Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 175, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of Patton Township, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of Patton Township," hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Patton Township Board of Supervisors, and it is the intention of
said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from
the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided in § 1-3
of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Patton Township and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as
hereinafter provided.
B. Ordinance No. 233, Communications Center Relocation, is repealed.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 21, 1996.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 PATTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is
the intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof.1 These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330." Schedule A,
containing a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three (3) copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
(1) Throughout this Code, references to the "Department of
Environmental Resources" are hereby changed to "Department of
Environmental Protection."
(2) Throughout this Code, references to the "Pennsylvania Department
of Highways" is hereby changed to "Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation."
A. Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 PATTON CODE § 1-10
1:6
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in
the manner required, a notice of the proposed adoption of the Code in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment and
application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice as
required by law, and the availability of the copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than six hundred dollars ($600.), and court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in force and effect on
and after August 19, 1996.
§ 1-14 PATTON CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 4
AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 10.
Emergency services — See Ch. 15.
Local Government Investment Trust — See
Ch. 21.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Industrial pretreatment program — See Ch.
136, Art. IV.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE I
Centre Regional Planning Commission
[Adopted 9-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-205]
§ 4-1. Agreement approved.
The Board of Supervisors hereby approves the Joint Articles of Agreement
of the Centre Regional Planning Commission, as recommended by the
General Forum of the Centre Region Council of Governments, August 19,
1985, and included herein by reference.
§ 4-2. Execution of agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
Articles of Agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
§ 4-3. Joint Articles of Agreement of the Centre Regional Planning
Commission.
This agreement is entered into this 24th day of January 1986, by and among
the Townships of College, Ferguson, Halfmoon, Harris and Patton and the
Borough of State College (hereinafter called the "municipalities"), County
of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, repealing and superseding the
Articles of Agreement of the Centre Regional Planning Commission, dated
September 1, 1960, as amended.
A. Background of this agreement.
(1) On September 1, 1960, the Townships of College and Patton and
the Borough of State College joined together to form the Centre
Regional Planning Commission, which included representatives
from each of the aforesaid municipalities and the Pennsylvania
State University. The Commission was organized under the
Pennsylvania Regional Planning Law, Act of May 29, 1956, P.L.
1845 (53 P.S. § 491 et seq.).2
(2) Commission membership was later expanded to include
representatives of the Townships of Ferguson and Harris on
November 2, 1961, and the Township of Halfmoon on December 6,
1965.
(3) The Pennsylvania State University is a member of the Centre
Regional Planning Commission for purposes of planning
cooperation and communication, though it does not approve the
Centre Regional Planning Commission annual work program and is
under no obligation to financially contribute to the program
budget.
2. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 491 et seq. was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2341 et seq.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:11
(4) On December 2, 1969, the municipalities joined together in a
voluntary organization known as the "Centre Region Council of
Governments" through adoption of the Council of Government
Articles of Agreement. The Centre Regional Planning Commission
became an agency of the Council of Government. The Council of
Government Articles of Agreement require that each regional
agency be established by separate joint municipal agreement
which shall be enacted by local ordinance and filed together with a
Joint Agreement with the Council of Governments.
(5) The original Centre Regional Planning Commission Articles of
Agreement adopted in 1960 do not reflect the relationship of the
Centre Regional Planning Commission to Council of Government or
all of the Commission's current activities. These include certain
duties and responsibilities of the Centre County Planning
Commission, as specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,3 that were delegated to the Centre Regional
Planning Commission in the Agreement of Relationship, dated
March 16, 1982, between the Centre County Commissioners and
the municipalities.
B. Provisions of this agreement. Based on the foregoing, the municipalities
agree and intend to be legally bound by the following:
(1) Establishment of Commission. The municipalities of the Centre
Region Council of Governments do hereby create the Centre
Regional Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission."
(2) Purpose. The Commission is established to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the Centre Region through effective
development of the municipalities of the region.
(3) Composition.
(a) The composition of the Commission shall include one
representative from each participating municipality and one
from the Pennsylvania State University, all representatives
having the right to vote. The governing body of each said
municipality shall appoint its representative and determine the
length of such appointment. In the event of a vacancy caused
by death, resignation or other reason, such vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the university or participating
municipality for which the vacancy exists. Each representative
shall hold no elected municipal office.
(b) The Commission shall elect a Chair whose term shall not
exceed one year and who shall be eligible for reelection. The
Commission may also create and fill other offices as it may
determine.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 4-3 PATTON CODE § 4-3
1:12
(c) The representatives shall serve without salary, but all expenses
incurred with prior approval of the Council of Governments in
the performance of their duties shall be reimbursed to them.
(4) Duties and responsibilities. The Commission shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(a) The Commission shall prepare and maintain a Regional
Comprehensive Plan, in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code,4 for the guidance of the
continuing development of the Centre Region. The Commission
shall encourage the cooperation of the participating
municipalities in matters which concern the integrity of the
Comprehensive Plan or maps prepared by the Commission, and
as an aid toward coordination, all municipalities and public
officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Commission within
a reasonable time the available maps, plans, reports, statistics
or other information the Commission may require for its
approved work program.
(b) The Commission may, in accordance with its approved work
program, be charged with:
[1] The preparation of reports and recommendations on
regional problems and issues, such as but not limited to
land use, transportation, water supplies and sewage
disposal, housing, recreation and environmental
protection.
[2] The maintenance of educational programs to familiarize
the public with specific planning proposals.
[3] The presentation of the regional point of view to state or
federal agencies contemplating legislation or public works
affecting the region.
[4] Aiding in the preparation of long-term budget programs in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. The
Commission may also act as a helpful coordinating agency
and may function as a clearinghouse for information and
consultation for the respective municipal bodies and for all
agencies, public and private, which have any concern with
planning in the Centre Region.
(c) The Commission shall, upon request of the governing body of a
participating municipality, and in accordance with the
approved work program of the Commission, provide staff
planning assistance and do planning work, including municipal
comprehensive plans, surveys, land use studies, urban renewal
plans, technical services and other elements of comprehensive
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:13
planning and planning effectuation programs in and for any
participating or member municipality.
(d) Any proposed action of the governing body of a participating
municipality relating to the location, opening, vacation,
extension, widening, narrowing or enlargement of any street,
public ground or watercourse; the location, erection,
demolition or sale of any public structures located within the
municipality; or the adoption, amendment or repeal of any
official map, subdivision and land development ordinance,
zoning ordinance or planned residential development
ordinance shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations. The recommendation of the Commission
shall be made to the governing body of the municipality within
45 days and the proposed action shall not be taken until such
recommendation is made. If, however, the Commission fails to
act within 45 days, the governing body shall proceed without
its recommendations. Proposed actions included above which
do not affect adjacent municipalities or the Regional
Comprehensive Plan may be delegated by the Commission to
the planning staff for review and recommendation to the
municipality in a manner and time established by said
municipality.
(e) Any proposed action of the governing body of any school
district located within the Centre Region relating to the
location, demolition, removal or sale of any school district
structure or land shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the execution of
such proposed action by the governing body of the school
district.
(5) Finances, staff and program. The Commission shall prepare an
annual work program and budget for its operation for review and
approval by the Centre Region Council of Governments General
Forum.
(a) The governing bodies of the municipalities shall have the
authority to appropriate funds for the purpose of contributing
to the operation of the Commission. The Commission, with the
consent of the Council of Governments, may also receive
grants from federal or state governments or from individuals
or foundations and shall have the authority to contract
therewith; to appoint such employees and staff as it may deem
necessary for its work and contract with planners and other
consultants for the services it may require to the extent
permitted by its financial resources; and may perform planning
services for any municipality which is not a member thereof
and may charge fees for the work. The Commission may also
prepare and sell maps, reports, bulletins or other material and
establish reasonable charges therefore.
§ 4-3 PATTON CODE § 4-3
1:14
(b) For the provision of planning services to member
municipalities, the Commission may, with the consent of the
Council of Governments, accept and utilize any funds,
personnel or other assistance made available by federal or
state governments or any of their agencies or from individuals
or foundations. For the purposes of receiving and using federal
or state planning grants for the provision of urban planning
assistance, the Commission may enter into agreements or
contracts regarding acceptance or utilization of the funds or
assistance.
(c) For the administration of the planning program, the Council of
Governments may appoint a Director of Planning who shall be,
in the opinion of the Council of Governments and the
Commission, qualified for the duties of their position. The
Director of Planning shall be in charge of the administration of
the program and shall exercise the powers and be subject to
the duties that are granted by the Council of Governments in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.5
(d) The Commission shall adopt bylaws establishing rules for the
conduct of its business, which record shall be a public record.
The Commission shall maintain and keep records of all receipts
and disbursements, which records shall be available and shall
be forwarded annually to the Council of Governments.
(6) Changes in member municipalities.
(a) The Commission may from time to time be enlarged to include
representatives from other municipalities upon such terms and
conditions as shall be agreed upon by the Centre Region
Council of Governments.
(b) Any member municipality shall have the right to withdraw from
the Commission at the end of any calendar year by giving six
months' written notice to the Chair of the Commission and to
the governing bodies of the member municipalities.
(7) Relationship with other commissions. Nothing in this agreement
shall abrogate, annul, modify or otherwise affect in any way the
duties and responsibilities of Municipal Planning Commissions of
participating members as specified in the Municipalities Planning
Code6 or of the Centre County Planning Commission as specified in
the Agreement of Relationship, dated March 16, 1982, between the
Centre County Commissioners and the municipalities.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:15
(8) Existing composition. All current representatives to the Centre
Regional Planning Commission may continue to serve until the end
of their appointed term.
§ 4-3 PATTON CODE § 4-3
1:16
ARTICLE II
Police Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-5137]
§ 4-4. Agreement by municipalities and university to provide police
mutual aid.
The municipalities of State College Borough, Ferguson Township, Patton
Township, Bellefonte Borough, and Spring Township, all of Centre County,
Pennsylvania, and the Pennsylvania State University have agreen to provide
police mutual aid through a Police Mutual Aid Agreement, a copy of which
is attached as Exhibit A.8
§ 4-5. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton hereby authorizes
the Chair of the Board of Supervisors to execute the Police Mutual Aid
Agreement.9
§ 4-6. (Reserved)
7. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Mutual Support Police
Services, adopted 9-24-1986 by Ord. No. 86-215.
8. Editor’s Note: A copy of the agreement (said Exhibit A) is on file in the Township offices.
9. Editor’s Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:17

ARTICLE III
Regional Emergency Management Program
[Adopted 12-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-47810]
§ 4-7. Repeal of previous agreement.
Ordinance No. 2002-401, which adopted the Joint Articles of Agreement for
the Regional Emergency Management Program dated May 30, 2002, which
at that time superseded Ordinance No. 90-251, which adopted the Joint
Articles of Agreement for the Regional Emergency Management Program
dated December 18, 1989, is hereby repealed and superseded.
§ 4-8. Adoption of Articles of Agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Joint Articles of Agreement for the Regional Emergency Management
Program. (A copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A).11
§ 4-9. Execution of agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
Articles on behalf of the Township of Patton.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Regional Emergency
Operations Plan, adopted 7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 202-401.
11.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Council of Governments Agreements
[Centre Region Council of Governments Agreements, including Ord.
No. 89-248, COG Articles of Agreement; Ord. No. 91-270, Schlow
Memorial Library Articles of Agreement; Centre Region Refuse
Program Articles of Agreement; Ord. No. 2001-394, amendment
to the COG Articles of Agreement; Ord. No. 2001-396, COG Office
Project Intermunicipal Agreement; Ord. No. 2003-418, Addendum
to Schlow Memorial Library Articles of Agreement; Ord. No.
2004-428, New Agreement for the Centre Region Code
Administration Agency; Ord. No. 2004-429, New Agreement for the
Centre Region Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals; Ord.
No. 2005-457, Oak Hall Parkland Acquisition Agreement; Ord. No.
2009-504, repealing Ord. No. 89-248, as amended by Ord. No.
2001-394, and adopting Articles of Agreement for the Centre
Region Council of Governments; Ord. No. 2014-558, repealing Ord.
No. 2004-428 and adopting revised Joint Articles of Agreement
of the Center Region Code Administration Agency; and Ord. No.
2015-564, repealing Ord. Nos. 91-270 and 2003-418 and adopting
revised Joint Articles of Agreement of the Schlow Centre Region
Library, are in file in the Township offices and are available for
inspection during normal business hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:21

ARTICLE V
Enforcement of University Area Joint Authority Industrial
Pretreatment Program
[Adopted 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-329]
§ 4-10. Agreement adopted.
The Supervisors of the Township of Patton hereby adopt, by reference,
the Intermunicipal Agreement for creation of the Industrial Pretreatment
Program, a copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A.12
§ 4-11. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
Agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
§ 4-12. Repeal of conflicting agreements.
All existing agreements, resolutions and ordinances which are contrary to
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to
give this article full force and effect.
12.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:23

ARTICLE VI
Drug Task Force
[Adopted 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-361]
§ 4-13. Agreement adopted.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopted, by reference,
the Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement (Rev. 7/97), a copy of which is
attached to this article as Exhibit A.13
§ 4-14. Amendments.
Amendments to the agreement as provided in Section 15 (p. 7) shall be valid
and binding only upon adoption of an ordinance of the Township of Patton
approving the amendments and authorizing the Chair to sign the changes
or modifications.
§ 4-15. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
13.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15
1:25

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Command and Communications Post Vehicle
[Adopted 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-391]
§ 4-16. Vehicle sharing agreement adopted.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Mobile Command and Communications Post Vehicle Sharing
Agreement, a copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A.14
§ 4-17. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
Agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
§ 4-18. Repeal of conflicting legislation.
All existing agreements, resolutions, and ordinances which are contrary to
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to
give this article full force and effect.
14.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18
1:27

ARTICLE VIII
Centre Area Cable Consortium Agreement
[Adopted 10-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-445]
§ 4-19. Article of Agreement adopted.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Joint Articles of Agreement for the Centre Area Cable Consortium, a
copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A.15
§ 4-20. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said Articles on behalf of Patton Township.
15.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20
1:29

ARTICLE IX
Intermunicipal Zoning Implementation Agreement
[Adopted 7-20-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-459]
§ 4-21. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Intermunicipal Zoning Implementation Agreement, a copy of which is
attached to this article as Exhibit A.16
§ 4-22. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said Articles on behalf of Patton Township.
16.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22
1:31

ARTICLE X
Centre Region Insurance Cooperative Agreement
[Adopted 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-468]
§ 4-23. Incorporation of preamble clauses.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.17
§ 4-24. Agreements approved.
The Township of Patton hereby approves entering into the Agreements,
copies of which are attached hereto as Exhibit A and Exhibit B18 and
incorporated herein by reference, with the intent and effect that the
Township of Patton shall be bound by the Agreements.
§ 4-25. Authorization to execute agreements.
§ 4-26. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The Chair or Vice Chair of the Township of Patton, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the Township of Patton: a) to execute and
deliver the Agreements; and b) to execute and deliver such additional
instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or
appropriate to carry forth the Agreements and the transactions to be
effected under the Agreements.
B. All actions of the Chairman of the Township of Patton heretofore taken
in the pursuit of the establishment of CRIC19 and/or PMHIC,20 and/or
the Township of Patton's participation therein, are hereby ratified and
approved in all respects.
C. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton is hereby
authorized to take such other action as may be necessary or
appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the
Agreements.
A. The conditions of the Agreements are set forth in the Agreements.
B. The Township of Patton shall participate in CRIC and/or PMHIC for an
initial term of three years after agreeing to purchase one or more
17.Editor's Note: A complete copy of the ordinance with preamble is on file in the Township
offices.
18.Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the Township offices.
19.Editor's Note: Centre Region Insurance Cooperative (CRIC).
20.Editor's Note: Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative Agreement (PMHIC).
§ 4-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26
1:33
employee benefits through one or both cooperatives. All renewal terms
shall be as further set forth in the Agreements.
C. The purpose and objectives of the Agreements are as set forth in this
article and in the Agreements.
D. The manner and extent of financing the Agreements are that: a) no
borrowing will be required by the Township of Patton; b) funds to
implement the Township of Patton's obligations under the Agreements
shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters;
and c) other provisions governing the manner and extent of the
financing of the CRIC and PMHIC shall be as set forth in the
Agreements.
E. Each cooperative shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant
to the terms of the Agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the cooperatives shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of by the cooperatives in accordance
with the terms of the Agreements.
G. CRIC and PMHIC created by their respective Agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee benefits pursuant to the terms of the Agreements.
§ 4-26 PATTON CODE § 4-26
1:34
ARTICLE XI
Mutual Aid DUI Police Services Agreement
[Adopted 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-473]
§ 4-27. Formalization of collective participation.
Centre County, the Boroughs of Bellefonte and State College, and the
Townships of Ferguson, Patton and Spring (hereinafter referred to as
parties) desire to formalize their collective participation in the Centre
County DUI Checkpoint, roving DUI patrols, and Cops in Shops Program.
The parties participate in this program by providing law enforcement
officers through the sheriff's department or the police department,
respectively. The DUI Checkpoint, roving DUI patrols, and Cops in Shops
Program is designed to improve the safety of our community by addressing
the potential impacts of alcohol while operating a motor vehicle.
§ 4-28. Agreement.
The parties have determined that it is necessary to formalize their
participation in the Centre County DUI Checkpoint, roving DUI patrols, and
Cops in Shops Program by setting forth their participation in a mutual aid
agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A.21
§ 4-29. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton hereby authorizes the
Chair of the Board of Supervisors to execute the mutual aid agreement
attached hereto as Exhibit A.
21.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-29
1:35

ARTICLE XII
Whitehall Road Regional Parklands Ownership Agreement
[Adopted 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-474]
§ 4-30. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Joint Articles of Agreement for the Ownership of the Whitehall Road
Regional Parklands, a copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A.22
§ 4-31. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said Articles on behalf of Patton Township.
22.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-31
1:37

ARTICLE XIII
Regional Parks Planning, Development and Operation Agreement
[Adopted 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-475]
§ 4-32. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Joint Articles of Agreement for the Planning, Development and
Operation of Regional Parks, a copy of which is attached to this ordinance
as Exhibit A.23
§ 4-33. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said Articles on behalf of Patton Township.
23.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-33
1:39

ARTICLE XIV
Centre Region Growth Boundary and Sewer Service Area
Implementation Agreement
[Adopted 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-55024]
§ 4-34. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Centre Region Growth Boundary and Sewer Service Area
Implementation Agreement (a copy of which is attached to this article as
Exhibit A).25
§ 4-35. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute said
agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
§ 4-36. Repealer.
All existing agreements, resolutions, and ordinances which are contrary to
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to
give this article full force and effect.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. XIV, Centre Region Growth
Boundary/Sewer Service Area Implementation Agreement, adopted 12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-477.
25.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-36
1:41

ARTICLE XV
Spring Creek Watershed Agreement
[Adopted 8-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-484]
§ 4-37. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Agreement for the Spring Creek Watershed Commission.
§ 4-38. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said articles on behalf of Patton Township.
§ 4-39. Repealer.
All existing agreements, resolutions, and ordinances which are contrary to
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to
give this article full force and effect.
§ 4-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:43

ARTICLE XVI
Central Booking Program Intergovernmental Agreement
[Adopted 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-492]
§ 4-40. Approval of agreement; authorization to execute agreement.
The Patton Township Board of Supervisors approves the agreement and
hereby authorizes the Chairman and Secretary to execute the Central
Booking Program Intergovernmental Agreement on behalf of Patton
Township.
§ 4-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-40
1:45

ARTICLE XVII
Regional Records Management and Mobile Computer (RM/MC)
System Intergovernmental Agreement
[Adopted 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-58026]
§ 4-41. Approval of agreement; supersession of prior agreement,
authorization to execute agreement.
The Patton Township Board of Supervisors approves the agreement, to
supersede any prior Regional Records Management and Mobile Computer
(RM/MC) System Ownership Intergovernmental Agreement, and hereby
authorizes the Chairman and Secretary to execute the Regional Records
Management and Mobile Computer (RM/MC) System Ownership
Agreement on behalf of Patton Township.
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. XVII, Regional Records
Management and Mobile Computer (RM/MC) System Intergovernmental Agreement,
adopted 8-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-572.
§ 4-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-41
1:47

ARTICLE XVIII
Hess Softball Field Complex Agreement
[Adopted 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-522]
§ 4-42. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Joint Articles of Agreement for Acquisition, Ownership, and Disposition
of the "Hess Softball Field Complex," a copy of which is attached to this
ordinance as Exhibit A.27
§ 4-43. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said agreement on behalf of Patton Township.
27.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-43
1:49

ARTICLE XIX
Homestead Farms Neighborhood Improvement District Agreement
[Adopted 12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-538]
§ 4-44. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the Articles of Agreement for Management, Operation and Termination of
the Homestead Farms Neighborhood Improvement Districts in Ferguson
and Patton Townships, a copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit
A.28
§ 4-45. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chair of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized
to execute said agreement on behalf of Patton Township.
28.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-45
1:51

ARTICLE XX
Regional Wide Area and Local Area Network Intermunicipal
Agreement
[Adopted 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-540]
§ 4-46. Approval of agreement; authorization to execute agreement.
The Board of Supervisors approves the agreement and hereby authorizes
the Chairman to execute the Regional WAN/LAN Intermunicipal Agreement
on behalf of the Township of Patton.29
29.Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-46
1:53

ARTICLE XXI
Health Services Intermunicipal Agreement
[Adopted 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-542]
§ 4-47. Approval of agreement; authorization to execute agreement.
The Board of Supervisors approves the agreement and hereby authorizes
the Chairman to execute the Health Services Intermunicipal Agreement on
behalf of the Township of Patton.30
30.Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-47
1:55

ARTICLE XXII
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust Intermunicipal
Agreement
[Adopted 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-565]
§ 4-48. Adoption of agreement.
§ 4-49. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 4-50. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 4-51. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Board of Supervisors adopts the Restated Trust Agreement and
agrees to participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the Restated Trust Agreement, and the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby
authorized to sign the Restated Trust Agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The Restated Trust Agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 100 Patton Plaza, State College, Pennsylvania. The
Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or amended
in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in accordance with
the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best
interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 4-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-52
1:57
§ 4-52. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be March
17, 2015.
§ 4-53. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 4-54. Organization.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 4-55. Funds for operation.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 4-56. Powers of Trust.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 4-57. Compliance with terms and conditions.
That as a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees
to comply with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust
Agreement.
§ 4-58. Certified copy to be provided.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 4-59. Additional actions.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby
authorized to take any and all such other actions as may be necessary
or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and comply with
the requirements of the attached Restated Trust Agreement31 and any duly
adopted amendments thereto.
31.Editor's Note: The Restated Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-52 PATTON CODE § 4-60
1:58
§ 4-60. Duration of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 4-61. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 4-62. Effect on prior rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 4-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-63
1:59
§ 4-63. When effective.
This article shall take effect five days from the date of adoption.
§ 4-64. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 4-63 PATTON CODE § 4-64
1:60
ARTICLE XXIII
Centre Regional Pollutant Reduction Plan Intermunicipal
Agreement
[Adopted 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-579]
§ 4-65. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township hereby adopts, by reference,
the cooperative agreement for the preparation of the Centre Regional
Pollutant Reduction Plan.
§ 4-66. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Chairman of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors is hereby
authorized to execute said agreement on behalf of the Township of Patton.
§ 4-67. Repealer.
All existing agreements, resolutions, and ordinances which are contrary to
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to
give this article full force and effect.
§ 4-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-67
1:61
Chapter 7
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
§ 4-67 PATTON CODE § 4-67
1:62
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-455; amended in its entirety
12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-536]
§ 7-1. Compensation of members elected in 2011 and thereafter.
§ 7-2. Compensation of incumbent members.
The rate of compensation paid to incumbent Board members serving in
Seats 3, 4 and 5 until the term for which the new rate of compensation
is effective as outlined in § 7-1 above shall remain at the current rate of
$3,250 annually, to be paid quarterly, as was established by Ordinance No.
2007-490.
A. As established by Section 606 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's
Second Class Township Code reenacted and amended in 1995 (P.L. 350,
No. 60), as amended,32 Supervisors may receive as compensation an
amount established by ordinance not in excess of $4,125 annually for a
Township with a population of 15,000 to 24,999, to be paid monthly or
quarterly.
B. In keeping within these guidelines, the Board of Supervisors shall be
compensated in the amount of $4,125 annually, to be paid quarterly.
This rate of compensation shall take effect following the next election to
each seat of the Board and paid to the individual elected to that position
for the terms established as follows:
Seat Term Begins
1 January 3, 2012
2 January 3, 2012
3 January 6, 2014
4 January 6, 2014
5 January 4, 2016
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65606.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:63
Chapter 10
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agreements — See Ch. 4. Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 136.
§ 7-2 PATTON CODE § 7-2
1:64
ARTICLE I
Patton-Ferguson Joint Authority
[Adopted 1-16-1962 by Ord. No. 18]
§ 10-1. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its intention and desire
to organize an authority, under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and
supplemented (the "Authorities Act"),33 for the purpose of exercising any
and all powers conferred by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Township are authorized and directed
to execute on behalf of this Township Articles of Incorporation for such
Authority in substantially the following form.34
§ 10-3. Notice.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of this Township
are authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this article,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and the
proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as required
by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-4. Filing.
The President and Secretary of this Township are authorized and directed
to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together with necessary proofs
of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate
to effect the incorporation of the Authority, including payment of any filing
fees necessary in connection therewith.
§ 10-5. Appointment of first members of the Board of the Authority;
terms.
The following named persons shall be and they are appointed as first
members of the Board of the Authority for the following terms of office.35
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
34.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation, as amended 10-23-1964 by Ord. No. 30, are
on file in the Township offices.
35.Editor's Note: The names of the first members of the Board of the Authority are on file in
the Township offices.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5
1:65

ARTICLE II
Application to Join Patton-Ferguson Joint Authority
[Adopted 2-8-1965 by Ord. No. 34]
§ 10-6. Approval of request.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its consent to and
approval of the request of the Township of Ferguson, Centre County,
Pennsylvania, to become a member of Patton-Ferguson Joint Authority (the
"Authority"), under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as
the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented
(the "Act").36
§ 10-7. Application and joinder.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its approval of such
incoming Township's application to become a member of Patton-Ferguson
Joint Authority, together with the appropriate joinders in such application,
in substantially the following form.37
§ 10-8. Execution of application and joinder.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and
directed to execute and acknowledge, in behalf of this Township, the joinder
in such application of such incoming Township, in substantially the form set
forth in § 10-7 hereof.
§ 10-9. Membership.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township agrees and determines that the
Board of the Authority, upon admission of such incoming Township as a
member thereof, shall be seven in number and that such membership shall
be apportioned as follows:
A. Township of Ferguson, Centre County, Pennsylvania: three.
B. Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania: four.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: The application and joinder are on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-9
1:67

ARTICLE III
University Area Joint Authority
[Adopted 8-10-1964 by Ord. No. 24]
§ 10-10. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority jointly with the Townships of College, Ferguson and
Harris, all located in Centre County, Pennsylvania (collectively called the
"Townships"), under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as
the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented
(the "Authorities Act"),38 for the purpose of exercising any and all powers
conferred by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-11. Articles of Incorporation.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and
directed to execute, in behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for
such Authority in substantially the following form.39
§ 10-12. Notice.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with
appropriate officers of the Townships, are authorized and directed to cause
notice of the substance of this article, including the substance of the
foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing of such
Articles of Incorporation to be published as required by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-13. Filing.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with
appropriate officers of the Townships, are authorized and directed to cause
such Articles of Incorporation, together with necessary proofs of
publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and to do all other acts necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of such Authority, including payment of any fee necessary in
connection therewith.
§ 10-14. Appointment of first representative to the Board of the
Authority; term.
The following named person is appointed the first member to represent this
Township on the Board of such Authority for the following term of office.40
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Township offices.
40.Editor's Note: The name of the first representative on the Board of the Authority and their
term is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-15
1:69
§ 10-15. Purpose.
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of
citizens of this Township and will increase the prosperity of citizens of this
Township.
§ 10-15 PATTON CODE § 10-15
1:70
ARTICLE IV
Application to Join University Area Joint Authority
[Adopted 7-19-1965 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 10-16. Request approved.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its consent to and
approval of the request of the Borough of State College, Centre County,
Pennsylvania (the "borough"), to become a member of the University Area
Joint Authority (the "Authority"), under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended
and supplemented (the "Act").41
§ 10-17. Application.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its approval of the
borough's application to become a member of the University Area Joint
Authority, together with the appropriate joinders in such application, in
substantially the following form.42
§ 10-18. Execution of application and joinder.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and
directed to execute and acknowledge, in behalf of this Township, the joinder
in such application of the borough, in substantially the form set forth in
§ 10-17 hereof.
§ 10-19. Membership.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township agrees and determines that the
Board of the Authority, upon admission of the borough as a member thereof,
shall be six in number and that such membership shall be apportioned as
follows:
A. Township of College, Centre County, Pennsylvania: one.
B. Township of Ferguson, Centre County, Pennsylvania: two.
C. Township of Harris, Centre County, Pennsylvania: one.
D. Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania: one.
E. Borough of State College, Centre County, Pennsylvania: one.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: The application to become a member of the University Area Joint Authority
is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-19
1:71

ARTICLE V
Patton Township Authority
[Adopted 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 50]
§ 10-20. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority, under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended
and supplemented (the "Authorities Act"),43 for the purpose of exercising
any and all powers conferred by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-21. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Township are authorized and directed
to execute on behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for such
Authority in substantially the following form.44
§ 10-22. Notice.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of this Township
are authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this article,
together with the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-23. Filing.
The President and Secretary of this Township are authorized and directed
to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs
of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate
to effect the incorporation of the Authority, including payment of any filing
fees necessary in connection therewith.
§ 10-24. Appointment of first members of the Board of the
Authority; terms.
The following named persons shall be and they are appointed as first
members of the Board of the Authority for the following terms of office.45
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation, as amended 10-10-1972 by Ord. No. 90, are
on file in the Township offices.
45.Editor's Note: The names of the first members of the Board of the Authority and their
terms are on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-24
1:73

ARTICLE VI
Centre Regional Recreation Authority46
[Adopted 1-5-1970 by Ord. No. 74]
§ 10-25. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority jointly with the Townships of College, Harris,
Ferguson, Halfmoon and the Borough of State College, all located in Centre
County, Pennsylvania under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and
supplemented (Authorities Act),47 for the purpose of exercising any and all
powers conferred by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-26. Articles of Incorporation.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township are authorized and
directed to execute, in behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for
such Authority in substantially the following form.48
§ 10-27. Notice.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with
appropriate officers of the Townships and the Borough of State College,
are authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this article,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the Authorities Act.
§ 10-28. Filing.
The Chair or Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly with
appropriate officers of the Townships and the Borough of State College, are
authorized and directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together
with necessary proofs of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other acts necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of such Authority, including payment
of any fee necessary in connection therewith.
46.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 4, Agreements, Art. IV, Council of Governments Agreements.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301.
48.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-29
1:75
§ 10-29. Appointment of first representative to the Board of the
Authority; term.
The following named person is appointed the first member to represent this
Township on the Board of such Authority for the following terms of office.49
§ 10-30. Purpose.
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of
citizens of this Township and will increase the prosperity of citizens of this
Township.
49.Editor's Note: The name of the first representative of the Board of the Authority and his
term is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-29 PATTON CODE § 10-30
1:76
ARTICLE VII
Centre Area Transportation Authority
[Adopted 12-8-1981 by Ord. No. 81-166]
§ 10-31. Intent and purpose.
The Supervisors hereby signify their intention to join an existing authority
known as the "Centre Area Transportation Authority" under the provisions
of the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.50
§ 10-32. Application and joinders.
The Chair and the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Township of Patton,
an application of joinder with the Secretary of the commonwealth in
substantially the form attached hereto and made a part hereof by
reference.51
§ 10-33. Notice.
The Chair and the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are directed
to cause a notice of the substance of the application of joinder, making
reference to the Act of Assembly under which such application may be filed,
to be published once in a newspaper published and of general circulation in
Centre County and once in the Centre County Legal Journal.
§ 10-34. Filing.
The Chair and the Secretary of the Township are directed to jointly file said
application of joinder, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
with the Secretary of the commonwealth and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to join the Centre Area Transportation Authority.
§ 10-35. Appointment of first representative to the Board of the
Authority.
The name of the person set forth on the application of joinder attached
hereto shall be the Township's representative as a member of the Board of
Authority, and the term of office shall commence on the date of appointment
and shall be computed from January 1, 1982.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: The application and joinder are on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-35
1:77
Chapter 15
FIRE, RESCUE AND RELATED SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mutual support police services — See Ch. 4,
Art. II.
Regional Emergency Management
Program — See Ch. 4, Art. III.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Alarms — See Ch. 48.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 78.
§ 15-1. Fire company recognized.
The Alpha Fire Company of State College, Pennsylvania (hereinafter called
"the Company"), organized in the Borough of State College, Centre County,
Pennsylvania, and existing in the Borough of State College, and the
Township of Patton and the Township College, is hereby designated as the
officially recognized fire company for the Township of Patton.
§ 15-2. Authorized activities of company.
A. The Company is authorized to provide fire, rescue, and related services
to the Township of Patton as may be necessary for the protection of
persons and property situated therein. These services include, by way
of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment of unwanted fires,
prevention or reduction of loss of life or injury to persons or damage to
property from fires, emergency response and rescue to traffic
accidents, building collapses, hazardous materials incidents; the
conduct of fire prevention and other safety programs; the support of
emergency operations, and other assistance to other dangerous
situations.
B. The Company may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, by way of example and not limitation, traffic control
after a storm, or related activities that assist in prevention, mitigation
or abatement of injury, damage or other undesirable consequences,
whether from natural or man-made situations.
C. The Company may also conduct and participate in such training
activities either within or outside of the Township of Patton as may be
deemed necessary by the Centre Region COG Fire Director (hereinafter
called the Fire Director) or by the Fire Chief or his/her designee to
maintain proficiency in providing service.
D. The Company may also respond to calls and provide services to
jurisdictions outside of this municipality.
E. The Company may also conduct regular and special meetings, work
details, maintenance activities, fund-raising programs, and public
§ 10-35 PATTON CODE § 15-2
1:78
§ 15-3. Authorized activities of members of company.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the Company as
authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the Company are also authorized to:
§ 15-4. Fire Chief.
education programs. Social events are the exclusive responsibility of
the Company.
F. The Company may also participate in other activities as may be
approved by the Centre Region COG.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, funeral detail, ceremony, practice,
test, or parade when authorized by the Fire Chief, President, or his/her
designee.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the Company and programs aimed
at securing and retaining Company members, when authorized by the
Fire Chief, President, or his/her designee.
C. Engage in inspections and tours of private property, when invited, for
fire prevention, planning, and training purposes; preplanning; public
education programs; testing of fire-protection equipment or systems;
open houses; and other fire-prevention activities, when authorized by
the Fire Chief, President, or his/her designee.
D. Attend local, regional, state, and national fire association meetings,
conferences, and conventions, when authorized by the Fire Chief,
President, or his/her designee.
E. Engage in the performance of any other function, duty, or activity
authorized by the Centre Region COG.
A. The Company shall select a Fire Chief and assistants, in accordance
with its bylaws. The names of these individuals shall be forwarded to
the Centre Region COG General Forum for approval and appointment,
after which the Chief of the Alpha Fire Company shall be designated as
the Fire Chief of the Township of Patton. The Fire Chief shall be
invested in powers under authority granted by the Township of Patton
and shall carry a badge of authority when exercising his/her duties. The
Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Fire Director for his/her actions
and shall report to the Centre Region COG General Forum as necessary
in conducting his/her duties, at such times as requested to appear
before it. Any changes in policies and procedures for fire, rescue, and
related services within the Township of Patton shall be coordinated with
the Centre Region COG.
B. The term "Fire Chief" as used in this chapter and the Articles of
Agreement adopted by this chapter means the Fire Chief and his/her
§ 15-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:79
§ 15-5. Fire Marshal.
designees. The designees of the Fire Chief shall be identified in the
policies, procedures, or bylaws of the Fire Company.
C. When, in the opinion of the Fire Chief or Fire Director, there is actual
and potential danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any
building, structure, or premises because of fire, unsafe structural
conditions, or inadequacy of any means of egress, the presence of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes,
gases, or materials, the Fire Chief or Fire Director shall order the
immediate evacuation of said building, structure or premises, and
persons shall not enter or reenter until authorized to do so by the Fire
Chief or Fire Director.
D. The Fire Chief and the Fire Director are both empowered to direct such
operations as may be necessary to extinguish, mitigate, or control any
suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, rescue, or other hazardous
conditions or situations, or of taking any other action necessary to save
life, protect property, and prevent further injury or damage, in
reasonable performance of his/her duty. The Fire Chief or Fire Director
may prohibit any person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene
and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person,
vehicle, or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of
the Company. The Fire Chief or Fire Director may remove or cause to be
removed any person, vehicle, or object from hazardous areas. All
persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and
shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Chief or
Fire Director. The Fire Chief or Fire Director shall also have the power
to call upon any municipal police officer to aid and assist in the carrying
into execution any measure he/she may deem proper and expedient.
E. The Fire Chief and Fire Director shall both have the authority to
establish barriers to control access in the vicinity of emergencies and to
place, or cause to be placed, ropes, guards, barricades, or other
obstructions across any street or alley to delineate such emergency
scene barrier. No person, except as authorized, may cross such
barriers.
F. The specific duties of the Fire Chief and his/her designees shall be as
prescribed in the current agreement between the Alpha Fire Company
and the Centre Region COG.
G. The specific duties of the Fire Director shall be as prescribed in the
current agreement between the Alpha Fire Company and the Centre
Region COG (Exhibit A).52
A. In accordance with the Joint Articles of Agreement for the Fire, Rescue,
and Related Services Program, the Board of Supervisors of the
52.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 15-4 PATTON CODE § 15-5
1:80
§ 15-6. Emergency operations.
No person shall obstruct the operations of the Company in connection with
extinguishing or control of any fire, or actions relative to other emergencies,
or disobey any lawful command of the Fire Chief, Fire Director, or any lawful
order of a police officer assisting the Company.
§ 15-7. Special fire police.
Township of Patton herein authorizes the Executive Director of the
Centre Region COG, with the advice and consent of the COG General
Forum, to biennially appoint a Fire Marshal and assistants for the
Township of Patton, as well as the remaining member municipalities
of the Centre Region COG, all of Centre County. For the purposes
of insurance liability only, the Fire Marshal shall be considered an
employee of the Centre Region COG and subject to terms and
conditions of appointment as it may approve.
B. The Fire Marshal shall investigate or cause to be investigated every fire
or explosion occurring within the Township of Patton that is of
suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or
causes destruction or damage to property. Such investigation shall be
initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion, and
if it appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the Fire
Marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence and, in
order to preserve any physical evidence related to the cause or origin of
such fire or explosion, take means to prevent access by any person or
persons to such building, structure, or premises until such evidence has
been properly processed. The Fire Marshal shall notify such persons
designated by law to pursue investigations into such matters and shall
further cooperate with such authorities in the collection of evidence
and prosecution of the case and shall pursue the investigation to its
conclusion. The Fire Marshal shall provide for the preparation and
submission of reports and other information relating to his/her duties,
as may be requested by the Executive Director of the Centre Region
COG.
A. In accordance with the Special Fire Police Act,53 the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Patton herein authorizes the General
Forum of the Centre Region COG to confirm special fire police when
nominated by the Company. Special fire police are subject to the terms
and conditions of appointment as may be approved by the Centre
Region COG. Special fire police may be removed by the COG Executive
Director upon recommendation of the Fire Chief, Fire Director, or the
Chief of Police.
B. After being nominated by the Company, confirmed by the General
Forum, and sworn, special fire police members may engage in crowd
control, traffic control, and related activities as described in the Special
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1201.
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:81
§ 15-8. Municipal liability.
§ 15-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any lawful order of the
Fire Chief, Fire Director, Fire Marshal, or special fire police authorized by
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 15-10. Articles of agreement.
Fire Police Act. When on duty, all special fire police shall display a
badge of authority and shall be subject to control of the Chief of Police
of the municipality in which they are serving or, if none, a member of
the Pennsylvania State Police.
C. On behalf of the governing body of the municipality in which they are
serving, the Police Chief may request the special fire police to perform
traffic or crowd control at any event, function, or parade conducted by
an organization other than Alpha Fire Company.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Patton, neither the Alpha Fire Company
nor its officers, members, representatives, agents, servants, or
employees shall have the power or authority, either actual, apparent, or
implied, to contractually bind or create contractual liability on the part
of any municipal entity.
B. However, it is recognized that the Alpha Fire Company is a
governmental agency and that its officers, members, representatives,
agents, servants, or employees are included within the provisions of the
Political Subdivision Immunity Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and as
such, the said Alpha Fire Company, its officers, members,
representatives, agents, servants, and employees are entitled to
immunity from tort liability and to all rights and privileges as provided
in said act.
A. This chapter hereby repeals the Joint Articles of Agreement for Fire,
Rescue, and Related Services, dated November 27, 1995.
B. The Joint Articles of Agreement for Fire, Rescue, and Related Services,
dated August 27, 2007 (Exhibit B),54 are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 15-7 PATTON CODE § 15-11
1:82
§ 15-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days following its adoption by
College Township, Ferguson Township and Patton Township, and State
College Borough.
Chapter 21
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agreements — See Ch. 4.
§ 21-1. Entry into declaration of trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act55 and other similar
acts by becoming a settler of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the Trust) and entering into the Declaration of Trust,
which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this chapter was adopted.
§ 21-2. Purchasing of shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to the
terms and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 21-1.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of this
governmental unit.
§ 21-3. Official custody.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 21-4. Rules and regulations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 21-1.
55.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 15-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:83
Chapter 25
MANAGER AND DEPUTY MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 25-1. Office of Township Manager.
B. This government unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at
any time by ordinance, subject to the terms and restrictions of the
Declaration of Trust referred to in § 21-1.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 21-1.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements in accordance with the terms
and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 21-1.
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
A. Office created. The Office of Township Manager is hereby created by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton, Centre County,
Pennsylvania, subject to the right of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Patton, by ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
B. Appointment; term; vacancies; removal. The Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Patton shall elect, by a majority vote of all of its
members, one person to fill the office of Township Manager who shall
serve until their successor is elected and qualifies. In the case of a
vacancy, the Board of Supervisors of Patton Township shall fill said
office by a majority vote of all its members. The Township Manager
shall, however, be subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of
all the members of the Board of Supervisors of Patton Township.
C. Qualifications; residency requirements. The Manager shall be chosen
solely on the basis of their executive and administrative abilities, with
special reference to their actual experience in or their knowledge of
§ 21-4 PATTON CODE § 25-1
1:84
accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as herein
outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Township of Patton
or of the State of Pennsylvania at the time of their appointment, but
as soon as possible thereafter they shall become, and during their
tenure as Manager shall remain, a resident of the Township of Patton,
unless the Board of Supervisors provides a waiver of the residency
requirement.
D. Salaries and compensation. The Township Manager shall receive such
compensation and fringe benefits fixed from time to time by action or
consensus of the Board.
E. General powers and duties. The Township Manager shall be the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Township and they shall be responsible to
the Board of Supervisors of Patton Township as a whole for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township of Patton.
Their powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
Township business not expressly imposed or conferred upon other
Township officers.
F. Specific powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Township
Manager shall include the following:
(1) They shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
(2) They shall hire and, when they shall deem it necessary for the good
of the service, shall suspend or discharge all employees under their
supervision; provided, however, that this authority shall not apply
to the removal and suspension of any police officer that may at any
time hereafter be appointed. Provided further, that the Township
Manager shall report, at the next regular meeting thereafter of the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton, any action taken by
authority of this subsection.
(3) The Township Manager shall be responsible for preparation of the
budget and for its presentation to the Board of Supervisors. They
shall be directly responsible for the administration of the budget
after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors of Patton Township.
(4) They may attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and of its
committees with the right to take part in the discussion, and they
shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and of its committees.
(5) They shall assist in the preparation of the agenda for each meeting
of the Board of Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(6) They shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the
conduct of Township affairs in connection with their duties as
Township Manager and shall submit such other reports as the
Board of Supervisors shall request. They shall make such
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1
1:85
§ 25-2. Deputy Township Manager.
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as they deem
necessary.
(7) They shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, when requested,
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report for the
preceding year on the administrative activities of the Township of
Patton which are within the duties of the Township Manager.
(8) They may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
in connection with any of the functions of the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Patton which are within their duties.
(9) They shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and
they shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the
same, except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon
some other Township officer by statute.
(10) They shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Township of Patton, and
they shall purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the
Second Class Township Code,56 all supplies and equipment for the
various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the
Township of Patton. They shall keep an account of all purchases
and shall from time to time, or when directed by the Board of
Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. They shall also
issue rules and regulations subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors governing the requisition and purchasing of all
municipal supplies and equipment.
(11) They shall cooperate with the Board of Supervisors at all times and
in all matters that the best interests of the Township of Patton and
of the general public may be maintained.
(12) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township of
Patton shall be referred to the office of the Township Manager.
They, or an officer designated by them, shall investigate and
dispose of such complaints, and the Township Manager shall report
thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
G. Delegation of powers and duties upon absence. In case of illness or the
absence of the Manager from the Township, the Board of Supervisors
may delegate one qualified individual who shall perform the duties of
the Manager during their absence or disability.
A. Position created. The position of Deputy Township Manager is hereby
created by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton, Centre
County, Pennsylvania, subject to the right of the Board of Supervisors of
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 25-1 PATTON CODE § 25-2
1:86
§ 25-3. Bond.
The Township shall provide appropriate bonding for the individuals in these
offices.
the Township of Patton, by ordinance, at any time to abolish such
position.
B. Appointment; removal. The nominee(s) for Deputy Township Manager
shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors by the Township
Manager. The Board of Supervisors shall take action by motion to
approve or disapprove the Manager's recommended appointment(s).
The position may be concurrently held by an employee holding the
position of department director, including the Police Chief. The position
may be rotated among employees holding the position of department
director, including the Police Chief. The Deputy Manager's employment,
or responsibilities in the case of a department director, may be
terminated by the Manager; with such action to be reported to the
Board of Supervisors at the next public meeting of the Board.
C. Salaries and compensation. The Deputy Township Manager shall
receive compensation and fringe benefits in accordance with the
current Township salary schedule.
D. General powers and duties. The Deputy shall operate under the
direction of the Manager, except as noted in § 25-2E. The Deputy
Township Manager shall assist the Township Manager in fulfillment of
the duties of the Office of Township Manager for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Township of Patton.
E. Delegation of duties.
(1) The Manager may, in the case of absences from the area or
expected inability to serve, assign the duties of the Office of
Township Manager to the Deputy Manager, for a definitive time
period, by notice to the Deputy and the Board Chair or Vice Chair.
(2) In the case where the Manager is unexpectedly unable to carry out
the duties of the Office or does not respond to requests for action or
decision, the Deputy Manager shall assume the duties of the Office
of Township Manager, and provide notice of such to the Board
Chair, Vice Chair and Township department directors. The Deputy
shall continue to carry out the duties of the Office of Township
Manager until relieved by written notice from the Manager to the
Deputy, the Board Chair, the Vice Chair, and Township department
directors, or until such time as the Board takes action under § 25-1.
§ 25-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:87
Chapter 28
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Centre Regional Planning Commission — See
Ch. 4, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 28-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Patton Township
Official Map."
§ 28-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, "The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code," Act 170 of 1988, December 21, P.L. No. 170,
as amended.57
§ 28-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of serving and promoting the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare, to facilitate adequate
provision of public streets and facilities, to improve traffic circulation, to
provide for the recreational and open space needs of the community, to
protect and enhance water resources and to facilitate the subdivision of
land and the use of land and watercourses.
§ 28-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. Language interpretations. For the purposes of this chapter, certain
terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and plural number includes
the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender,
and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 25-3 PATTON CODE § 28-4
1:88
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
B. Definitions. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following
words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. All
words and terms not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Patton
Township, County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — A structure, including any part thereof, having a roof and
used for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township,
County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL; MUNICIPALITY — Patton Township, County of Centre,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency.
PUBLIC GROUNDS —
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days or less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — A corridor of land set aside for use, in whole or in
part, by a street.
STREET — A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
TOWNSHIP — Patton Township, County of Centre, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSES — A stream of surface water, including river, stream,
creek or run, whether or not intermittent.
(1) Parks, playgrounds and other public area.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:89
§ 28-5. Provisions of the Official Map.
The Official Map, as enacted and subsequently amended, shall identify the
location of the lines of existing and proposed public streets, well sites,
watercourses and public grounds, including widenings, narrowings,
extensions, diminutions, openings or closings.
§ 28-6. Incorporation of the Official Map.
The Official Map, including all notations, references and other data shown
thereon, is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if it were
fully described herein.
§ 28-7. Changes in the Official Map.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made
to the location of lines designating existing or proposed public streets,
A. For the purpose of initially reserving land on the Official Map, property
records, aerial photography, photogrammetric mapping or other
method sufficient for the identification, description and publication of
areas for reservation on the Official Map will be sufficient. For the
acquisition of lands and easements, boundary descriptions by metes
and bounds shall be made and sealed by a licensed surveyor registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The governing body, by amending ordinances, may make additions or
modifications to the Official Map or part thereof by following the
provisions included in Subsection A above and may also vacate any
existing or proposed public street, watercourse or public ground
contained in the Official Map, or part thereof.
C. Unless otherwise specified, all proposed public street rights-of-way and
widenings of existing public street rights-of-way shall meet the width
requirements specified in the Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, for the street classification so designated.
A. Certification of the Official Map. The Official Map shall be identified by
the signatures of the Patton Township Board of Supervisors, attested by
the Township Secretary under the following words: "This is to certify
that this is the Official Map of the Patton Township referred to in § 28-5
of Ordinance No. 96-325 of the Patton Township, Centre County,
Pennsylvania, together with the date of enactment of this chapter." The
map shall be kept on file with the Municipal Manager.
B. The Official Map and this chapter have been adopted pursuant to the
provisions provided in Section 402 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.58 A copy of the Official Map and this chapter of the
Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania is recorded in the Centre
County Recorder of Deeds Office.
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402 et seq.
§ 28-5 PATTON CODE § 28-7
1:90
watercourses or public grounds, such changes shall be entered promptly
on said map. All changes, except those resulting from subdivision and
land development plans as specified in § 28-12B below, shall be certified
by initialing of the map by the Chair of the Patton Township Board of
Supervisors together with the amending ordinance number and date of
enactment.
§ 28-8. Relationship with County Official Map.
The adoption of an Official Map by the county shall not affect the Official
Map of Patton Township, except that the County Official Map shall govern
as to county streets and public grounds, facilities and improvements of the
county in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.59
§ 28-9. Relationship with adjacent municipalities.
If the Official Map, or amendment thereto, shows any street intended to
lead into any adjacent municipality, a certified copy of the Official Map, or
amendment thereto, shall be forwarded to such adjacent municipality.
§ 28-10. Construction within mapped streets, watercourses or
public grounds.
For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map of the
municipality, no permit shall be issued for any building within the lines of
any street, watercourse or public ground shown or laid out on the Official
Map. No person shall recover any damages for the taking for public use
of any building or improvements constructed within the lines of any street,
watercourse or public ground after the same shall have been included in the
Official Map, and any such building or improvement shall be removed at the
expense of the owner. However, when the property of which the reserved
location forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless
a permit shall be granted, the owner may apply to the governing body for
the grant of a special encroachment permit to so build. Before granting
any special encroachment permit authorized in this section, the governing
body may submit the application for a special encroachment permit to the
local planning agency and allow the planning agency 30 days for review and
comment and shall give public notice and hold a public hearing at which
all parties in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard. A refusal by
the governing body to grant the special encroachment permit applied for
may be appealed by the applicant to the zoning hearing board in the same
manner, and within the same time limitation as is provided in Article IX of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code60 in accordance with § 28-14
of this chapter.
A. The Patton Township Board of Supervisors may fix the time for which
streets, watercourses and public ground on the Official Map shall be
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 28-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-10
1:91
§ 28-11. Release of damage claims or compensation.
The governing body may designate any of its agencies to negotiate with
the owner of land whereon reservations are made, releases of claims for
damages or compensation for such reservations are required or agreements
indemnifying the governing body from such claims by others may be
required. Any releases or agreements when properly executed by the
governing body and the owner, and recorded, shall be binding upon any
successor in title.
§ 28-12. Adoption and amendment.
deemed reserved for future taking or acquisition for public use. The
reservation for public grounds shall lapse and become void one year
after an owner of such property has submitted a written notice to
the governing body announcing his intentions to build, subdivide or
otherwise develop the land covered by the reservation or has made
formal application for an official permit to build a structure for private
use, unless the governing body shall have acquired the property or
begun condemnation proceedings to acquire such property before the
end of the year.
B. The adoption of any street, street lines or other public lands as part of
the Official Map shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to
constitute the opening or establishment of any street nor the taking or
acceptance of any land, nor shall it obligate the municipality to improve
or maintain any such street or land. The adoption of proposed
watercourses or public grounds as part of the Official Map shall not, in
and of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute a taking or
acceptance of any land by the municipality.
A. Procedure.
(1) Prior to the adoption of the Official Map or part thereof, or any
amendments to the Official Map, the governing body shall refer the
proposed Official Map, or part thereof or amendment thereto, with
an accompanying ordinance describing the proposed map, to the
Municipal Planning Commission, Centre Regional Planning
Commission and Centre County Planning Commission for review.
The Planning Commissions shall report their recommendation on
said proposed Official Map and accompanying ordinance, part
thereof, or amendment thereto within 45 days unless an extension
of time shall be agreed to by the governing body. If, however, the
planning agency fails to act within 45 days, the governing body may
proceed without its recommendations.
(2) The county and adjacent municipalities may offer comments and
recommendations during said forty-five-day review period in
accordance with Section 40861 to local authorities, park boards,
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10408.
§ 28-10 PATTON CODE § 28-12
1:92
§ 28-13. Violations and penalties.
environmental boards and planning agencies, if requested by same
during said forty-five-day review period.
(3) Before voting on the enactment of the proposed ordinance and
Official Map, or part thereof or amendment thereto, the governing
body shall hold a public hearing pursuant to public notice.
(4) Following adoption of the ordinance and Official Map, or part
thereof or amendment thereto, a copy of the same, verified by the
governing body, shall be submitted to the Recorder of Deeds of the
county in which the municipality is located and shall be recorded
within 60 days of the effective date. The fee for recording and
indexing ordinances and amendments shall be paid by the
municipality enacting the ordinance or amendment and shall be in
the amount prescribed by law for the recording of ordinances by
the Recorder of Deeds.
B. Effect of approved plans on Official Map. After adoption of the Official
Map, or part thereof, all streets, watercourses, and public grounds and
the elements listed in Section 40162 on final, recorded plats, which have
been approved as provided by this chapter, shall be deemed
amendments to the Official Map. Notwithstanding any of the other
terms of this chapter, no public hearing need be held or notice given if
the amendment of the Official Map is the result of the addition of a plat
which has been approved as provided by this chapter.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever any person, partnership or corporation
shall have violated the terms of this chapter, the Municipal Manager
shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner, applicant,
developer, property manager or other person responsible for the
property or the violation, directing him to comply with all the terms of
this chapter within seven days, or such additional period, not to exceed
30 days, as the Manager shall deem reasonable, and further the
Manager shall give notice to the owner, applicant, developer, property
manager or other person responsible for the property or the violation
that if the violation is not corrected, the municipality may correct the
same and charge the landowner or other persons responsible the cost
thereof plus penalties as specified herein for failure to comply. Such
notice may be delivered by the United States Postal Service, first class,
postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail or by personal
service or, if the property is occupied, by posting notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
B. Penalties for failure to comply. Any person or partnership or
corporation who fails to comply with this chapter within the period
stated in the notice of the Manager shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a penalty of
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401.
§ 28-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-13
1:93
§ 28-14. Appeals.
Any appeal from a decision or action of the governing body or of any officer
or agency of the Township in matters pertaining to this chapter shall be
made in the same manner and within the same time limitation as is provided
for zoning appeals in Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.63
Chapter 31
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
not more than $300. Each and every day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
(1) In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant,
property manager or other person responsible fails to comply with
the terms of this chapter within the time specified by the Manager,
the municipality may take any actions necessary to correct the
violation. The costs for correction of any violation shall be in
addition to any penalties for violations for failure to comply.
(2) In addition to the fines for violations, costs, and penalties provided
for by this section, the municipality may institute proceedings in
courts by equity to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
buildings, structure or land or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
(3) The cost for removal, fines and penalties hereinabove mentioned
may be entered by the municipality as a lien against such property
in accordance with existing provisions of law or may be collected by
action in assumpsit.
63.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A.
§ 28-13 PATTON CODE § 28-14
31:94
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-21-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-432]
§ 31-1. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors (the "Supervisors") of Patton Township, Centre
County, Pennsylvania (the "Township"), previously established the Patton
Township Police Pension Plan (the "plan"), and the Supervisors, in order to
clarify the exact status and terms and conditions of the plan and to continue
its compliance with the tax-exempt retirement plan requirements of Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 Section 401(a), desire to enact a restatement of the
plan in its entirety with appropriate amendments.
§ 31-2. Repealer.
The provisions of Ordinance Nos. 90-256, 93-302, and 94-315, codified
as Chapter 31, Article I of the Code of Ordinances of the Township,
establishing and revising the Patton Township Police Pension Plan, are
hereby repealed.
§ 31-3. Reenactment and restatement of Police Pension Plan.
This article adopts by reference the attached restatement64 of the Patton
Township Police Pension Plan dated January 1, 2004, establishing and
continuing a Police Pension Plan pursuant to Act 600 of 1956, 53 P.S. 761
et seq., and providing for administration, eligibility for benefits, source and
allocation of plans, calculation of retirement benefits, return of participant
contributions, vesting terms of retirement benefits, disability retirement,
death benefit and other matters associated with the establishment and
continuation of the Police Pension Plan.
§ 31-4. Effective date.
The effective date of this reenactment and restatement shall be January 1,
2004.
§ 31-5. Execution of documents.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute the
plan document on behalf of the Township.
64.Editor's Note: A copy of the Police Pension Plan, as restated and amended, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 31-1 PENSIONS § 31-5
31:95
Chapter 34
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Centre Regional Planning
Commissions — See Ch. 4, Art. I.
Official Map — See Ch. 28.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 34-1. Commission established.
A Township Planning Commission, composed of five members, is hereby
created in and for the Township of Patton as provided in the Municipalities
Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.). Said Commission shall be appointed
in the manner provided by law and shall perform all the duties and may
exercise all the powers conferred by law on township planning agencies.
§ 34-2. Membership.
The number of members of the Patton Township Planning Commission are
hereby increased from five to seven members, which Commission shall
continue to have all of the powers, rights and duties of a Township Planning
Commission as set forth in the Second Class Township Code.
Chapter 37
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mutual support police services — See Ch. 4,
Art. II.
Regional Emergency Operations Plan — See
Ch. 4, Art. III.
Emergency services — See Ch. 15.
§ 37-1. Establishment.
In accordance with Section 590 of the Second Class Township Code65 the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Patton reaffirm the establishment
of a Department to be known as the "Police Department."
§ 37-2. Composition; appointment; removal.
The Police Department shall be composed of a Chief of Police, and such
officers and patrolmen, to be appointed by the Supervisors of the Township
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66901 et seq.
§ 31-5 PATTON CODE § 37-2
31:96
of Patton. Any such appointment shall remain in force until the appointee
resigns or is removed by action of the Board of Supervisors at a public
meeting, after such officer has been notified of charges brought against
him and has been given a public hearing by the Board of Supervisors.
Nothing in this chapter shall remove or relinquish the power of the Board
of Supervisors to remove an officer from his appointment if the officer is
convicted of any crime other than a minor motor vehicle violation, or if the
officer is found to be morally, physically or emotionally unsuited for duty.
§ 37-3. Vesting of powers.
The Supervisors do hereby vest in the officers of the Police Department all
police powers recognized under the various codes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 37-4. Deputies.
The Chief of Police may from time to time, as necessary deputize officers to
serve on a short period of duty in the Police Department to assist in other
than routine situations such as public disturbances, riots, fires or other
emergencies.
Chapter 42
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
§ 42-1. Findings.
The retention and maintenance of true and exact copies of public records
relating to the construction, alteration, maintenance and occupancy of
buildings and structures is essential to the proper administration of
government and the protection of public health, safety and welfare. The
storage of such records in original format has become an onerous obligation
requiring the dedication of much office space, has made retrieval of
information time consuming and difficult and provides for no security of
records from destruction by fire or atmospheric conditions and age. The
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in recognition of these serious problems
has authorized local governments to maintain quality microfilm copies of
essential public records and to subsequently destroy the originals or
transfer them to a secure storage at the direction of the Pennsylvania Local
Government Records Committee.
§ 42-2. Microfilm retention of records.
In accord with the provisions of the Municipal Records Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. §§ 9000 through 9010) all essential
public records relating to the construction, alteration, maintenance and
occupancy of buildings and structures in the Township of Patton shall be
maintained by true and exact microfilm copy.
§ 37-2 PENSIONS § 42-3
31:97
§ 42-3. Destruction of records.
After the microfilming of the public records and the creation of a microfilm
duplicate, the Director of Centre Region Code Administration shall
authorize the destruction or the transfer to a secure storage area provided
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accord with the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, of the records so copied.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 48
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 15.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
§ 48-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt emergency alarm
provisions which will prescribe effective standards, requirements and
controls to reduce the frequency of false alarms within the municipality.
§ 48-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALARM — A communication to a public safety agency indicating that a
crime, fire or other emergency situation warranting immediate action by a
public safety agency has occurred or is occurring.
ALARM SUPPLIER — The business by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired,
altered, replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or
facility.
ALARM SYSTEM —
Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or battery-operated,
arranged to signal the occurrence of a police, fire, hazard or medical
emergency requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire units
are expected to respond.
A.
B. Exceptions.
§ 42-3 PATTON CODE § 48-2
31:98
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees, in
attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location, where such
employees have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such
emergency message over a trunk line to the communications center of a
police or fire agency.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn, or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building, structure, or facility and emits a warning
signal audible outside the building, structure or facility and is designed
to attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other emergency
requiring police or fire agency response.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to transmit a signal by a voice or coded
message that indicates that an emergency condition exists and the need for
an emergency response is required.
CENTRAL STATION — A protective system or group of such systems
operated privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation which
accepts recorded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central
station having operators and/or guards in attendance at all times who have
the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message,
including the relaying of messages to the communications center of the
police or fire agency.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Patton Township Police Department.
COG — The Centre Region Council of Governments.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Centre Region Code Administration
Agency.
EMERGENCY — A police, fire, hazard or medical emergency.
FALSE ALARM —
(1) Manual fire alarm pull stations are not regulated by this chapter.
Residential smoke detectors that do not transmit an alarm signal
off premises are not regulated by this chapter.
(2)
An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully
or by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act, including the
malfunction of the alarm system, the intentional activation of a holdup
alarm for other than a holdup in progress, the intentional activation of
a burglary alarm for other than a burglary, the intentional activation of
a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency or the intentional
activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard to which a police
or fire agency responds.
A.
Exceptions: an alarm caused by the testing or repairing of telephone
or electrical lines or equipment outside the premises; acts of God, such
as earthquakes, floods, windstorms, thunder or lightning; an attempted
illegal entry of which there is visible evidence; a crime in progress;
B.
§ 48-2 PENSIONS § 48-2
31:99
FIRE AGENCY — The Alpha Fire Company.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Agency or an authorized designee.
FIRE EMERGENCY — A fire, smoke or overheating.
HAZARD EMERGENCY — An explosion; leak of toxic gas, liquid or solid; or
a potential explosion or leak.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic dialing device.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Patton.
PERMIT — Written authorization granted to an applicant by the Director
upon payment of the required fee.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or similar entity.
POLICE AGENCY — The Centre Region Police Departments.
POLICE EMERGENCY — An incident requiring prompt response by a police
agency.
POLICE AND FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police and fire
communications rooms and other rooms which house communications
equipment.
PROFESSIONAL ALARM LICENSE — A legal document authorizing a
person the right to sell, install and service an alarm system within the
municipality.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY — The Centre Region Police Departments and
Fire Companies.
§ 48-3. Permit and license requirements; fees.
A permit and/or license shall be governed by the following requirements on
and after the effective date of this chapter:
or, in the case of an emergency medical alarm, an actual medical
emergency requiring police, fire and/or medical personnel.
A. An alarm system permit shall be required for each structure having an
alarm system or multiple alarm systems. The provisions of § 48-6,
entitled "Alarm system permit; fee," shall apply.
B. A building permit shall be required for the installation of an alarm
system unless the system is battery-powered.
C. An annual professional alarm license shall be required for persons
selling, installing or servicing alarm systems within the municipality.
§ 48-2 PATTON CODE § 48-3
31:100
§ 48-4. Prohibited equipment.
§ 48-5. Professional alarm license.
The provisions of § 48-5, entitled "Professional alarm license," shall
apply.
D. The alarm system permit and professional alarm license fees shall be
established by resolution of the municipality.66 The building permit fee
shall be established through the adoption of the BOCA National
Building Code or the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code by the
municipality.67
E. Exceptions.
(1) The owner or occupant of the structure is exempt from an alarm
system permit and professional alarm license when installing an
alarm system, provided that the purpose of the audible alarm is to
notify the occupants of the structure of an emergency situation, the
audible alarm does not sound outside the structure (no external
speakers), the internal signal emitted by the audible alarm does not
exceed 90 decibels at the property line and the alarm signal device
when activated notifies only the owner or occupant when they are
not on the premises.
(2) The municipality and COG shall be issued an alarm system permit
where applicable and shall be exempt from any alarm system
permit fees.
A. Exterior alarms. On and after the effective date of this chapter, owners
or users of exterior audible alarms must equip such exterior audible
alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the exterior
audible alarm after a maximum of 15 minutes except for water flow
alarms. Exterior audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall
be unlawful in the municipality and must be disconnected by the owner
or user within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter.
B. Automatic dialing devices. On and after the effective date of this
chapter, no automatic dialing devices may be keyed to the police and
fire communications center.
A. On and after the effective date of this chapter, no one except an alarm
supplier holding a valid professional alarm license (hereinafter referred
to as "license") from the municipality or its designee shall sell, install or
service any alarm system within the municipality.
B. The Director shall issue a license to an alarm supplier meeting the
requirement of this section upon the filing of the required application
and payment of a fee as established by resolution.68 Each license shall
66.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 48-3 PENSIONS § 48-5
31:101
be an annual license and bear the signature of the Director. A copy
of the license shall be physically displayed upon each of the premises
using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the
Director or by an authorized code inspector. A license is not required
where no alarm system permit is required.
C. The alarm supplier applying for a license shall furnish the Director an
insurance certificate on an annual basis confirming that the alarm
supplier has in force general liability insurance coverage in an amount
of not less than $300,000 for each occurrence. The alarm supplier who
self-insures such coverage shall furnish evidence of financial ability.
D. No corporation, sole proprietor, partner, joint venturer, trustee,
executor, administrator, employee, fiduciary or stockholder with a 5%
or greater interest in a corporation (except a corporation whose stock is
publicly traded and registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission or with a state securities commission) applying for a
license shall have been convicted of a felony or pleaded nolo contendere
to a felony charge or indictment.
E. Alarm suppliers shall demonstrate a working knowledge of burglar, fire
or supervisory alarm systems that they sell and shall be authorized by
the manufacturer of the alarm equipment to sell, install and maintain
the same.
F. A license shall be revoked or renewal denied when:
(1) The alarm supplier fails to meet the requirements necessary to
obtain a license.
(2) The license fee is not paid.
(3) The Director, Chief of Police, Fire Chief or their designee has
reason to believe the alarm supplier's installations are the cause of
false alarms.
(4) The alarm supplier fails to provide emergency service as required
by this chapter.
G. Every alarm supplier that installs one or more alarm system in the
municipality shall make service available directly or through an agent
on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days a week, to repair in a
timely manner such devices and to correct malfunctions as they occur.
Any person using an alarm system shall make arrangements for service
to be available for such device on a twenty-four-hour-per-day, sevendays-
per-week basis.
H. Every alarm supplier who, after the effective date of this chapter, sells
or leases in the municipality an alarm system shall furnish operating
instructions and manual to the buyer or lessee.
68.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 48-5 PATTON CODE § 48-6
31:102
§ 48-6. Alarm system permit; fee.
§ 48-7. Installation, operational and inspection requirements.
A. The fee for an alarm system permit shall be established by resolution of
the municipality and said permit shall be obtained by or on behalf of the
owner of the premises upon which the alarm system is installed from
the Centre Region Code Administration Agency prior to the installation
of the alarm.
B. The alarm system permit shall bear the signature of the Director and be
valid for the period that the owner owns the premises upon which the
alarm system is installed, or until revoked by the Director. The permit
shall be physically present upon the premises using the alarm system
and shall be available for inspection by the Director or by an authorized
code inspector.
C. The alarm system permit shall contain the address of the property, the
name of the business (if applicable), the name of the owner, tenant or
agent responsible for the property, the alarm supplier or other entity
responsible for maintaining the system (if applicable), the type of alarm
(fire, burglary, holdup or medical), at least two alternate emergency
numbers of persons to be contacted to secure the property and any
additional information as may be determined to be necessary. It shall be
the owner's responsibility to amend the foregoing information
whenever the information changes during the life of the permit.
D. Persons who fail to obtain an alarm system permit within 60 days after
an alarm system is activated or within 60 days after the effective date of
this chapter shall be liable to pay a late charge penalty as designated by
resolution of the municipality for each calendar month or part thereof
that the permit is not obtained.
A. Every alarm supplier selling, leasing or furnishing to any user or a user
who privately installs an alarm system which is located on premises
within the municipality shall:
(1) Be permitted to install only equipment that is listed by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as being electrically safe and
meeting the municipality's requirements for the alarm system.
Wiring for the alarm system must conform with all applicable
municipal codes.
(2) Be required to cause each alarm system installed to be provided
with standby battery power which shall automatically and
immediately take over in the event of a power failure without
initiating an alarm except for a trouble signal.
(3) Be required to install equipment in such a way as to neutralize
electrical surges on the alarm system.
§ 48-6 PENSIONS § 48-7
31:103
§ 48-8. False alarms.
(4) Be required to deactivate any alarm system within a reasonable
period of time when multiple false alarms are received.
B. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an alarm device must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion so that the
alarm device will not be activated by impulses due to transient pressure
change in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises (such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows), vehicular noise adjacent to
the premises or other forces unrelated to genuine alarm situations.
C. Application for a permit for the installation of an alarm system and
subsequent installation of such a system, pursuant to a permit issued or
the continuance of the use of any alarm system already installed, at the
effective date of this chapter shall constitute consent by the owner or
lessee thereof and authorization for the inspection of any such
installation and/or operation by the Director or his representative.
D. All such entries upon the premises where an alarm system is installed
and all such inspections of the installation and operation of alarm
systems shall be at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice,
except in emergency situations.
A. The permittee shall be notified, in writing, by the Public Safety Agency
for each and every false alarm activated in the absence of an
emergency, whether willfully or by inadvertence, negligence or
unintentional act, including the malfunction of the alarm system to
which the police or fire agency responds. Each twenty-four-hour period
during which an alarm occurs shall constitute a separate offense and
each offense shall accumulate over a twelve-month period, as follows:
Alarm False Alarm Notification
First Written warning
Second Written warning
Third Written warning
Fourth Charge as established by resolution
Fifth Charge as established by resolution
Each additional Charge as established by resolution
B. When the fourth and subsequent alarm occurs, the Public Safety
Agency shall, within 20 days from the date of the false alarm, notify the
permittee that a false alarm charge is due and payable and the amount
thereof. Such notice shall be forwarded by certified mail to the
permittee at their last known address. Failure of the Public Safety
Agency to mail notice of assessment of the false alarm change within 20
days from the occurrence of a false alarm shall preclude the
municipality from assessing a false alarm charge for said false alarm.
§ 48-7 PATTON CODE § 48-8
31:104
§ 48-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 48-10. Liability of municipality and COG.
C. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the
municipality 25 days from the date of the mailing of the notice of
assessment of the charge. The municipality and COG shall be exempt
from payment of all fees.
D. Failure of the permittee to pay a false alarm charge on or before the due
date shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject said
person to the penalties set forth in § 48-9 hereof.
E. If doubt exists as to the cause of the false alarm, the Chief of Police or
Fire Chief or their designee shall make a decision regarding the
circumstances of the activation.
F. Multiple alarms received by the police or fire agency before the system
can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be
considered a single alarm.
A. Should any person fail to pay the false alarm charges as required under
§ 48-8 of this chapter, such failure shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, and such unpaid charges may be collected as fines by suit or
civil proceeding brought in the name of the municipality before any
District Justice of this commonwealth having jurisdiction. Such
proceedings for such violations and for the collection of such fees
imposed herein and unpaid may be commenced by warrant or by
summons, at the discretion of the District Justice before whom such
proceedings are begun. Each twenty-four-hour period during which
failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation of the
terms of this chapter.
B. Any person who is convicted of a violation shall be subject to
prosecution in a civil proceeding brought before a District Justice
having jurisdiction and, upon conviction, shall be liable for a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $600, and court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. [Amended
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
C. The municipality and COG shall be exempt from all penalties under this
chapter.
A. The issuance of any permit under this chapter shall not constitute
acceptance by the municipality or COG of any liability to maintain any
equipment, to answer alarms nor otherwise render the municipality or
COG liable to any person for any loss or damage relating to the alarm
system or procedure.
§ 48-8 PENSIONS § 48-10
31:105
§ 48-11. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be a function of the
Code Administration Agency and Police Services of the municipality and
shall include the following:
§ 48-12. Appeals.
Any applicant or permit holder shall have a right of appeal under this
chapter. An appeal may be taken to the municipality on a decision regarding
installation, operation or maintenance of an alarm device for which a permit
has been requested and is denied or upon which a permit has been issued
and a revocation of said permit has occurred. Such an appeal, when filed,
shall be in writing and filed within 10 days following such decision. The
appeal shall be filed with the governing body of the municipality making the
decision. The governing body shall promptly conduct a hearing to affirm,
modify or reverse the decision appealed from. The decision of the governing
body shall be final.
Chapter 50
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
B. In the event that the owner of such premises is a person other than the
permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee or other user not the
owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed, such permit
application shall constitute an indemnification agreement by the
applicant to hold harmless any such police officer or firefighter, the
Police Department or the Fire Department, the municipality or COG, as
appropriate, from any and all damages whatsoever claimed by the
lessor or owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed.
A. Authority to accept or reject a permit application or revoke a permit
because of a misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application for a permit, failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment
or operation of an alarm device connected to the central receiving
station after due notice or not meeting other conditions and
specifications of this chapter.
B. Authority to order the disconnection of an alarm device to the central
receiving station for a violation of this chapter or failure to pay any of
the appropriate fees.
§ 48-10 PATTON CODE § 48-12
31:106
ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-58969]
§ 50-1. Intent.
The Township recognizes that persons in possession or consumption of
an open container of alcohol on any public street, public sidewalk, public
parking lot, public parking garage, public alley, public park or public space,
represent a danger to the health and welfare of the residents.
§ 50-2. Applicability.
This article applies to all persons within the Township.
§ 50-3. Relationship with other restrictions.
The provisions of this article are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including Title 40 (Liquor
Code)70 and Title 75 (Vehicle Code),71 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
If more stringent requirements concerning possession or consumption of an
open container of an alcoholic beverage control are contained in the other
rules, regulations or ordinances, the more stringent regulation shall apply.
§ 50-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Liquor or malt or brewed beverages, as
defined herein, or both of them.
LIQUOR — Means and includes spirituous, vinous, fermented or other
alcoholic beverages or combination of liquors and mixed liquors, a part of
which is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all
drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures and reused, recovered
or redistilled denatured alcohol usable for beverage purposes, which
contain more than 1% of alcohol by volume.
MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGES — Any beer, lager, lager beer, ale, porter
or similar fermented malt beverages containing 1/2 of 1% or more alcohol
by volume.
TOWNSHIP — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 109 but was renumbered for
organizational reasons.
70.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 50-1 PENSIONS § 50-5
31:107
§ 50-5. Open containers.
Possession/transportation of open containers of alcoholic beverages. It shall
be unlawful for any person to possess or transport an open container of
alcoholic beverage on any public street, public sidewalk, public alley, public
park, public parking lot or public parking garage within the Township,
whether such person is on foot or is in or on a vehicle, and whether such
vehicle is moving or is stationary.
§ 50-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions herein relating to open
containers of alcoholic beverages shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500.
§ 50-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by Township police officers,
Township Ordinance Enforcement Officers, and others designated by the
Township Manager.
§ 50-5 PATTON CODE § 50-7
31:108
Chapter 52
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Parks — See Ch. 112.
Pest control — See Ch. 118.
§ 50-7 PENSIONS § 50-7
31:109

ARTICLE I
Animal Regulations
[Adopted 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 134]
§ 52-1. Running at large. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, cat or any other
animal in the nature of a pet, owned by or under the control or supervision
of such person, to run at large on property other than that of such owner or
keeper, except with the permission of the property owner.
§ 52-2. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or otherwise maintain
any animal which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by
making any noises which would be loud or unusual to a person of ordinary
sensibilities.
§ 52-3. Conflict with other provisions.
It is the intent of this article not to supersede any laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This includes the Dog Law of 1965, as
amended and supplemented,72 under which the seizure and detention of
dogs running at large shall be regulated.
§ 52-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-439]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate or
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding commenced before a magisterial
district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures,
be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35, nor more than $1,000, plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days.
72.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 52-1 PENSIONS § 52-4
31:111

ARTICLE II
Dog Sanitation
[Adopted 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-393]
§ 52-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health of Township residents by
limiting the areas in which dogs are permitted to defecate and by requiring
removal of feces deposited by dogs in the permitted areas.
§ 52-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG OWNER — Every person having a right of property in any dog and
every person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his/her care and every
person who permits any dog to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him/her.
KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any
dog, or otherwise have custody of any dog, whether or not the owner of the
dog, whether for compensation or otherwise.
§ 52-7. Curbing of dog and removal of feces.
§ 52-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation reported will require verification. If investigation into a
reported violation affirms the complaint, a citation specifying a $25 fine will
be issued. Second confirmed complaints will result in fines of $100, to be
raised an additional $100 for each subsequent violation.
A. No person owning, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause or allow
such dog to soil or defecate on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
passageway, bypath, play area, park, or any place where people
congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever or any
private property without the permission of the owner.
B. The restriction in this part shall not apply to that portion of any public
street lying between the street side of the two sidewalks or the area
within five feet of the cartway if sidewalks are not present. This area is
designated as appropriate for curbing dogs.
C. The person who curbs any dog in the above area shall immediately
remove all feces deposited by the dog in a sanitary method.
§ 52-5 PENSIONS § 52-8
31:113

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Chickens in Residential Areas
[Adopted 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-507]
§ 52-9. Intent.
The intent of this ordinance is to permit the keeping of chicken hens in
residentially zoned areas by the citizens of Patton Township. It has been
shown that, in limited quantities, chickens do not pose a major health
hazard and under certain conditions can be kept without causing a nuisance
to surrounding properties.
§ 52-10. Use regulations.
The keeping of chicken hens shall be allowed by right in the Rural
Residence (R-1) District, the Low-Density (R-2) Residence Zoning District,
the Medium Density (R-3) Residence Zoning District, the Manufactured
Home Park (R-MHP) Zoning District, the Manufactured Home Residence
(R-M) Zoning District, and the Agricultural (A-1) District, provided that the
following conditions are met:
A. The building lot has been developed as a single-family residence.
B. No more than four chicken hens shall be kept per one-family dwelling,
and no more than eight chicken hens shall be kept per one-family
dwelling for lots two acres or greater in the A-1 Agricultural and R-1
Rural Residence Zoning Districts only.
C. A minimum lot size either owned, leased, or rented of 1/2 acre shall be
required in residential zoning districts.
D. No person shall keep a rooster in Patton Township on a tract of land less
than 10 acres in size.
E. All chicken hens shall be housed in a roofed coop that is stationary,
secure, and enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
F. The coop shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an adjacent
lot.
G. The minimum coop size shall be three square feet per chicken. The
maximum overall coop size shall not exceed 30 square feet.
H. An outside run is permitted when attached to the coop.
I. If an outside run is provided, it shall be no bigger than 10 square feet
per chicken and shall be enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
J. The outside run shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an
adjacent lot.
K. All coops and runs are subject to setbacks for accessory structures.
§ 52-9 PENSIONS § 52-10
31:115
§ 52-11. Running at large prohibited; sanitary requirements;
slaughtering; violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to all residentially zoned properties of
less than 10 acres that are keeping chickens as set forth in § 52-10 of the
Code of Patton Township:
L. All coops and runs shall be screened from the view at ground level from
adjacent lots by using fencing, landscaping, or a combination thereof.
M. A zoning permit shall be required for keeping chicken hens, coops, and
outside runs.
A. Unlawful to allow chickens to run at large. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or owners of any chickens to allow the same to run at large upon
any of the common thoroughfares, sidewalks, passageways, play areas,
parks, streets, alleys, or public highways, or any place where people
congregate or walk, or upon any public or private property, without an
approved coop and run in Patton Township. Any chicken not contained
within an approved coop or run shall be deemed "at large."
B. Sanitary requirements for housing chickens. Any owner or owners of
chickens within the limits of Patton Township shall be required to house
the same at all times under sanitary conditions so that the keeping of
chickens shall not become either a public or private nuisance. The
following provisions apply:
(1) All chicken feces accumulated on private property shall be removed
by using the approved sanitary method of double bagging and
placed in the trash for collection unless composted as provided for
below.
(2) Chicken feces on private property shall not be allowed to
accumulate to the degree that it becomes a public health nuisance
or hazard. In cases where chicken feces does accumulate on
private property, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer and/or Local
Health Department or his designee may conduct an investigation,
after which the accumulation may be declared a public health
hazard or nuisance and the owner shall be ordered to remove and
dispose of the accumulated feces in an approved manner. The order
to remove such accumulated feces shall be given personally to the
owner or shall be sent by registered mail, and the owner shall be
given a period of 48 hours from the date and time of receipt of the
order to clean the property and remove the accumulated feces.
C. Composting. It shall be unlawful for any person to spread or cause to be
spread or deposited upon any ground or premises within Patton
Township any chicken manure. However, chicken manure may be
composted on the property where the chickens are housed and the
composted material then applied to gardens or yards.
§ 52-10 PATTON CODE § 52-11
31:116
D. Slaughtering or butchering. Slaughtering or butchering of chickens for
personal consumption or religious practices shall be permitted,
provided that it is done wholly on the property where the chickens are
kept and any waste is disposed of in a proper and sanitary way.
E. Slaughtering or butchering: commercial. No person shall slaughter or
butcher any chicken within Patton Township for commercial sale unless
under the operation of an approved facility for the slaughtering of
animals as regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
F. Proper storage of feed. All feed, water, and other items associated with
the keeping of chickens shall be protected in a way that prevents
infestation by rats, mice, or other rodents or vectors. Failure to keep all
feed, water, and other items associated with the keeping of chickens in
a clean and sanitary condition constitutes a violation of this ordinance.
G. Penalty for violation of provisions on chickens. Any owner or owners of
any chicken or chickens kept within the limits of Patton Township
violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof before the District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution at the
discretion of said Magistrate and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be committed to the county jail for not more than five days.
§ 52-11 PENSIONS § 52-11
31:117
Chapter 58
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127. Trees — See Ch. 163.
§ 58-1. Unlawful growth of grass, weeds and other vegetation.
§ 58-2. Responsibility of property owners and occupants.
The owner of any such premises, whether occupied by the owner or not,
shall be responsible to remove, trim or cut all such vegetation growing
or remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of the first
section of this chapter. Both the owner and the occupant, in the case of
premises occupied by other than the owner, shall be jointly responsible for
the compliance with this chapter.
§ 58-3. Notice to owners and occupants of premises. [Amended
9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-436]
A. No person, firm, partnership or corporation owning or having a present
interest in or occupying any real estate in a C-1, C-2, I-1, I-RD, PAD, R-M
and R-MHP Zone, and those parts of A-1 Districts which have been
developed using R-1 area and bulk standards, or any lot in a residential
subdivision in a PC, R-2 or R-3 Zone or any area in an R-1 zone where
houses inhabited by humans are closer than 300 feet to each other, as
defined in the Chapter 175, Zoning, as amended, shall, except as
hereinafter provided, permit any grass or weeds or vegetation not
eatable or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose to grow or
remain on such premises, including any portion of the premises
occupied by a street or alley, so as to exceed a height of six inches or to
throw off any unpleasant or obnoxious odor or to conceal any debris or
to create or to produce pollen. All such vegetation is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and
comfort of the inhabitants of the Township. [Amended 8-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-330]
B. No such weeds, grass or similar vegetation as heretofore defined, shall
come within the terms of this chapter except within a radius of 150 feet
from a structure inhabited by humans and provided, further, that weeds
or grass intermingled with growing cultivated crops or on premises
adjacent to agricultural land or land in agricultural use shall not come
within the provisions of this chapter.
A. Upon the discovery of the initial violation on a premises during a
growing season (April through October), the authorized agent of the
Township shall give a written notice of warning to the owner and/or
§ 52-11 PATTON CODE § 58-3
58:118
§ 58-4. Violations and penalties.
If any such owner and/or occupant shall neglect to comply with such notice
within the period of time stated herein, the Township authorities shall have
the following remedies:
occupant of such violation. The owner and/or occupant shall then have
72 hours to abate such violation.
B. After a period of no less than 72 hours after the issuance of the warning
notice, the Township’s authorized agent may inspect the premises for
compliance with this chapter.
(1) If, after the 72 hours' warning time and within the same growing
season, the Township’s authorized agent observes the premises to
be in violation, an ordinance violation notice shall be issued to the
owner and/or occupant either by personal delivery, by the United
State mail directed to the last known address, or by posting the
violation notice upon the premises where such violation occurs.
Each twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate violation
and an ordinance violation notice may be issued every 24 hours.
(2) If such owner and/or occupant shall, within seven days after the
delivery, mailing or leaving of such violation notice, pay to the
Treasurer of the Township the sum of $35 for the violation, the
same will constitute full satisfaction for the violation noted in said
notice. The failure of such person to make payment, as aforesaid,
within seven days shall render such owner and/or occupant subject
to the penalties as provided for in § 58-4, Violations and penalties.
A. They may remove, spray, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so
as to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the reasonable cost
thereof, together with an additional penalty of 10% of reasonable costs,
may be collected by the Township from such owner or occupant as a
penalty under the provisions of this chapter, or in any other manner
provided by law. This right as herein vested in the Township shall be in
addition to penalties prescribed by the provisions of this chapter for the
conviction of the owner or occupant as aforesaid to comply with the
terms of this chapter.
B. Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate
or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding commenced before a
magisterial district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedures, shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35
nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, provided
each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice to the
offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330; 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-436]
§ 58-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 58-4
58:119
Chapter 59
BURIAL OF HUMAN REMAINS
§ 59-1. Burial in recognized cemeteries preferred.
The burial of human remains in recognized cemeteries in the Township is
preferred, although not required, and shall follow the regulations of the
recognized cemetery if more restrictive than the requirements herein.
§ 59-2. Permits required.
Permits for burial are required prior to any interment and will be issued by
the Patton Township Zoning Officer.
§ 59-3. Requirements for interment in family burial cemeteries.
All interments occurring in family burial cemeteries will require the
following additional requirements:
A. All burials must conform to the following depth of graves requirements:
(1) The distance from parts of the top of the outer case containing the
casket may not be less than three feet (36 inches) from the natural
surface of the ground.
(2) When a casket is not placed in an outer case or when a body is not
placed in a casket, the distance from parts of the casket or body
may be no less than four feet (48 inches) from the natural surface of
the ground.
B. The area of excavation shall have a minimum setback requirement of 30
feet from all property lines.
C. The area of excavation shall have a minimum setback requirement of
100 feet from any private or public water wells, wetlands, or other
water courses.
D. No burials are permitted within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
E. The minimum size of the tract or parcel on which the burial of human
remains is allowed shall be one acre.
F. A maximum of four interments may occur per one acre of land.
G. All burial sites must be marked with a permanent marker made of
stone, metal, or other durable material so that the area is not disturbed.
A map or survey showing the burial site location, or geographic
coordinates of the burial site location, must be provided with the permit
application.
H. All family burial cemeteries shall be accessible from at least one public
or private roadway.
§ 58-4 PATTON CODE § 59-3
58:120
§ 59-4. Violations and penalties.
Any of the provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable pursuant to
§ 175-55, Violations and penalties.
Chapter 60
CABLE SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A177.
§ 60-1. Statement of intent and purpose; franchise fee.
I. Any deed conveying a property containing a family burial cemetery
shall reflect the restriction and/or reservation for the family burial
cemetery and should identify what party(s) shall be responsible for its
maintenance. The deed shall include, or be accompanied by, a suitable
access easement to provide perpetual access for family members of the
deceased.
A. Statement of intent and purpose. The Grantor intends, by the adoption
of this chapter, to facilitate the development and operation of cable
systems to provide cable service. This development can contribute
significantly to meeting the cable-related needs and desires of many
individuals, associations, and institutions. Therefore, the following are
statements of the Grantor's intent when granting or renewing a
franchise:
(1) Provide for the installation and operation of cable systems with
features meeting the current and future cable-related needs and
interests of the community considering the costs to subscribers and
to any operator of cable systems.
(2) To act expeditiously on any requests for a franchise so as to allow
the prompt provision of cable service while ensuring that the public
interest is met and that residents are not discriminated against
based on race, ethnicity, income, or other unfair basis.
(3) Encourage the offering of the widest feasible scope and diversity of
programming and other services to all Grantor residents that are
consistent with community needs and interests and as measured
against the cost of providing such programming and other services.
(4) Encourage implementation of technical advances in cable
programming technology, and to make available to residents cable
services of all kinds in the Grantor.
§ 59-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-1
58:121
§ 60-2. General provisions.
(5) Provide the use of channel capacity for government, educational,
and public service access programming consistent with the needs
and interests of the community and federal law.
(6) Ensure that rates and charges for Basic Service programming,
equipment, and service are fair, reasonable and consistent with
federal standards.
(7) Require that a Grantee of a franchise provide customer service
consistent with industry standards, this chapter and the standards
of the FCC.
(8) Ensure that the installation and maintenance of cable systems
comply with all generally applicable Grantor ordinances and
regulations and do not interfere with the Grantor's legitimate use
of rights-of-way of its own facilities and property.
(9) That the occupation of the Grantor's rights-of-way does not
endanger the health, safety and welfare of its citizenry, public
property or other uses of the rights-of-way.
(10) Ensure the widest availability of cable services within Grantor on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
(11) Provide for compliance with the emergency alert provisions set
forth by the FCC, set forth under 47 CFR Part 11, FCC Rules and
Regulations, Emergency Alert System (EAS). To the extent required
by federal and state law, Grantee of a franchise shall assist the
Grantor in working with the Centre County Office of Emergency
Services and the Centre Region Emergency Management Council
in the establishment of an emergency response plan.
(12) Provide for the payment of franchise fees in accordance with
federal law.
B. Franchise fee and franchising costs. Costs incurred by Grantor for the
granting or renewing of a franchise and for rights-of-way use shall be
reimbursed by the collection of franchise fees.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Township of
Patton Cable System Regulations." Within this document it shall also be
referred to as "this chapter" or "the chapter."
B. Applicability. The requirements of this chapter shall supersede any
existing regulations of Grantor inconsistent with this chapter and apply
to the full extent of the terms herein and shall be limited in scope or
application only to the extent as may be required by applicable federal
or state law, including such changes in applicable law as may be
hereinafter enacted. No provisions of this chapter shall be disregarded
pursuant to this subsection except on express application to and
§ 60-1 PATTON CODE § 60-2
58:122
determination by the Grantor to such effect based on the specific
factual circumstances demonstrated. When not in conflict with a
franchise agreement, each Grantee shall be subject to all the terms and
conditions of this chapter. Any franchise existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter shall be subject to it at the time a renewed franchise is
granted by the Grantor. Nothing in this chapter or amendments thereto
shall be interpreted to unilaterally deprive any person of any rights
or obligations imposed by any binding and existing valid franchise
agreement during the term thereof, whether entered into before or
after enactment of this chapter, and shall impose obligations on any
such person additional to those included in such franchise agreement
only to the extent permitted by law and to the extent not inconsistent
with such franchise agreement; provided that the failure of the Grantor
to enforce any provision herein or in a franchise agreement or the
failure of any person to comply with any provision herein or in a
franchise agreement shall not be a waiver of the Grantor's right to
enforce such provisions, nor shall it in any way constitute evidence
or agreement by the Grantor that such person has a valid existing
franchise agreement. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
irrespective of whether a Grantee is determined to be operating
pursuant to a valid franchise agreement.
C. Participation in CACC authorized. The Grantor may negotiate franchise
language jointly with other local Grantors in order to develop a
coordinated franchise document with common elements shared among
participating municipalities in the Centre Area Cable Consortium
(CACC).
D. Preservation of police power authority. Any rights granted pursuant to
this chapter and pursuant to any franchise agreement authorized
hereunder are subject to the police power authority of the Grantor to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public. Grantees shall be subject to and comply with all
valid generally applicable laws enacted by the Grantor.
E. Public inspection of records. Certain information required to be filed
with the Grantor pursuant to this chapter or a franchise is subject to
inspection and copying by the public pursuant to the provisions of
Pennsylvania Open Records Law, 65 P.S. § 271, as amended ("Sunshine
Law").73 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, a
Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The
Grantor agrees to treat any information disclosed by a Grantee as
confidential and only to disclose it to those employees, representatives,
and agents of the Grantor that have a need to know in order to enforce a
franchise and who agree to maintain the confidentiality of all such
information. Grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber
information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act or any other
73.Editor's Note: Former 65 P.S. § 271 was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93, § 6(a)(3).
See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq. for the Sunshine Act.
§ 60-2 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-2
58:123
§ 60-3. Definitions and word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section and
any franchise granted by Grantor, unless the context clearly indicates that
another meaning is intended or unless otherwise more specifically defined
in another Chapter or Code of the Grantor. Words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural
number, words in the masculine gender include the feminine, and words
applicable law. For purposes of this section, the terms "proprietary"
or "confidential" include, but are not limited to, information relating
to a cable system design, customer lists, marketing plans, financial
information unrelated to the calculation of franchise fees or rates
pursuant to FCC rules, or other information that is reasonably
determined by a Grantee to be competitively sensitive. In the event
that the Grantor receives a request under the state's Sunshine Law,74
public records or similar law for the disclosure of information the
Grantee has designated as confidential, trade secret or proprietary, the
Grantor shall promptly notify Grantee of such request and cooperate
with Grantee in its efforts to protect its rights.
F. Enforcement. The Grantor shall be entitled to enforce this chapter and
any franchise agreement through all remedies lawfully available.
G. Relationship of the parties. Under no circumstances shall any franchise
agreement authorized by this chapter be construed to create any
relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment
between the parties.
H. Indemnification. As a condition of use of the rights-of-way, every
Grantee, at its sole cost and expense, shall indemnify, protect, defend
and hold harmless the Grantor, its elected officials, officers, employees,
and agents acting in their official capacities, from and against any and
all claims, demands, losses, damages, liabilities, fines, charges,
penalties, administrative and judicial proceedings and orders,
judgments, remedial actions of any kind, and all costs and expenses of
any kind, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney fees,
directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, resulting from the granting of
a franchise, property damage or bodily injury (including accidental
death) that arise out of Grantee's construction, operation, maintenance
or removal of a cable system, except to the extent arising from or
caused by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the
Grantor, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents or contractors.
The Grantor shall give Grantee written notice of its obligation to
indemnify and defend the Grantor within 10 business days of receipt of
a claim or action pursuant to this section. If the Grantor determines
that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such
separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the Grantor.
74.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 60-2 PATTON CODE § 60-3
58:124
in the plural number include the singular. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
ACCEPTANCE — Filing a written acceptance of a franchise on a form
approved by the Grantor's Solicitor with the Grantor's Secretary notifying
the Grantee of such acceptance.
ACCESS CHANNELS — Channels as designated in a franchise to be used
for public access, educational access, or government access or any
combination thereof.
ACCESS FACILITIES —
AFFILIATE — Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by,
or under common control with the Grantee, provided that "affiliate" shall in
no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less
than 25% of such Grantee, or any creditor of such Grantee solely by virtue
of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason
of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common
ownership, common management, or common control with, such Grantee.
APPLICABLE LAW — The Cable Act, all applicable FCC rules, this chapter,
all generally applicable local regulations, and state statutes and rules and
regulations, any amendments thereto, and any of the applicable federal and/
or state laws that are now existing or hereafter adopted or amended.
APPLICANT — Any person that applies for a franchise pursuant to this
chapter.
APPLICATION — The process by which an applicant submits a request and
indicates a desire to be granted an initial franchise to utilize the rights-ofway
of all, or a part, of Grantor jurisdictional area. An application includes
all written documentation, statements and representations, in whatever
form or forum, made by an applicant to Grantor concerning the construction
of a system over, under, on or through the rights-of-way; the area proposed
to be served within Grantor by an applicant; the portion of the rights-of-way
proposed to be used by an applicant; and any other matter pertaining to a
proposed system which is necessary for a determination as to whether or
not applicant meets the terms and conditions established by this chapter.
BASIC SERVICE — To the extent required by federal law, any Service
tier that includes the lawful retransmission of 1) all commercial television
broadcast signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Section 614
of the Cable Act; 2) qualified local, noncommercial educational television
broadcast signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Section 615
Channel positions designated in a franchise agreement for public,
educational, or governmental access (PEG) use; and
A.
The facilities and equipment for the use of such access channel
positions.
B.
Grantee does not relinquish its ultimate ownership of access facilities
when designated for PEG use.
C.
§ 60-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-3
58:125
of the Cable Act; and 3) any public, educational, and governmental access
programming if required by a franchise agreement. Basic service as defined
herein shall be consistent with the Cable Act and federal law. A franchise
agreement may include a more expanded definition based upon mutual
agreement between Grantor and a cable operator.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, P.L. No.
98 549 (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 to 611 (1982 and Supp. V. 1987) as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, P.L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, P.L. No.
104-104 (1996) as it may, from time to time, be amended.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
CABLE PROGRAMMING or VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming
provided by or generally considered comparable to programming provided
by a television broadcast station.
CABLE SERVICES — The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed or used to provide cable services and which is
capable of being provided to multiple subscribers within the Grantor, but
such term does not include:
CAPITAL COSTS — Costs associated with the purchase of video production
assets, products or other resources that will provide service and support
Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one
or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or
A.
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
A. Video programming or other programming service; and
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service, as such term
is defined in the Cable Act.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations.
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any rights-of-way.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 to 226, except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C.
§ 541(c)] to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of cable
services directly to subscribers.
C.
Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility system.
D.
§ 60-3 PATTON CODE § 60-3
58:126
for access channels for more than one year, but shall not have any meaning
inconsistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
CENTRE AREA CABLE CONSORTIUM or CACC — The combined eight
communities, including Benner, College, Ferguson, Halfmoon, Harris and
Patton Townships and the Boroughs of Bellefonte and State College.
CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which
is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel (as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation).
CONVERTER — An electronic device that converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber
and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a cable
subscriber to view all authorized cable subscriber signals delivered at
designated converter dial locations.
DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS or EXTERNAL COSTS —
DROP — The cable or cables or other hardwire technologies that connect
the cable system to the subscriber's dwelling or residence to the nearest
feasible point on the system in order to receive cable service.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS or GOVERNMENT ACCESS — The availability
of channel positions on the cable system for noncommercial educational
or government use by agencies, institutions, organizations, groups and
individuals in the community, including the Grantor or their designees for
Costs in the following categories:
State and local taxes and franchise fees applicable to the provision
of Cable service;
(1)
Incidental costs of complying with franchise requirements,
including bond premiums and other security payments, insurance
and indemnification costs, penalties and liquidated damages, and
the capital costs of providing public, educational, and government
access channels as required by the local franchising authority;
(2)
Retransmission consent fees or copyright fees incurred for the
carriage broadcast signals;
(3)
(4) FCC regulatory fees pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 159;
Headend equipment costs necessary for the carriage of digital
broadcast signals; and
(5)
(6) Other programming costs.
A.
Notwithstanding, in accordance with the FCC regulations, certain other
charges are not incidental, and they are to be considered part of
the franchise fee assessment subject to the five-percent cap: attorney
fees, consultant fees, application or processing fees that exceed the
reasonable cost of processing such submissions, and complimentary or
discounted services provided to Grantors.
B.
§ 60-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-3
58:127
the distribution of noncommercial programming not under the Grantee's
editorial control and consistent with applicable law, including:
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC — The Federal
Communications Commission of the United States government.
FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The initial authorization or
renewal of the rights and obligations extended by the Grantor to a person
to own, lease, construct, maintain, or operate a cable system in the rightsof-
way within the Grantor for the purpose of providing cable services. It
shall not mean or include: i) any other permit or authorization required
for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
Grantor required by the ordinances and laws of the Grantor, including
the provision of telecommunications services; ii) any generally applicable
permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with
construction and operations in the rights-of-way, including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on poles, conduits,
or other structures, whether owned by the Grantor or a private entity,
or for excavating or performing other such work in or along the rightsof-
way. Cable operators shall be responsible for obtaining all generally
applicable permits, licenses, or other forms of approval or authorization
necessary prior to the commencement of any such construction activity.
Notwithstanding, standard service installations, routine maintenance, or
repair or replacement of parts on any part of the cable system or its
appurtenances (e.g., system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies,
pedestals, or other related equipment) shall not require an operator to
obtain prior approval, authorization, permits, or licenses to perform such
activities from the Grantor.
FRANCHISE FEE — Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the
Grantor on a cable operator or its subscribers, or both, solely because of
their status and activities as such in accordance with Section 622(g) of the
Cable Act. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
"Educational access" shall mean access where local schools or
education institutions, public or private, K-12, technical and community
colleges, as well as other accredited institutions of higher learning,
as the designated programmers having editorial control over their
programming which shall concern their educational functions;
A.
"Government access" shall mean access where the Grantor, county,
or other governmental entities, agencies or institutions, or their
designees, as designated by the Grantor, are the primary or designated
programmers having editorial control over their programming, which
shall concern governmental meetings, activities, services, or
community affairs; and
B.
"EG access" or "EG access channel" shall mean educational access and
government access channels, collectively.
C.
Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
A.
§ 60-3 PATTON CODE § 60-3
58:128
GRANTEE — A person, including a cable operator, who has been granted
a franchise to provide cable service by Grantor or is required to have a
franchise and that person or cable operator's agents, employees, lawful
successors, transferees, or assignees.
GRANTOR — The Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
GROSS REVENUES — Any revenue actually received by a Grantee, or
by any other entity that is a cable service on a Grantee's cable system,
including the Grantee's affiliates, from the operation of the Grantee's cable
system to provide cable services in accordance with general accounting
principles (GAAP).75 By way of illustration and not limitation, this definition
would include, without limitation, revenue derived from basic service and
other tiers of service, franchise fees paid by subscribers, pay-per-view
cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased access channel fees;
converter rentals; locally derived revenue from home shopping to the extent
conducted through a cable service; all lease access payments from the
cable system; locally derived advertising revenues; revenues from twoway
transmissions to the extent these transmissions are considered cable
services under federal law; payments or other consideration received by the
Grantee for the use of the cable system to provide cable service or other
cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP. Gross revenues
shall include revenue received by any entity other than the Grantee where
necessary to prevent evasion or avoidance of the obligations under this
Code or a franchise to pay the applicable franchise fees. Revenues which
are not directly attributable to specific subscribers, including, but not
limited to, leased access fees, advertising revenues, and home shopping
commissions, shall be allocated among the franchising jurisdictions served
by the Grantee's cable system on a per-subscriber or other equitable basis
measured in a consistent manner from period to period. Gross revenues
shall not include:
their cable services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment that is
unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers);
Capital costs that are required by a franchise to be incurred by a
grantee for public, educational or governmental (PEG) access facilities;
B.
Requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of
a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages;
C.
D. Any permit fee or other such fee imposed under any valid ordinance;
E. Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code; or
F. Grantor utility pole fees.
To the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt; provided, however, that
all or part of any such bad debt that is written off but subsequently
collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected;
A.
75.Editor's Note: Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
§ 60-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-3
58:129
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK or I-NET — A communication network which
is constructed or operated by Grantee and which is generally available only
for educational or governmental use. The I-Net shall consist of capacity,
fibers or both, from both within the primary cable network and/or
separately constructed networks, that may be dedicated to governmental,
educational and other publicly funded users for two-way, broadband
communications. The I-Net includes all equipment and maintenance of
equipment required to make the capacity available, including, but not
limited to, fiber and coaxial cable, cable modems, switching, routing,
transmitting and receiving necessary for the use of the network as set out
in the individual franchise.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES or I -NET SERVICES — The
provision of capacity in a cable system made available by a cable operator
to governmental and educational buildings as determined by the Grantor,
pursuant to the specific terms of the applicable franchise, for
noncommercial applications, including, but not limited to, two way
dedicated voice, video, data and telephony channels connecting and
interconnecting user facilities.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers, e.g., Monday
through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. In all cases, normal business hours
must include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some
weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those conditions that are within
the control of Grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of
Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, vandalism, public works
projects for which no advanced notice is given, and severe or unusual
weather conditions.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM or OVS — Any video programming services provided
to any person by a grantee certified by the FCC to operate an open video
system pursuant to Section 653 of the Cable Act, as may be amended,
regardless of the facilities used.
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity or any natural person.
PUBLIC ACCESS — The availability of channel positions on the system for
noncommercial public use by Grantor for the distribution of noncommercial
Amounts collected from subscribers for public, educational and
governmental access; provided, however, this exclusion does not limit
a Grantee's ability to pass through franchise-related costs to the extent
allowed by valid applicable law;
B.
Any taxes on cable services furnished by Grantee which are imposed
directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, Grantor or other
governmental unit and which are collected by Grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit.
C.
§ 60-3 PATTON CODE § 60-3
58:130
programming not under the Grantee's editorial control and consistent with
applicable law. Further, public access shall mean access where
organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public are the
designated programmers having editorial control over their programming
pursuant to rules which may be promulgated by the Grantor.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building or part thereof owned or leased or for
the greater part occupied by the Grantor or other governmental unit for
government administrative purposes, but shall not include buildings owned
by Grantor and leased to third parties or buildings such as storage facilities
at which government employees are not regularly stationed.
RENEWAL — The reauthorization of a franchise granted to an existing cable
operator as provided under applicable law and this chapter.
REPORTS — Any and all nontrade secret documents and information
required to be completed and/or kept or filed by a Grantee on order of
the Federal Communications Commission, state, or franchise. In accordance
with valid applicable law and § 60-2E hereinabove, the Grantor shall
maintain such information as confidential to the extent that the cable
operator identifies specific information as such.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface of and the space above and below any
public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane,
public path, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public
boulevard, public parkway, public drive or any public easement or rights-ofway
now or hereafter held by the Grantor which shall, within its proper use
and meaning, entitle Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing
or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as
may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or more
channels on a cable system.
STANDARD INSTALLATION or NORMAL INSTALLATION — Any cable
service installation that can be completed using a drop of 125 feet or less.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who or which lawfully elects to subscribe for
any purpose to cable service provided by a Grantee by means of, or in
connection with, the cable system, and whose premises or facilities are
physically wired lawfully activated to receive cable service from Grantee's
cable system, including persons who receive cable service without charge
according to the terms of the franchise.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission of electromagnetic signals
between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent
and received regardless of the technology used. This term does not include
cable service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Telecommunications Act of 1996
codified at Title 47 of the United States Code.
§ 60-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-3
58:131
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public. This term does not include cable service,
which is instead subject to separate cable service franchising requirements
under this chapter.
TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE — Employees of a Grantee who have the
authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other
things, answer billing questions, adjust bills, and schedule service and
installation calls.
§ 60-4. Franchise general provisions.
A. Franchise required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
operate or maintain a cable system or other competing cable services,
including OVS, in the Grantor without a franchise in the form of a
franchise agreement authorizing the same, unless valid applicable
federal or state law prohibits the Grantor's enforcement of such a
requirement. Such franchise agreement shall comply with all of the
specifications of this chapter unless otherwise specified by the Grantor.
B. Franchise not exclusive.
(1) Any franchise granted by the Grantor shall be nonexclusive. The
Grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable system or any component thereof,
to any other person including itself, as it deems appropriate,
subject to this chapter and valid applicable state and federal law.
(2) The terms and conditions of any franchise granted or renewed after
the effective date of this chapter shall be, when taken as a whole,
no less burdensome or more beneficial than any other franchise
granted or renewed subject to this chapter when taking into
consideration, where reasonably warranted, the situation that
existed at the time in which the earlier terms were adopted;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as
requiring the use of identical terms or conditions or limit the
enforceability of conditions that are freely negotiated.
C. Authority for use of rights-of-way. For the purpose of constructing,
operating, and maintaining a cable system in the Grantor, Grantee may
erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate, reconstruct and retain
in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the rights-of-way accessible
for construction of a cable system within the Grantor such lines, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are
necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system, subject
to the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable Grantor
codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the Grantee
to construct, operate, or maintain underground any ground-mounted
appurtenances such as customer taps, line extenders, system passive
§ 60-3 PATTON CODE § 60-4
58:132
devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related
equipment.
D. Franchise term. A franchise shall commence upon acceptance by
Grantee as defined in § 60-15 herein and as may continue for up to 15
years from the date of acceptance, unless renewed, revoked or
terminated sooner as herein provided.
E. Area of cable service. Every franchise shall apply to the area designated
by the franchise agreement approved by the Grantor.
F. Application for grant of initial franchise. In conformance with the Cable
Act and FCC rules, an application for an initial franchise for a cable
system to provide cable service shall at a minimum be subject to
additional information needed by the Grantor, to understand the
application, including the following:
(1) The applicant's name.
(2) The names of the applicant's officers and directors.
(3) The business address of the applicant.
(4) The name and contact information of a designated contact for the
applicant.
(5) A description of a geographic area of the Grantor that the applicant
proposes to serve.
(6) The public access or EG access channel capacity and capital
support proposed by the applicant.
(7) The term of the agreement proposed by the applicant.
(8) Whether the applicant holds an existing authorization to access the
public rights-of-way in the Grantor franchise.
(9) The amount of franchise fee the applicant offers to pay.
(10) Information necessary for Grantor to evaluate a Grantee's legal,
technical, and financial qualifications to construct, own, and
operate a cable system.
(11) Any additional information required by applicable state laws or
Grantor ordinances.
G. Consideration of initial franchise application. Applicants may be
evaluated according to the information included in an application as
required by § 60-4F and within a maximum time, after 90 days for
persons with existing authority to access rights-of-way and 180 days for
persons that do not have authority to access rights-of-way. The times
start on the date an applicant files an application or other writing
including certain minimum information which is set forth in § 60-4F and
deemed complete by the Grantor. The Grantor and an applicant may
§ 60-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-4
58:133
agree, in writing, to extend the ninety-day/one-hundred-eighty-day time
period for negotiations. It may then be adopted at the date as permitted
by this § 60-4G. If the ninety-day/one-hundred-eighty-day time elapses
without action by the Grantor, the applicant is automatically granted
an interim franchise based on the application submitted. Thereafter,
the Grantor and applicant may continue to negotiate the terms of a
franchise in an attempt to reach a negotiated franchise. The ninetyday/
one-hundred-eighty-day time may be tolled by the Grantor if it has
requested and not received information from the applicant.
H. Grant of additional franchise and competing service. Since competing
or overlapping franchises may encourage the introduction of better
cable services and quality at lower prices, the Grantor will at all times
attempt to accommodate additional entrants. At the same time, it is
recognized that the introduction of overlapping cable systems could
have a potential adverse impact on the rights-of-way and on the quality
and availability of existing cable services to the public. Accordingly, the
Grantor shall issue a franchise in an area where another Grantee is
operating only following a public hearing to consider the potential
impact which the grant of an additional franchise may have on the
community and the rights-of-way. In considering whether to grant one
or more additional franchises, the Grantor shall specifically consider,
and address in a written report, the following issues:
(1) Whether or not applicant has provided, at a minimum, information
with its application as required by § 60-4F and consideration
described in § 60-4G.
(2) The legal, technical, and financial qualifications of the applicant
and agreement by a Grantee to comply with such requirements of
the Grantor as may be determined by it to be applicable to a
Grantee in conformance with applicable law.
(3) Acceptance of a franchise and the terms therein.
(4) The capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate one or more
additional cable systems and the potential disruption of rights-ofway
and private property that may occur if one or more additional
franchises are granted.
(5) Such other information as the Grantor may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping
franchise.
I. Application for franchise renewal. Renewals will be according to valid
applicable law, as amended. A Grantor and a Grantee, by mutual
consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the
franchise term of a franchise agreement. According to applicable law,
Grantor will review and evaluate the past performance of a Grantee,
including compliance with an existing franchise. Also, review and
determination by Grantor of current and future community needs and
the technical, financial, and legal capabilities of a Grantee to meet the
§ 60-4 PATTON CODE § 60-4
58:134
current and future cable-service-related needs in a new franchise
considering the reasonable cost to do so.
J. Permits for nonfranchised entities. The Grantor may issue a license,
easement, or other permit to a person other than the Grantee to permit
that person to traverse any portion of the rights-of-way for purposes
other than providing cable service. Such license or easement, absent a
grant of a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize
nor permit said person to provide cable service of any type to any home
or place of business within the Grantor nor render any other service
within the Grantor except as specifically authorized by Grantee.
K. Franchise provisions.
(1) All franchises granted pursuant to this chapter are subject to this
chapter, including at least the following provisions:
(a) The continuing authority of Grantor to impose such other
regulations of general applicability through lawful exercises of
the Grantor's police powers as may be determined by the
Grantor to be conducive to the health, safety, and welfare of
the public.
(b) The continuing authority of Grantor to control and regulate the
use of rights-of-way.
(c) The authority of Grantor or its designees upon reasonable
notice to inspect all construction or installation work
performed by a Grantee in Grantor subject to the provisions of
the franchise and this chapter and to make such inspections as
it will find necessary during regular business hours to insure
compliance with the terms of the franchise, this chapter, and
applicable law.
(d) The authority of Grantor or its designees to inspect the
financial records related to franchise fees, maps, plans, and
other like materials of the Grantee upon reasonable notice to
insure compliance with the terms of the franchise, this chapter,
and applicable law.
(e) The authority of a Grantor, upon the revocation or denial of
renewal as provided therein, to require a Grantee to remove at
Grantee's own expense any and all portions of a cable system
from the rights-of-way within the Grantor; provided, however,
Grantee shall not be required to remove its cable system, or to
relocate the system, or to sell the system, or any portion
thereof as a result of revocation, denial of renewal, or any
other action to forbid or disallow Grantee from providing cable
services if the system is actively being used to provide
noncable services or other services not regulated under the
Cable Act.
§ 60-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-4
58:135
(f) The authority of a Grantor to require a franchise fee.
(2) Federal, state, and grantor jurisdiction.
(a) This chapter and any franchise agreement will be construed in
a manner consistent with all applicable law.
(b) In the event that the state or federal government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable service over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such a manner as to expand rather
than limit municipal regulatory authority, the Grantor and a
Grantee shall in good faith negotiate applicable change to
modify a franchise agreement to comply with the changed law
to ensure competitive equity between a Grantee and other
cable operators, taking into account the conditions under
which other cable operators are permitted to provide cable
services to subscribers in the Grantor.
(c) This chapter will apply to all franchises granted or renewed
from and after the effective date of this chapter.
(d) Grantee will not be relieved of Grantee's obligation to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter or any franchise
agreement granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any
failure of the Grantor to enforce prompt compliance.
(e) In the event of a change in applicable law affecting this
chapter, the Grantor may amend this chapter to comply with
such change in applicable law.
(3) Franchise agreement.
(a) By acceptance of a franchise, a Grantee acknowledges and
agrees, unless otherwise provided in the franchise, that this
chapter in whole and its exhibits76 are incorporated and made
part of a franchise agreement and shall be a binding contract.
In addition, the franchise agreement accepted by a Grantee is
deemed to include the following representations:
[1] Grantee accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this
chapter, as to construction, operation, or maintenance of
the cable system, which the Grantor may include in the
franchise agreement subject to applicable law.
[2] Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this chapter
and agrees that the provisions thereof are valid and
binding and enforceable as of the effective date of the
franchise agreement.
[3] Grantee recognizes the right of the Grantor to adopt such
additional regulations of general applicability as it will find
76.Editor's Note: Said exhibits are on file in the Township offices.
§ 60-4 PATTON CODE § 60-4
58:136
§ 60-5. Design, services, and capabilities.
necessary in the exercise of the Grantor's police power.
Any amendment to the Grantor Code binding on Grantee
shall be confined to changes which do not materially alter
the rights and obligations of Grantee granted under a
franchise agreement.
(b) The franchise agreement will contain such further conditions
or provisions as may be included in the proposal of a Grantee
and negotiated between the Grantor and a Grantee. In case of
such conflict or ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a
franchise agreement and this chapter, the franchise agreement
will control.
A. Cable system design. Every Grantee shall offer cable service that meets
the cable related needs of the Grantor in accordance with applicable
law. The franchise shall include a description of the Grantee's cable
system, including the general design and capabilities of the cable
system to identify how the cable system will meet the current and
future cable needs of the Grantor and the schedule for commencement
and completion of construction. Every Grantee shall have responsibility
for the design and maintenance of a cable system, including subscriber
premises equipment, unless the equipment is owned by the subscriber.
Every Grantee will provide notices regarding the use and operation of
any equipment to be operated by subscribers in accordance with
federal law.
B. System description and maps. A Grantee shall provide the Grantor,
upon written request, a complete set of cable system location maps of
the service area, on which will be shown those areas within the Grantor
which its cable system exists and the description and location of all
rights-of-way within which the cable system has been constructed.
These maps shall be provided to the Grantor in hardcopy and, if
available, electronic format. Updated maps shall be delivered to the
Grantor within 30 days after a request is made.
C. Biannual technology review. It is recognized that technology is rapidly
changing and that, subsequent to its initial construction, further
modifications to incorporate increased channel capacity with
compression technology, fiber optics and other unidentified
technologies which materially affect the capability of the system to offer
new and additional services such as interactive television, video on
demand and similar services, will be desirable. No more than once
every two years, the Grantor or its representatives, with the
cooperation and assistance of a Grantee, may conduct a full compliance
review, including possible public hearing, with respect to whether
Grantee has complied with the material terms of the franchise
agreement, so long as it provides Grantee with 90 days' written notice
in advance of the commencement of any such review or public hearing.
§ 60-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-5
58:137
D. Grantor, installation and general line extension policy.
(1) A Grantee providing initial cable service within a Grantor shall
serve all residential areas as described in the franchise agreement
and shall extend cable system and cable service to contiguous
areas upon request of the Grantor when a density of 30 homes per
cable mile is reached. In a renewed franchise, the franchise
agreement will provide a description of the Grantee's current
service area. Grantee will extend cable service to contiguous areas
which have 30 homes per cable mile. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent a Grantee from serving areas not covered
under this section upon agreement with developers, property
owners, commercial and business establishments, or residents.
(2) Subscribers who request installation or maintenance or repairs
shall be given an "appointment window" for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities at a specific time or, at a
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours.
(The Grantee may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal business hours for the convenience of
the customer.) Persons requesting installation of residential cable
service shall be afforded a right of rescission between the time
cable service is requested and the time service is actually installed.
All standard installations, reconnects, service upgrades or
downgrades shall be performed within seven working days of the
date the order was placed by the subscriber unless a line extension
is required, in which event cable service shall be extended in
accordance with § 60-5D(4). Standard installations are those that
are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system or
the distribution system to be built in compliance with this § 60-5D.
(3) Only those homes which require drops in excess of 125 feet shall be
required to pay for Grantee's materials and labor costs, at the rate
per foot. All other installations shall be performed at no more than
the advertised normal installation rate.
(4) Grantee shall extend cable service to any residence(s) upon the
written request of one or more residents who shall reside within
the requested extension area and who shall agree to subscribe to
Grantee's cable service where the number of occupied homes, and
homes for which certificates of occupancy have been issued, which
would be served by the requested extension equals seven homes
per 1/4 cable mile or more, with the measurement starting from the
closest existing usable point of connection to the system. Unless
additional time has been agreed to by the Grantor, such extensions
shall be completed within 90 days of submittal of a request
(weather permitting) where the above density standard is met and
all additional utility permits or other right-of-way permits have
been obtained. The Grantor and Grantee may agree to a different
time for extension in particular instances.
§ 60-5 PATTON CODE § 60-5
58:138
(5) If the number of homes per 1/4 cable mile is less than seven, the
requesting subscriber(s) may obtain service by paying a share of
the incremental cost of the extension as follows:
(a) Grantee shall pay a share of costs calculated as the fraction
derived from the existing density as calculated above divided
by seven homes per 1/4 mile; requesting subscriber(s) share
shall equal the remainder. For example, if the existing density
is three homes per 1/4 mile, Grantee shall pay 40% of the
extension cost, and the requesting subscriber(s) shall pay the
remaining 60%.
(b) When Grantee receives a request for an extension, the Grantee
shall, within 30 days, respond in writing with its calculation of
the density and such other terms as may be needed to fully
inform subscriber(s), including cost sharing and
reimbursement procedures. If the density is less than seven
homes per 1/4 mile, Grantee shall also provide a firm price
good for 90 days reflecting the proportional share which the
requesting subscriber(s) must pay on a cost-sharing basis to
obtain cable service. Within 90 days from payment of the cost
share by prospective subscriber(s) and receipt of all necessary
utility permits or other right-of-way permits, Grantee shall
complete the extension of service. A franchise may include a
description of the cost-sharing policy in place if different from
what is described in this section.
(6) Nothing in this § 60-5D shall prohibit the Grantor, the Grantee, or
real estate developers from entering into an agreement whereby
entire new housing developments in the Grantor shall be prewired
for efficient future expansion of cable service.
E. Interconnection. In accordance with applicable law, including FCC
rules, and the purposes of allowing for public access and EG access
programming telecasts on cable systems serving subscribers in the
Grantor and adjoining communities, a Grantee will not interfere with
additional connections by other cable operators at studio or
transmission source for public access and/or EG access programming
telecasts in the Grantor. Such connections shall be made by direct
return line connection or other appropriate methods independent of a
Grantee's cable system.
F. Provision of service.
(1) After cable service has been established by activating trunk and
distribution cable for any area, Grantee shall make a standard
installation to any requesting subscriber within that area seven
days from the date of request.
(2) A Grantee, upon written request of Grantor, shall install and
provide basic service as described in a franchise agreement,
(excluding pay-per-view television and nonvideo services) to all
§ 60-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-5
58:139
public buildings designated by Grantor in a franchise at no charge
for either the initial normal installation or for monthly service
provided at each location. Each of these installations should
include one signal drop, one outlet, and one converter (or such
other terminal equipment as may be necessary to provide an
electronic interface with a television receiver). The public buildings
to be provided this complimentary service shall include public
buildings currently connected to and receiving complimentary
basic service; public buildings as described in a franchise; or any
such newly constructed public buildings.
(3) If more than one outlet is required at any public building as
described in a franchise, Grantee shall install such other outlets at
the cost charged to other institutional facilities for installation and
ongoing service. The distribution of the cable system inside such
buildings shall be the responsibility of the user.
(4) If required by Grantor under the franchise, Grantee will make
available, without charge, one free cable modem service outlet to
all School buildings and public libraries. The specific locations shall
be identified in the franchise agreement. For the purposes of this
section, the term "school" means an educational institution that
receives funding pursuant to Title I of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 6301 et seq., as
amended, and does not mean "home schools."
G. Technical standards. A cable system of a Grantee shall be designed,
constructed and operated so as to meet those technical standards
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission relating to
cable systems contained in Part 76 of the Federal Communications
Commission's rules and regulations relating to cable systems and found
in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Sections 76.601 to 76.617,
as amended, or as may, from time to time, be amended. The results of
tests required by the Federal Communications Commission must be
filed with the Grantor within 10 business days of written request.
H. Special testing.
(1) At any time after commencement of service to subscribers upon 30
days' written notice, and in the presence of a representative of the
Grantee, the Grantor may require or may retain an independent
engineer to perform additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, or
tests involving a specific subscriber's drop. Such additional tests
will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence
indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance,
and such tests will be limited to the particular matter in
controversy.
(2) The Grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such
special tests during regular business hours so as to minimize
hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the subscriber. The
§ 60-5 PATTON CODE § 60-5
58:140
§ 60-6. Conditions for use of rights-of-way and construction.
rights and obligations of the Grantor and Grantee under this
section shall at all times be subject to applicable law and FCC
regulation.
A. Construction. Grantee shall comply with all generally applicable codes
and ordinances with respect to construction within rights-of-way, and
shall obtain all necessary permits and licenses required by federal,
state and local law, ordinances and rules as required of other like users
of the rights-of-way, before commencing construction in Grantor rightsof-
way. A Grantee shall furnish to Grantor a written description of its
system, including the size, appearance, and location of aboveground
facilities, boxes, pedestals, and equipment being installed under its
permit. The Grantor may review the submittal for compliance with the
Grantor ordinances and include this as an exhibit in a franchise. This
requirement shall not be interpreted or construed in any way to require
a Grantee to obtain from Grantor prior approval, authorization, permits,
or licenses to repair aboveground appurtenances, pedestals, and
similar equipment or replace with facilities of the same or comparable
size, or to perform maintenance or repairs on any part of the system
where the right-of-way is not being disturbed.
B. Compliance with laws. As a minimum, and without limitation, Grantee
shall adhere to the Grantor's generally applicable ordinances relating
to rights-of-way construction and use safety standards and all building
and zoning codes currently or hereafter in force in the Grantor. The
construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be
effectuated by Grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws,
ordinances and construction standards of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, all applicable industry standards, the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration, FCC, and the Standards of Good
Engineering Practices for Measurement of cable systems of the
National Cable Television Association to the extent applicable, as well
as all other valid generally applicable laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances, federal, state and local, as the same may be modified or
amended from time to time, pursuant to the Grantor's legitimate
exercise of its police powers.
C. Minimum interference. A Grantee shall construct and maintain its cable
system so as to minimize any adverse impact on public improvements or
facilities of others in a right-of-way and which will not unnecessarily
interfere with the usual and customary uses in the rights-of-way.
D. Erection of poles prohibited without approval.
(1) A Grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any
rights-of-way or in an existing aerial utility system without the prior
approval of the Grantor or owner of the facilities proposed to be
attached to. A Grantee shall negotiate with the Grantor or, as
applicable, any private utility and furnish Grantor with a copy of a
§ 60-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-6
58:141
current pole attachment agreement or agreement for conduit use,
or both, before commencement of construction.
(2) Aboveground location of cable system and related facilities shall
generally be located where reasonable and safe and in a manner
that will not adversely affect the Grantor or other public or private
property.
E. Reservations of rights-of-way. Nothing herein or in a franchise shall be
construed to prevent the Grantor from constructing sewers, grading,
paving, repairing or altering any rights-of-way, or laying down,
repairing or removing water mains or constructing or establishing any
other public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in
such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and
operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances
of Grantee. If any such facilities of Grantee shall interfere with the
construction or repair of any rights-of-way or public improvement, then
upon 30 days' written notice all such property of the Grantee shall be
removed or replaced in such manner as shall be directed by the Grantor
so that the same shall not interfere with the public works of the Grantor.
Such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of Grantee. The
Grantee shall at all times have the right to abandon its property.
However, any such abandonment shall be in accordance with pole
attachment agreements, a franchise, and valid applicable state, federal
and local law.
F. Underground installation. In those areas within the Grantor where
cable system facilities and other utilities are currently placed
underground, all cable system facilities shall remain or be placed
underground. In areas where telephone and electric utility facilities are
above the ground at the time of a Grantee's installation, Grantee may
install its cable system facilities above the ground, provided that at
such time as both electric and telephone utility facilities are placed
underground, Grantee shall likewise place its cable system facilities
underground without cost to the Grantor. Nothing contained in this
section shall require Grantee to construct, operate and maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances.
G. New subdivision.
(1) A Grantee shall offer cable services to residential development
constructed or erected after the effective date of the enacting
ordinance for this chapter, provided that the dwelling units meet
the density requirement, specified herein. The developer or
subdivider developing any residential development within the
Grantor shall give advance written notice to Grantee of the
beginning of excavation for or construction of off site
improvements in any residential development to enable installation
of such conduit, pedestals, substructures and other equipment as
may be necessary to provide cable service to the residential units in
such a development so as to provide minimal interference with
§ 60-6 PATTON CODE § 60-6
58:142
surface improvements. The same density requirements shall apply
as defined in this chapter. If the developer gives the Grantee
adequate notice (as defined below), then Grantee shall be obligated
to install all cable lines underground at the time the subdivision
is constructed rather than when the individual lots are actually
occupied.
(2) In cases of new construction or property development where
utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property
owner shall give the Grantee at least 10 days' written notice of such
construction or development and of the particular date on which
open trenching will be available for the Grantee's installation of
conduit and/or cable. The Grantee shall provide specifications as
needed for trenching.
(3) Cost of trenching and easements required to bring cable service to
the development shall be borne by the developer or property
owner; provided, however, if the Grantee fails to install its conduit
and/or cable within 10 working days of the date the trenches are
available, as designed in the notice given by the developer or
property owner, and the trenches are closed after the five-day
period, the cost of new trenching shall be borne by the Grantee.
H. Property damage and repair.
(1) Grantee shall endeavor to minimize the occurrence of damage to
improvements in the rights-of-way and all public and private
property. If damage occurs, Grantee shall promptly notify the
property owner within seven days in writing. Whenever the
Grantee disturbs or damages any rights-of-way, other public
property or any private property, the Grantee shall promptly
restore the property to a condition reasonably comparable to that
existing immediately prior to the disturbance. In addition, if
Grantee is restoring rights-of-way, it shall do so in accordance with
all applicable requirements. If restoration is not satisfactorily
performed by the Grantee within a reasonable time, the Grantor
may, after prior written notice to the Grantee, or without notice
where the disturbance or damage may create a risk to public health
or safety, cause the repairs to be made and recover the costs of
those repairs from Grantee. Within 30 days of receipt of an
itemized proof of payment of those costs, including the cost of
labor, materials and equipment, the Grantee shall pay the Grantor.
(2) Upon completion of work which caused any disturbance or damage
to private property, Grantee shall promptly commence restoration
and will use its best efforts to commence the restoration within 72
hours of written notice from Grantor, weather permitting and
considering the nature of the work that must be performed.
Grantee shall also perform such restoration in accordance with any
customer service standards required by a franchise.
§ 60-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-6
58:143
(3) When Grantee excavates the surface of any rights-of-way, Grantee
shall be responsible for restoration of such excavation in
accordance with all Grantor general ordinances, rules, regulations
and standards. Throughout the term of its franchise, Grantee's
cable system and related facilities, including aboveground
pedestals, vaults, boxes, generators, power supplies or structures
of any kind, shall be maintained in proper order and repair.
(4) Upon completion of restoration in any area, Grantee will notify the
Grantor.
(5) If Grantee enters private property for the purposes of construction
where there is no dedicated public easement, Grantee shall first
secure the private property owner's consent.
I. Permit requirements.
(1) Subject to the generally applicable ordinances of Grantor, a
franchise and this chapter establishes the general rules and scope
of authority for Grantee to construct and maintain and operate its
cable system within the rights-of-way of the Grantor. Grantee shall
designate a responsible contact person, including a telephone
number available seven days a week, twenty four hours a day, with
whom representatives of the Grantor can communicate on all
matters relating to cable system installation, construction,
operation, and maintenance.
(2) Prior to any excavation within the rights-of-way, a Grantee shall
obtain a permit, pay all applicable fees, and perform such work in
accordance with applicable provisions of a franchise and/or other
applicable ordinances or regulations with respect to excavation
work. Notwithstanding the above, no permit shall be required for
cable service drops for individual subscribers, servicing of
pedestals, or other routine maintenance of the cable system that
does not result in surface disturbance of the public right-of-way as
outlined in § 60-6A.
(3) A Grantee must be current with all requirements of this chapter
and all franchise requirements, including payment of required fees
and charges and insurance, before a permit is issued by Grantor.
J. Cable system drawings. Grantee shall keep and maintain accurate
records and as built drawings of its cable system constructed,
reconstructed, or relocated within the Grantor's rights-of-way in
accordance with § 60-5B. Grantee shall cooperate promptly and fully
with the Grantor and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide
accurate and complete information regarding the nature and location of
its cable system located within the rights-of-way when requested by the
Grantor to facilitate public improvements. Such location maps and
information shall be at the sole expense of Grantee without expense to a
Grantor, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors.
§ 60-6 PATTON CODE § 60-6
58:144
§ 60-7. Service provisions.
K. Grantee responsible for costs. All earth, materials, sidewalks, pavings,
crossings, utilities, public improvements, or improvements of any kind
disturbed or removed by a Grantee in its activities under its franchise
shall be fully repaired or replaced promptly by a Grantee and as
required elsewhere in this chapter and the franchise agreement and as
may be required in accordance with applicable Grantor's streets and
sidewalks design standards and state law. Any such repair or
replacement shall be at Grantee's sole expense and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Grantor or owner thereof.
L. Procedure for enforcement and administration relating to construction.
The Grantor has the responsibility to manage and control use of the
rights-of-way or utility easements within the Grantor's jurisdictional
boundaries. In accordance with applicable law, including ordinances of
general application, the Grantor has the authority to administer and
enforce rights-of-way construction standards for Grantee's cable
system on a nondiscriminatory basis, including the authority to collect
permit fees, review plans, and enforce the provisions of a franchise, and
may utilize the assistance of qualified independent third parties.
(1) Upon reasonable notice, the Grantor has the right to inspect all
construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of this chapter and applicable franchises of the Grantor,
and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of a franchise and applicable
requirements of the Grantor; provided, however, a representative
of Grantee is present for all such testing, which shall occur during
normal business hours (generally between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.).
(2) Nothing in this chapter or a franchise granted pursuant to it gives
permission to use the poles, conduit or other facilities of the
Grantor or others. A separate agreement for such use or
connection shall be the responsibility of Grantee.
M. Work performed by others.
(1) A Grantee shall make available, upon request, to the Grantor the
names and addresses of any person, contractor, subcontractor,
agent, representative or entity other than the Grantee, which
performs services pursuant to a franchise; provided, however, that
all provisions of this chapter and a franchise remain the
responsibility of a Grantee.
(2) All provisions of a franchise shall apply to any of a Grantee's
subcontractors or others performing any work or services pursuant
to the provisions of a franchise.
§ 60-6 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-7
58:145
A. Parental control device. Upon request by any subscriber, Grantee shall
make available at Grantee's actual cost a parental control or lockout
device compatible with the subscriber's equipment that will enable the
subscriber to block access to any or all channels in accordance with
Sections 640 and 641 of the Cable Act.
B. Leased access channels. Leased access channels shall be provided in
accordance with Section 612 of the Cable Act. A leased access channel
need not be activated or otherwise made available for any particular
user until such time as an agreement with respect to charges for said
channel has been reached between Grantee and said user. Grantee shall
charge no more for said channel use than that amount allowed under
federal or state law.
C. Emergency use and safety alert. The Grantee shall comply with all
emergency or disaster notification requirements in accordance with
and at the time required by the provisions of the then applicable valid
law, including FCC Regulations [47 C.F.R. Part 11, FCC Rules and
Regulations, Emergency Alert System (EAS)] and provisions relating to
the Grantor's Emergency Operations Plan [35 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 7101 to
7707] and the Pennsylvania Amber Alert System [35 P.S. § 7025.1 et
seq.].
D. Institutional network.
(1) A Grantee shall, if required in the franchise agreement, construct,
activate, and thereafter maintain an institutional network capable
of transmitting two way voice, data and video signals. A specific
plan shall be made part of a franchise agreement.
(2) The institutional network shall be designed and constructed so as
to interconnect public buildings, including educational institutions,
Grantor facilities, libraries, police and fire departments and other
institutions as designated by Grantor.
E. Access channels.
(1) If required in the franchise agreement, the Grantee shall make
bandwidth on its cable system available for up to two downstream
channels for noncommercial access programming use. Channel
capacity for public access shall be provided if required in a
franchise and approved unanimously by the CACC. Additional PEG
channel capacity shall be made available when, over a period of six
consecutive months, 60% of the prime time (7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.
each evening) on the existing access channel(s) on average are
fully occupied with locally produced access channel programming.
Such additional channel availability will be provided within 180
days of the Grantor's certification of such use and written request
for additional channel(s). Grantee shall offer to each of its
subscribers who receive all or any part of the cable services offered
on the system, reception of the access channels. No charges shall
be made for channel time or playback of prerecorded
§ 60-7 PATTON CODE § 60-7
58:146
programming. Management of the access channels' programming
shall be the responsibility of the Grantor and not the responsibility
of the Grantee.
(2) It shall be the Grantee's sole responsibility to provide the cable,
wire, lines and/or other necessary signal distribution equipment
such that live or playbacks of access channel programming can be
received from the selected production location and be distributed
via the cable system to subscribers in the Grantor. These cables,
wires, lines and other signal distribution equipment shall be
collectively known as the "return line."
(3) Access channels may also be used by Grantee when such channel
or channels are not being used by Grantor for access programming
and provided that such channel usage is subject to Grantor
approval and displacement by Grantor upon 180 days' prior written
notice to the Grantee if there is demand to use the access channel.
(4) The Grantee shall be responsible for the technical maintenance and
signal quality of such channels. Signal quality on such channels
shall be commensurate with those which apply to the Grantee's
regular commercial channels, and the Grantee shall, upon request,
provide copies of FCC signal quality proofs of performance with
respect to those channels.
F. Access channel funding, facilities, and equipment.
(1) The Grantee shall provide financial support permissible under
applicable law as an equipment replacement and facilities capital
grant payable by Grantee to Grantor to support the cost of facilities
and equipment for development of programming for playback on
access channels in the amount and payable in a manner described
in a franchise, and may be itemized and passed through to the
subscribers. The Grantor shall own and maintain all equipment
purchased with equipment funding.
(2) The Grantee will provide access channel support as specifically
agreed to in the franchise agreement, and to periodically inspect
and maintain the return line to ensure that the technical quality of
the retransmitted access programming signal meets FCC
regulations. The Grantee will not engage in any editorial control of
the content of programming on an access channel on the cable
system, except as otherwise required or permitted by law. The
Grantor shall be solely responsible for the use of the access
channels and shall indemnify and hold harmless the Grantee from
any and all claims, demands, actions and damages (including
attorney fees) arising from the use or operation of the access
channels.
(3) Use of a channel position for public, educational, and/or
governmental (PEG) access shall be provided on the most basic tier
§ 60-7 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-7
58:147
§ 60-8. Operation and reporting provisions.
of service offered by Grantee in accordance with the Cable Act and
a franchise agreement.
(4) Grantee shall insure that all access channels meet the technical
standards of the FCC; provided, however, Grantee shall not be
responsible for defects, flaws or other impairments in the access
channel programming delivered to Grantee and shall only be
responsible for maintenance for facilities and equipment under its
control applicable to the playback of programming on access
channels of a Grantee's system.
(5) If Grantee makes changes to its cable system that necessitate
modifications to access channel(s) signal transmission facilities and
equipment (including but not limited to the upstream paths),
Grantee shall provide reasonable advance notice of such changes
to the Grantor and shall provide, at Grantee's expense, any
additional or modified headend facilities necessary to implement
such modifications within a reasonable period of time prior to the
date that the system changes are to be made.
(6) Upon request by the Grantor, the access channels shall be made
available in digital formats comparable to commercial offerings at
the time Grantee converts 60% of its system to digital transmission.
A. Open books and records. The Grantor shall have the right to inspect,
upon 30 days' written notice, at any time during normal business hours
at the system office, all books, records, maps, plans, financial
statements that directly relate to the franchise, cable service complaint
logs ("trouble calls" that have generated a work order and/or
necessitated a response originating from the Grantor received during
the prior twelve-month period), performance test results, and other like
materials of Grantee that relate directly to the terms and conditions of
the franchise. Said books and records shall be made available for
inspection at the local business office of Grantee. Upon proper request
by a Grantee and pursuant to § 60-2E herein, information obtained
during such an inspection shall be treated as confidential, making it
available only to those persons who must have access to perform their
duties on behalf of the Grantor, including but not limited to financial
personnel, solicitor's office, and members of the governing body, if it is
proprietary in nature or within the definitions of closed records
contained within the Pennsylvania Open Meetings Act, § 610.010 et
seq.,77 as amended from time to time. To the extent any federal
requirement for privacy applies to the information to be submitted, said
law shall control.
77.Editor's Note: The Public Agency Open Meeting Law was repealed 7-3-1986 by P.L. 388,
No. 84, § 17. For the Sunshine Act, see 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 60-7 PATTON CODE § 60-8
58:148
B. Communications with regulatory agencies. Copies of all petitions,
applications, communications and reports submitted by a Grantee or on
behalf of or relating to Grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any
matters affecting the system authorized pursuant to this franchise shall
also be submitted to the Grantor upon written request. Copies of
responses from the regulatory agencies to Grantee shall likewise be
furnished to the Grantor within 30 days of receipt of the response.
C. Annual Report.
(1) Upon written request, Grantee shall provide to the Grantor within
30 days of such request:
(a) A current financial statement for the immediately preceding
fiscal year, including an income statement, statement of
operating expenses in detail, a cash flow statement and a
balance sheet prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and certified by a financial officer of
Grantee. Submission of the most recent U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission Annual Report Form 10-K prepared by
Grantee shall be deemed as a satisfactory compliance with this
section.
(b) A description of all tiers or levels of service being offered,
together with a description of any changes made in any service
during the reporting year.
(c) A current copy of the subscriber service information required
in this chapter.
(d) A trouble call report or compilation summarizing the
complaints received during the reported year by category,
number for each category and a discussion of any unresolved
complaints.
(e) A certification of the gross revenues derived from the Grantor
area for the preceding year by the financial representative of
the company or, alternatively, an independent certified public
accountant.
(f) A description of how pay per view, on demand, and other
programming is made available to basic-service-only
subscribers.
(g) A description of services, including modifications, upgrades, or
increases in channel capacity.
(2) In any request for information pursuant to this section, the Grantor
shall specifically identify the information to be provided by Grantee
to the Grantor.
§ 60-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-8
58:149
D. Additional reports. Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Grantor, at
the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports which are
deemed by the parties as reasonably necessary for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter and a franchise.
E. Maps. Grantee shall maintain on file with the Grantor at all times a
current map or set of maps, either via paper or electronic format, drawn
to scale showing the location of the system and all equipment installed
or in place in rights-of-way and other public places. The maps shall be
updated and made available in accordance with § 60-5B, hereinabove.
F. Audit. The Grantor and its agents and representatives shall have the
authority, during normal business hours, to arrange for and conduct an
inspection of the books and records of Grantee related to the payment
of the franchise fee. Grantee shall first be given 30 days' written notice
of the audit request, the description of and purpose for the inspection
and description, to the best of the Grantor's ability. To the extent such
books, records or documents contain confidential information as
defined in § 60-8A, such confidential information may not be disclosed,
as described in § 60-8A.
G. Periodic evaluation, review and modification. The field of cable service
and technology is a relatively new and rapidly changing one which may
see many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes
during the term of a franchise agreement. Therefore, in order to
provide for a maximum degree of flexibility in a franchise, and to help
achieve a continued advanced and modern cable system, the following
evaluation provisions will apply:
(1) The Grantor may require, at its sole discretion upon 45 days'
written notice, evaluation sessions at any time during the term of a
franchise; provided, however, there shall not be more than one
evaluation session during any three calendar years.
(2) Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session include,
but are not limited to, Grantee's ability to comply with the legal,
financial, and technical requirements of the franchise and meet the
cable-related needs of the community and any other cable-related
topics the Grantor or a Grantee deem relevant.
(3) During an evaluation session, a Grantee shall fully cooperate with
the Grantor and shall provide, without cost, such information and
documents as the Grantor may request to perform the evaluation.
To the extent such information or documents contain confidential
information as defined in § 60-8A, such confidential information
may not be disclosed.
(4) If at any time during its evaluation, the Grantor determines that a
historical record of evidence exists of cable system performance
which fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, the Grantor
may require a Grantee to perform tests and analysis directed
toward such suspected inadequacies at a Grantee's expense. A
§ 60-8 PATTON CODE § 60-8
58:150
§ 60-9. Consumer protection provisions.
Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Grantor in performing such
testing, and any report prepared by a Grantee shall include at least:
(a) A description of the problem in the cable system performance
which precipitated the special tests.
(b) The cable system component tested.
(c) The equipment used and procedures employed in testing.
(d) The method, if any, by which the cable system performance
problem was resolved.
(e) If, after receiving a Grantee's report, the Grantor determines
that reasonable evidence still exists of inadequate cable system
performance, the Grantor may enlist an independent engineer
to perform tests and analysis directed toward such suspected
failures to meet the requirements of this franchise. A Grantee
shall be a witness to and cooperate and permit said testing.
(5) As a result of a periodic review and evaluation session, the Grantor
or a Grantee may determine that a change in the terms of the
franchise should be required to meet the cable-related needs of the
community, as determined by the Grantor's governing body, that
the cable system or franchise requirements should be updated,
changed, revised or that additional cable service should be
provided and that to provide same would be technically and
economically feasible. If the change is consistent with the terms of
this chapter or the franchise, the needs of the Grantor, and is
technically and economically feasible as determined following an
evaluation of a Grantee's financial condition, length of term
remaining on the franchise, economic waste, if any, that would
occur should the terms be changed, and rate of return on the
investment within the community, the parties will, in good faith,
review the terms of the proposed change and any amendment to
this chapter or a franchise. Based on this review, and upon adoption
of such a change or new requirement through a mutually agreed
upon and acceptable amendment, the change will become effective.
A. Approval of changes. The Grantor reserves the right to regulate rates
for basic service and any other services offered over the cable system,
to the extent provided by federal or state law. In accordance with the
Cable Act, Grantee shall maintain on file with the Grantor at all times a
current schedule of all rates and charges.
B. Subscriber complaint practices. At all times, a Grantee shall meet the
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission regulations
on Consumer Complaints and Protection. However, at a minimum and
in accordance with 47 CFR 76.309, as amended, a Grantee shall comply
with the following:
§ 60-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-9
58:151
(1) A Grantee shall maintain a conveniently located local office within
the CACC service area which shall be open during normal business
hours. This office shall accept payments, handle adjustments to
subscriber bills, respond to installation, repair, and/or maintenance
requests and other service calls. A Grantee shall have a toll-free
telephone number available at all times (an access line which will
be available to its subscribers twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
week). Trained company representatives shall be available to
respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business
hours. Except in situations beyond its control, the Grantee must
begin working on a service interruption or other service problems
no later than 24 hours after being notified of the problem. If the
problem cannot be resolved within 24 hours, the customer shall be
entitled upon request to a credit for one day's service for each day
of the outage. Under normal operating conditions, telephone
answer time by a customer representative, including wait time,
shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made, and the
customer will receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30
seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time
under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
A Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with these standards unless an
historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system.
(2) A Grantee may impose a charge reasonably related to a Grantee's
actual cost incurred for a downgrade of service, except that no
such charge may be imposed when:
(a) A subscriber requests total disconnection from the cable
system; or
(b) A subscriber requests the downgrade within a thirty-day
period following any rate increase relative to the service in
question.
(3) A Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt cable service only for good cause and for the shortest
time possible. Such interruptions shall occur during periods of
minimum use of the cable system.
(4) A Grantee shall maintain adequate telephone lines and personnel
to respond in a timely manner to schedule service calls and answer
subscriber complaints or inquiries as required by this§ 60-9B.
(5) Subscriber requests for repairs of service interruptions shall be
responded to by a trained customer service representative on the
next business day. A Grantee shall use best efforts to begin working
on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24
§ 60-9 PATTON CODE § 60-9
58:152
hours after the interruption becomes known. A Grantee shall begin
actions to correct other service problems the next business day
after notification of the service problem.
(6) Subscriber requests for maintenance or repairs received on
Saturdays or Sundays shall be responded to by a customer service
representative on the next business day. A Grantee shall use its
best efforts to begin working on service interruptions promptly and
in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known. Grantee shall begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service
problem.
(7) Service calls for maintenance or repair shall be performed in
accordance with the standards established by the FCC.
(8) A Grantee shall maintain an "appointment window" alternative for
installations, service calls and other installation activities that will
be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block
during normal business hours. A Grantee shall not cancel an
appointment with a customer after the close of business on the
business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a customer
service representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer shall be contacted. The appointment shall
be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the
customer.
C. Installation. A Grantee shall make service available to all Grantor
residents based on the terms and conditions outlined in § 60-5.
D. Subscriber information.
(1) A Grantee shall provide to all new subscribers and, at least once a
year, to existing subscribers, and upon request of a subscriber,
written subscriber service information which shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
(a) Products and services offered by Grantee;
(b) Prices and options for programming services, including
programming carried on the system such that the
programming information corresponds to channel positioning;
(c) Channel positions and programming carried on the cable
system;
(d) Installation policy and service maintenance and termination
procedures;
(e) Billing and complaint procedures, including grantee's address,
telephone number and office hours; and
§ 60-9 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-9
58:153
(f) Instructions on how to use the cable service and any
converters.
(2) A Grantee shall notify subscribers and the Grantor no less than 30
days in advance of any changes in rates, programming services, or
channel positions, provided that such change is within the control
of the Grantee. Grantee shall not be required to provide prior
notice to subscribers of any rate change that is the result of a
regulatory fee, franchise fee or any other fee, tax, assessment or
charge of any kind imposed by any federal agency, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Grantor on the transaction
between the Grantee and the subscriber.
E. Subscriber billing practices.
(1) As mentioned hereinabove, Grantee shall notify each of its existing
subscribers at least once a year, all new subscribers, and upon
request of a subscriber, of its billing practices in accordance with
FCC rules. Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills
must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited
to, basic service and premium tier service charges, if applicable,
equipment charges and any installation or repair charges. Bills
shall state the billing period, including an effective due date, the
amount of current billing and any relevant credits or past due
balances. Grantee shall not assess late fees for nonpayment of a
current bill until at least 30 days have elapsed since the mailing of
the bill by Grantee.
(2) As mentioned hereinabove, subscribers shall be notified of any
changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as
soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and/
or in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30
days in advance of such changes if the change is within the
Grantee's control.
(3) The subscriber bill shall contain the following information
presented in plain language and format:
(a) Name and address of Grantee;
(b) The period of time over which each chargeable service is
billed, including prorated periods as a result of the
establishment and termination of service;
(c) A fully itemized list of charges levied for programming
services, equipment provided, and other services or items
offered, and a report of all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits;
(d) The amount of the bill for the current billing period, separate
from any balance;
§ 60-9 PATTON CODE § 60-9
58:154
(e) A Grantee's telephone number and a statement that the
subscriber may call this number with any questions about the
bill; and
(f) The date on which payment is due from the subscriber.
(4) The account of a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent
until at least 30 days have elapsed from the due date of the bill,
which shall be a date certain. The following provisions shall apply
to the imposition of late charges on subscribers:
(a) A Grantee shall not impose a late charge on a subscriber unless
a subscriber is delinquent and Grantee has given the
subscriber written notice of the delinquency.
(b) A late charge of reasonable amount may be imposed monthly.
(c) No late charge may be assessed on the amount of a bill in
dispute if found in favor of the subscriber.
(d) Any charge for returned checks shall be reasonably related to
the costs incurred by a Grantee in processing such checks.
(5) In case of a billing dispute, a Grantee shall respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. Refund checks shall be
issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing
cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is
earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the cable
operator if service is terminated. Credits for service shall be issued
no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the
determination that a credit is warranted.
F. Mobility-limited subscribers. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise
agreement, upon the request of mobility-limited subscribers, a Grantee
shall make a good faith effort to arrange for delivery, pickup or
exchange or replacement of converters or other equipment at the
subscriber's address or by the use of a satisfactory equivalent means
such as provision of a prepaid postage mailer.
G. Dispute resolution.
(1) Every Grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting
upon, and resolving customer complaints, and crediting customer
accounts, without intervention by the Grantor.
(2) The Grantee's complaint procedure shall be filed with the Grantor
prior to its acceptance of a new or renewed franchise.
(3) The Grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint shall be
concluded in no more than 30 days after receiving a written
complaint, at which time the Grantee shall notify the subscriber of
the results of its investigation and its proposed action or credit.
§ 60-9 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-9
58:155
§ 60-10. General financial and insurance provisions.
(4) In the event of a billing dispute, Grantee shall notify the subscriber
in full accordance with FCC customer service regulations
regarding billing and complaint procedures and provide the
address and telephone number of Grantor's cable office.
H. Scrambling of cable channels. In accordance with Sections 640 and 641
of the Cable Act, Grantee shall fully scramble or block the audio and
video programming of a channel upon request by a cable service
subscriber without charge.
I. Programming.
(1) Programming decisions. All programming decisions shall be at the
sole discretion of Grantee; provided, however, that the Grantor
shall be notified of any changes in rates, channel positions or
programming service as required by FCC customer service
regulations.
A. Payment to grantor.
(1) As compensation for any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, a Grantee for a cable system located in the rights-of-way,
unless negotiated in a franchise agreement, shall have the
following obligations:
(a) Application fee for initial franchise. In addition to all other
fees, permits or charges required by the Grantor, an applicant
for an initial franchise shall pay to Grantor at the time of
application, or amendment to its application, $1,000 as a
deposit on the application fee. An applicant will be assessed an
additional application fee at the end of the review process
should the Grantor's actual costs of reviewing the application
exceed the deposit. This fee will be equal to 100% of Grantor's
costs (including administration overhead, legal, consulting,
etc.) for administrating the application and granting a
franchise. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned
to the applicant.
(b) Franchise fees. Any Grantee subject to the terms of this
chapter and a franchise agreement shall, in addition to any
other fees, permits, or charges by Grantor, commence making
payment of franchise fees on the effective date of a cable
services franchise agreement or, if such Grantee is already
providing cable services over the cable system, on the date of
the passage of the enacting ordinance. Commencing on the
specified date, a Grantee subject to the terms of this chapter
shall pay to Grantor an amount equal to 5% of its gross
revenues for the provision of cable services as defined in this
§ 60-9 PATTON CODE § 60-10
58:156
chapter and generally in the form as illustrated in Exhibit A,
attached and made part of this chapter by reference.78
(2) Payments due the Grantor under this provision shall be computed
at the end of each calendar year quarter. Payments shall be due and
payable for each quarter not later than 45 days from the last day of
the three-month period. Specifically, payments shall be due and
payable on or before May 15 (for the first quarter), August 15 (for
the second quarter), November 15 (for the third quarter), and
February 15 for the fourth quarter). Each payment shall be
accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the
computation and such other relevant facts related to the payment
of the franchise fee as may be required by the Grantor. At request
of Grantor, and if agreed to by Grantee, payments will be made
electronically.
(3) No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that
the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the
Grantor may have for further or additional sums payable under the
provisions of this franchise. All amounts paid shall be subject to
audit and recomputation by the Grantor.
(4) In the event any payment is not made on the due date, interest on
the amount due shall accrue from such date at the annual rate of
6%.
(5) Bundled, tied or combined services.
(a) If a Grantee offers bundled, tied, or combined cable services
(which are subject to the franchise fee) with noncable services
(which are not subject to the franchise fee) to individual
subscribers, the combined revenues from such bundled
services shall be allocated consistent with the rates or prices
advertised by the Grantee through its marketing materials or
on its published rate card.
(b) If the Grantee does not advertise or publish separate prices for
the combined services, the percentage that the price for the
combined services is discounted from the regular retail rates of
the individual services shall be prorated across all the services
in the bundled package.
(c) As an example, a Grantee may offer a "bundle" of video, data,
and voice services for a flat fee of $75, where the retail rate for
the services purchased on an individual basis would equal
$100. The Grantee would apply a twenty-five-percent discount
to the revenue derived from each service. Thus, if the retail
rate for the cable service in the bundle were $50, Grantee
78.Editor's Note: Said form is on file and available in the Township offices.
§ 60-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-10
58:157
would recognize cable service revenue in the amount of $37.50
and pay a franchise fee on that revenue.
(d) In no event shall Grantee be permitted to evade or reduce
applicable franchise fee payments required to be made to
Grantor due to discounted bundled services.
B. Application of franchise fees and other fees and charges.
(1) Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the franchise fees payable
by Grantee to Grantor shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a
tax and shall be in addition to any and all taxes of general
applicability and other generally applicable fees and charges which
Grantee may be required to pay to Grantor and/or to any other
governmental authority, all of which shall be separate and distinct
obligations of Grantee.
(2) Grantee shall not deduct all or any part of the franchise fees or
other payments or in-kind contributions to be made by Grantee to
Grantor pursuant to this chapter and/or a franchise from the
franchise fees paid thereunder unless specifically agreed to in a
franchise agreement.
C. Performance bond.
(1) Except as may be described in a franchise, at the time a franchise is
accepted, a Grantee shall furnish and file with the Grantor a
performance bond. The performance bond shall run to the Grantor
in the sum of as then determined in the franchise agreement. The
performance bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of Grantee of all terms and conditions of this chapter
and a franchise. The rights reserved to the Grantor with respect to
the performance bond or other security are in addition to all other
rights the Grantor may have under a franchise or any other
applicable law. The company providing such performance bond
must be licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) The rights reserved by the Grantor with respect to the performance
bond are in addition to all other rights the Grantor may have under
a franchise or other applicable law.
(3) The performance bond shall be subject to the approval of the
Grantor.
D. Security fund.
(1) Except as otherwise described in a franchise, at the time a
franchise is accepted and in lieu of a performance bond as required
hereinabove, a Grantee shall deposit into a bank account,
established by the Grantor, and maintain on deposit through the
term of this franchise, the sum of $10,000, unless otherwise
§ 60-10 PATTON CODE § 60-10
58:158
provided in a franchise agreement, as a common security fund for
the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this chapter,
the franchise and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of the Grantor and the payment by a Grantee of any
claim, liens, costs, expenses and taxes due the Grantor which arise
by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the
cable system. Interest on this deposit shall be paid to Grantee by
the bank on an annual basis.
(2) Provision shall be made to permit the Grantor to withdraw funds
from the security fund. Grantee shall not use the security fund for
other purposes and shall not assign, pledge or otherwise use this
security fund as security for any purpose. The Grantor reserves the
right to increase the required amount of the security fund to match
changes in the Consumer Price Index for All Items and All Urban
Consumers.
(3) If a Grantee fails to pay to the Grantor any amounts due and unpaid
to Grantor or fails to pay to the Grantor any liquidated damages,
costs or expenses which the Grantor shall be compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of a Grantee in connection with this
chapter and a franchise, the Grantor may then withdraw such funds
from the security fund. Payments are not franchise fees as required
in § 60-10A or as otherwise described in a franchise agreement.
E. Procedure for imposition of penalties.
(1) If the Grantor is able to demonstrate that Grantee violated any
provision of this chapter or franchise agreement, it shall promptly
notify Grantee in writing of the nature of such violation and the
section of this chapter or franchise agreement that it believes has
been violated. If the Grantor does not notify Grantee of any
violation of this chapter or franchise agreement, it shall not operate
as a waiver of any rights of the Grantor hereunder or pursuant to
applicable law.
(2) Grantee shall have 45 days to cure such violation after written
notice is received by taking appropriate steps to comply with the
terms of this chapter or franchise agreement. If the nature of the
violation is such that, in the Grantor's reasonable judgment, it
cannot be fully cured within 45 days due to circumstances outside
of Grantee's control, the period of time in which Grantee must cure
the violation may be extended by the Grantor in writing for such
additional time necessary to complete the cure, provided that
Grantee shall have promptly commenced to cure and is diligently
pursuing its efforts to cure in the reasonable judgment of the
Grantor.
(3) If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed under
§ 60-10E(2), then Grantee shall be liable for liquidated damages in
accordance with § 60-10F.
§ 60-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-10
58:159
F. Liquidated damages and opportunity to cure.
(1) Because Grantee's failure to comply with provisions of this chapter
or franchise agreement may result in harm to the Grantor, and
because it will be difficult to measure the extent of such harm, the
Grantor may assess liquidated damages against Grantee in the
following amounts, provided that Grantee has had an opportunity
to cure in accordance with § 60-10E(2). Such damages shall not be
a substitute for specific performance by Grantee but shall be in
addition to such performance.
(2) The first day for which liquidated damages may be assessed, if
there has been no cure after the end of the applicable cure period,
shall be the day after the end of the applicable cure period,
including any extension of the cure period granted by the Grantor.
Liquidated damages may not be assessed for a time period
exceeding 120 days, after which the Grantor may initiate an action
in law or equity in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) The Grantor may assess liquidated damages against Grantee in the
following amounts, provided that Grantee has had an opportunity
to cure in accordance with § 60-10E(2):
(a) For failure to provide and maintain cable service as required,
$200 per day for each day the violation continues;
(b) For failure to obtain and maintain permits as required, $200
per day for each day the violation continues;
(c) For failure to give notices required in this chapter or franchise
to Grantor as required, $200 per day for each day the violation
continues;
(d) For failure to comply with any customer service provisions as
required, $200 per day for each day the violation continues;
(e) For failure to submit reports in a timely fashion as required,
$150 per day for each day the violation continues; and
(f) For failure to comply with any material provision of the
franchise, $150 per day for each day the violation continues.
G. Liability insurance.
(1) A Grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of a franchise
agreement and as may be further described therein, liability
insurance with a company licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with a rating by A.M. Best of not
less than "A minus VII," insuring Grantee and the Grantor with
regard to all damages mentioned in § 60-10F(1), in the minimum
amounts of:
(a) For bodily injury or death to any one person: $1,000,000.
§ 60-10 PATTON CODE § 60-10
58:160
(b) For bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident:
$1,000,000; and
(c) For all other types of liability in umbrella form: $2,000,000.
(2) At the time of acceptance of a franchise, and upon request, Grantee
shall furnish to the Grantor a certificate evidencing that a
satisfactory insurance policy has been obtained. Said certificate
shall be approved by the Grantor, and such insurance policy shall
require that the Grantor be notified 30 days prior to any expiration
or cancellation.
(3) All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this § 60-10G shall
contain the following or similar endorsement:
"Should any of the policies described herein be canceled before
the expiration date thereof, the insurer affording coverage will
endeavor to mail 30 days' written notice to the certificate holder
named herein, but failure to mail such notice shall impose no
obligation or liability of any kind upon the insurer affording
coverage, its agents, or representatives, or the insurer of this
certificate."
(4) A Grantee will replace such insurance to conform to this chapter by
promptly filing evidence of proof of insurance with Grantor before
termination of any existing insurance.
H. Grantor's right to revoke. In addition to all other rights which the
Grantor has pursuant to law or equity, the Grantor reserves the right to
initiate revocation proceedings, and all rights and privileges pertaining
thereto, in the event that:
(1) It is demonstrated that Grantee substantially and materially
violated any material provision of this franchise or state, federal or
local law applicable to Grantee's operation of a cable system within
Grantor.
(2) It is demonstrated that Grantee repeatedly violates, after notice
and opportunity to cure, any of the material provisions of the
franchise or provision of valid applicable state, federal or local law
and refuses to cure it.
(3) A Grantee is found to have practiced any fraud or deceit upon the
Grantor or subscriber.
(4) A Grantee is found to have knowingly misrepresented a material
fact in the application for, negotiation of, renegotiation of, or
renewal of the franchise.
I. Revocation procedures. In the event that the Grantor determines that a
Grantee has violated any material event as set forth in § 60-10H, or any
generally applicable material federal, state or local law, the Grantor
may make a written demand on a Grantee that it remedy such violation
§ 60-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-10
58:161
and that continued violation may be cause for revocation. If the
violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect is not remedied to the
satisfaction of the Grantor within 45 days following such demand, the
Grantor shall determine whether or not such violation, breach, failure,
refusal or neglect by Grantee is due to acts of God or other causes
which result from circumstances beyond Grantee's control.
(1) The Grantor may schedule a public hearing, and Grantee shall be
provided with an opportunity to be heard. This opportunity shall
include the ability to introduce evidence, to question witnesses and
to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate in accordance with
the standards of a fair hearing applicable to administrative
hearings in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The causes for
pending revocation and the reasons alleged to constitute such
cause shall be recited in a notice to a Grantee prior to the public
hearing. Said notice shall affirmatively recite the causes that need
to be shown by the Grantor to support a revocation. All notice
requirements shall be met by providing Grantee at least 45 days'
prior written notice (via certified mail, return receipt requested) of
any public hearing concerning the proposed revocation of a
franchise.
(2) If notice is given and after a public hearing is held, the Grantor
determines there is a violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect
by a Grantee, the Grantor shall state in writing the grounds for its
decision and give notice to a Grantee to correct or remedy the same
within such reasonable additional time, in such manner and upon
such reasonable terms and conditions as Grantor may direct.
(3) If, after a public hearing or hearing by a hearing officer, designated
by Grantor, it is determined that a Grantee's performance of any of
the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of franchise was
prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable
control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform
shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall
be imposed as a result thereof, provided that Grantee has notified
Grantor in writing within 30 days of its receipt of notice of the
breach of said cause. Such causes beyond a Grantee's reasonable
control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be
limited to, acts of God, civil emergencies and labor strikes.
(4) If, after notice is given and opportunity to cure, at a Grantee's
option, a public hearing is held, the Grantor determines there was a
violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect, then the Grantor may
declare, by formal resolution, a franchise revoked and canceled and
of no further force and effect unless there is compliance within
such period as Grantor may fix, such period not to be less than 30
days, provided that no opportunity for compliance need be granted
for fraud or misrepresentation.
§ 60-10 PATTON CODE § 60-10
58:162
§ 60-11. Foreclosure and abandonment.
§ 60-12. Removal, transfer and purchase.
(5) The issue of revocation shall automatically be placed upon the
agenda of the Grantor's governing body at the expiration of the
time set by it for compliance. The Grantor then may terminate a
franchise forthwith upon finding that a Grantee has failed to
achieve compliance or may further extend the period, in its
discretion.
(6) If the Grantor, after notice is given and, at a Grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held and appeal is exhausted, declares a
franchise breached, the parties may pursue their remedies
pursuant to a franchise or any other remedy, legal or equitable.
A. Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the system,
Grantee shall notify the Grantor of such fact, and such notification shall
be treated as a notification that a change in control of Grantee has
taken place, and the provisions of this franchise governing the consent
to transfer or change in ownership shall apply without regard to how
such transfer or change in ownership occurred.
B. Abandonment. Grantee may not abandon any portion of the cable
system thereof without having first given three months' written notice
to the Grantor. Grantee may not abandon any portion of the cable
system without compensating the Grantor for damages resulting from
the abandonment.
A. Removal after revocation or denial of renewal.
(1) Upon denial of renewal of a franchise, or upon its revocation, as
provided for, the Grantor shall have the right to require a Grantee
to remove within two years, at a Grantee's expense, all or any
portion of the cable system from all rights-of-way and public
property within the Grantor. In so removing the cable system, a
Grantee shall refill and compact, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made and shall leave all rights-of-way, public property
and private property in as good a condition as that prevailing prior
to Grantee's removal of the cable system and without affecting,
altering or disturbing in any way electric, telephone or utility
cables, wires or attachments. The Grantor, or its delegation, shall
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of such rightsof-
way and public property after removal. Under no circumstance,
including, without limitation, revocation or denial of renewal of a
franchise or any other action to forbid or disallow Grantee from
providing cable services, shall Grantee or its assignees be required
to sell any right, title, interest, use or control of any portion of
Grantee's facilities, including, without limitation, the cable system
and any capacity used for cable service or otherwise, to the Grantor
or any third party. Grantee shall not be required to remove or to
§ 60-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-12
58:163
relocate the plant that facilitates Internet access, digital voice, or
other such services not governed by Title VI of the Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, or any portion thereof as a result of
revocation, denial of renewal or any other action to forbid or
disallow Grantee from providing cable services.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection A of this section, if a
Grantee has failed to complete such removal within the time given
under § 160-12A(1), after written notice of the Grantor's demand
for removal is given, the Grantor shall have the right to exercise
one of the following options:
(a) Declare all right, title and interest to the cable system to be in
the Grantor or its delegator with all rights of ownership,
including, but not limited to, the right to operate the cable
system or transfer the cable system to another for operation by
it; or
(b) Declare the cable system abandoned and cause the cable
system, or such part thereof as the Grantor shall designate, to
be removed at no cost to the Grantor. The cost of said removal
shall be recoverable from the security fund, indemnity and/or
penalty section provided for in a franchise or from a Grantee
directly.
B. Sale or transfer of franchise.
(1) A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred (including
through inheritance), either in whole or in part, used as collateral
for any loan or loans, or leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall
title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or
property therein, pass to or vest in any person without full
compliance with the procedure set forth in this section.
(2) Neither Grantee nor its parent nor any affiliated entity shall
transfer, assign or otherwise encumber, through its own action or
by operation of law, its right, title or interest in the cable system or
in a franchise agreement without the prior written consent of the
Grantor. Neither Grantee nor its parent nor any affiliated entity
shall sell, convey, transfer, exchange or release more than 50% of
its equitable ownership in the cable system without the prior
written consent of the Grantor. No such consent shall be required
for i) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, hypothecation, or by
assignment to a financial institution of any rights, title or interest of
Grantee in the franchise or in the cable system in order to secure
indebtedness, or ii) a transfer to an entity owned and/or controlled
by Grantee.
(a) The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request
to the Grantor for its approval of a sale or transfer. The written
request shall not be deemed complete until all information
required by the Grantor in accordance with applicable FCC
§ 60-12 PATTON CODE § 60-12
58:164
§ 60-13. Rights of individuals protected.
regulations is provided to the Grantor. Upon receipt of a
complete written request with all application information,
including the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the
transferee, the Grantor shall have 120 days to grant or deny
such approval. Within 30 days of the request, in accordance
with FCC rules and regulations, notify the Grantee in writing of
the additional information, if any, it requires to determine the
legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee or
new controlling party.
(b) The Grantor shall reply in writing within 30 days of the request
and shall exercise its determination that a public hearing is
necessary.
(c) If a public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to Subsection
B(2)(b) above, such hearing shall be commenced within 30
days of such determination, and notice of any such hearing
shall be given 14 days prior to the hearing by publishing notice
thereof. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the
public hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the
action to be considered by the Grantor.
(d) Within 30 days after the closing of the public hearing, the
Grantor shall approve or deny in writing the sale or transfer
request. If the Grantor has not taken final action on the
Grantee's request for consent within 120 days after receiving
such request, consent shall be deemed granted.
(e) Any consent by the Grantor for any transfer described above
shall not be effective until the proposed transferee or assignee
shall have executed a legally binding agreement stating that it
shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained in the
franchise.
C. Purchase by grantor upon denial of renewal or revocation.
(1) Upon lawful denial of renewal or revocation of franchise, the
Grantor may, in lawful manner and upon the payment of fair market
value, mutually determined, Grantor and Grantee, lawfully obtain,
purchase, condemn, acquire, take over and hold the cable system.
(2) Upon the revocation of a franchise, the Grantor may in lawful
manner and upon the payment of an equitable price lawfully obtain,
purchase, and condemn, in accordance with such proceedings
governed by federal and/or state law, take over and hold the cable
system.
A. Unfair discriminatory practices prohibited. In the performance of a
franchise, a Grantee shall not discriminate unfairly against any person
on the ground of or because of race, creed, color, national origin or
§ 60-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-13
58:165
§ 60-14. Miscellaneous provisions.
ancestry, gender, religion or political opinion or affiliation, income of
residents in any area of the Grantor, or age. A Grantee shall comply at
all times with all other valid applicable federal, state and local laws,
and all federal and state executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.
B. Subscriber privacy.
(1) Absent a court order or requirement of federal or state law, no
signal of a channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal
for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices
without the express written permission of the subscriber; provided,
however, that Grantee may conduct systemwide or individually
addressed "sweeps" solely for the purpose of verifying system
integrity, checking for illegal taps, controlling return-path
transmission, billing for pay services or monitoring channel usage
in a manner not inconsistent with the federal law. Grantee shall not
record or retain any information transmitted between a subscriber
and any third party, except as required for lawful business
purposes. The request for such permission shall be contained in a
separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber
is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions.
Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to
exceed one year, which shall be renewed at the option of the
subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to
provide or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be
revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind
whatsoever. Such permission shall be required for each type or
classification of cable communications activity planned for the
purpose of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.
(2) No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a
signal from a subscriber terminal, or any other means, including,
but not limited to, lists of the names and addresses of such
subscribers or any lists that identify the viewing habits of
subscribers, shall be sold or otherwise made available to any party
other than to a Grantee and its employees for internal business use,
and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless a
Grantee has received specific written authorization from the
subscriber to make such data available.
(3) Compliance with the Cable Act, Section 631, shall be deemed
compliance with this § 60-13B.
A. Compliance with laws. A Grantee and the Grantor shall act reasonably
and in good faith, deal fairly, and cooperate with each other to enable
performance of all obligations under this chapter and achievements of
the expected benefits. A Grantee shall conform to all Grantor
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter
§ 60-13 PATTON CODE § 60-14
58:166
adopted or established during the entire term of a franchise agreement
which conform with generally applicable Grantor regulations.
B. Continuity of service mandatory. Upon revocation or lawful denial of
renewal of a franchise agreement, the Grantor may require a Grantee to
continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time not
to exceed six months. A Grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in
interest, continue to operate the cable system under the terms and
conditions of a franchise agreement. In the event a Grantee does not so
operate the cable system, the Grantor may take such steps as it, in its
sole discretion, deems necessary to assure continued service to
subscribers.
C. Work performed by others.
(1) All provisions of this franchise shall remain the responsibility of a
Grantee, and a Grantee shall be responsible for and hold the
Grantor harmless for any claims or liability arising out of work
performed by persons other than a Grantee in accordance with
§ 60-2H. The Grantee shall further provide all emergency contact
information (name, address, phone number, etc.) for Grantee
employee responsible for said entity.
(2) All provisions of this chapter and a franchise shall apply to any
subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant
to the provisions of a franchise.
D. Compliance with federal, state and local laws.
(1) Conflict of law. If any federal, state or local law or regulation
requires or permits a Grantee or the Grantor to perform any
service or act or shall prohibit a Grantee or the Grantor from
performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the
terms of a franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge
thereof, Grantor and a Grantee may, by mutual agreement and in
accordance with such change in law, modify a franchise agreement.
(2) Severability. If any term, condition or provision of this chapter or a
franchise or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
shall, to any extent, be rendered invalid or unenforceable as in
conflict with any law, rule or regulation of a superior governmental
body, the remainder hereof and the application of such term,
condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be
affected thereby, and this chapter and a franchise and all the terms,
provisions and conditions thereof shall, in all other respects,
continue to be effective and to be complied with. In the event that
such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changed so that the provision which had
been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law,
rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon
§ 60-14 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-14
58:167
return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on a
Grantee and the Grantor.
(3) In the event that any court or other authority of competent
jurisdiction declares any section, provision or clause of this chapter
and a franchise to be unlawful, invalid or unenforceable, or is
preempted by federal or state laws or regulations, such section,
provision or clause shall be deemed to be severable from the
remaining portions of this agreement and shall not affect the
legality, validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this
agreement.
E. Nonenforcement by grantor. A Grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or a
franchise by reason of any failure of the Grantor to enforce prompt
compliance.
F. Administration of a franchise.
(1) The Grantor or its designee shall have continuing regulatory
jurisdiction and supervision over the cable system and a Grantee's
operation under a franchise.
(2) A Grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the cable system
subject to the supervision of all the authorities of the Grantor who
have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations
affecting the cable system.
(3) Upon reasonable written notice and in accordance with the
applicable provisions contained in § 60-5H and a franchise, a cable
system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic
inspection by the Grantor, provided that such inspection shall not
interfere with the operation of the cable system and such
inspections take place during normal business hours with a
representative of the Grantee present.
G. Miscellaneous violations.
(1) Except as otherwise permitted by applicable law, from and after the
acceptance of the franchise, it shall be unlawful for any person to
establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any
persons in the Grantor any video signals or audio signals by means
of a cable system using rights-of-way unless a franchise therefor
has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
(2) Unless permitted by law, from and after the acceptance of a
franchise, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or
maintain within any rights-of-way in the Grantor, within any other
public property of the Grantor, within any privately owned area
within the Grantor or which has not yet become a right-of-way but
§ 60-14 PATTON CODE § 60-14
58:168
is designated or delineated as a proposed right-of-way on any
tentative subdivision map approved by the Grantor, or the
Grantor's official map or the Grantor's major thoroughfare plan,
any cable system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such
rights-of-way or property or areas has first been obtained.
H. Emergency use. The Grantee shall comply with the emergency alert
provisions set forth by the FCC, set forth under 47 CFR Part 11, FCC
Rules and Regulations, Emergency Alert System (EAS). To the extent
required by federal and state law, Grantee shall assist the Grantor in
working with the Centre County Office of Emergency Services and the
Centre Region Emergency Management Council in the establishment of
an emergency response plan.
I. Controlling law. This chapter and a franchise shall be construed and
enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania except to the extent the Supremacy Clause of the
United States Constitution requires application of federal law.
J. Captions. The paragraph captions and headings in a franchise are for
convenience and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any
way the meaning or interpretation of a franchise.
K. Calculation of time. Where the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, payment or thing is required hereunder and the period of time
or duration for the performance or during thereof is prescribed and
fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and
include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time.
When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal
holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation.
L. Court jurisdiction. Except as may be permitted by applicable court
rules, any proceedings relating to this chapter or a franchise granted
pursuant to it will be venued in the courts of Centre County,
Pennsylvania.
M. Force majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in
noncompliance with, the provisions of the chapter or franchise, nor
suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default
(including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise),
where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused
by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain
or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic act of nature,
labor disputes, failure of utility service necessary to operate the cable
system, governmental, administrative or judicial order or regulation or
other event that is reasonably beyond the Grantee's ability to anticipate
or control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting for
utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which
the Grantee's cable or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability
of materials or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
§ 60-14 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 60-14
58:169
§ 60-15. When effective; publication and time of acceptance.
Chapter 62
(RESERVED)
Chapter 63
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Holding tanks — See Ch. 87.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 63-1. Adoption of code.
Now, therefore, for the purposes set forth in Section 1,79 it is hereby enacted
and ordained that the Township of Patton hereby elects to administer and
enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45
N. No third-party beneficiaries. Nothing in this chapter or the Grantee's
franchise agreement is or was intended to confer third-party
beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce the terms of
this chapter or the franchise agreement.
A. Publication; effective date. A franchise shall be signed by the
designated head of the governing body and attested by the Grantor
Manager/Secretary. The franchise shall be published in accordance
with the requirements of Grantor and state law and shall take effect
upon acceptance by Grantee.
B. Time of acceptance; incorporation of proposal; exhibits.
(1) A Grantee shall have 30 days from the date of adoption of a
franchise by the Grantor to accept a franchise and written evidence
of the authority of the person signing the acceptance and franchise
agreement has been so authorized. Such acceptance by Grantee
shall be deemed the grant of a franchise for all purposes. In the
event acceptance does not take place within 30 days or such other
time as the Grantor might allow, a franchise shall be null and void.
(2) Upon acceptance of a franchise, a Grantee shall be bound by all the
terms and conditions contained in this chapter and the franchise.
(3) With its acceptance, a Grantee shall also deliver any security
deposit, insurance certificates, and/or performance bonds as
required in this chapter and in a franchise agreement.
§ 60-14 PATTON CODE § 63-1
62:170
of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to
time, the Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time.
§ 63-2. Amendments to Chapter 403, Administration.80
The Township of Patton hereby adopts the following amendments,
alterations and deletions to Chapter 403, Administration, of Part XIV,
Uniform Construction Code:
§ 63-3. Amendments to International Building Code.
The Township of Patton hereby adopts the following amendments,
alterations and deletions to the International Building Code, 2003 Edition,
and its successor codes as adopted by the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act or Uniform Construction Code:
A. Section 403.1(b) Exclusions and exemptions, is amended as follows:
(3) The following structures if the structure has a building area less
than 150 square feet and is accessory to a detached one-family
dwelling except as might be required by an ordinance adopted
under Section 503 of the Act (35 P.S. § 7210.503):
(i) Carports.
(ii) Detached private garages.
(iii) Greenhouses.
(iv) Sheds.
(8) is deleted.
(9) is deleted.
A. Section 903.2.14 is added to read as follows:81
An automatic fire-suppression system shall be provided throughout all
buildings of Use Group B when more than three stories of 35 feet in
height or more than 10,000 square feet per floor in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1.
B. Section 1608.2 is hereby amended to add the following sentence to this
section:82
79.Editor's Note: Section 1, Intent and Purpose, of this ordinance provided as follows: "It is
the intent and purpose of this ordinance to promote the general health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of this municipality and to conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act and regulations to the Act promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as the
"code"), and in the Township of Patton."
80.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 62, Building Construction, Art. II, One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, was adopted 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-353.
81.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 62, Building Construction, Art. I, International Building Code,
was adopted 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-347.
82.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 62, Building Construction, Art. I, International Building Code,
was adopted 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-347.
§ 63-1 (RESERVED) § 63-3
62:171
§ 63-4. Amendments to International Residential Code.83
The Township of Patton hereby adopts the following appendixes for the
International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, and its successor codes as
adopted by the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or Uniform
Construction Code:
Appendix K: Sound Transmission
§ 63-5. Code Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the Centre
Region Council of Governments Centre Region Housing and Code Board of
Appeals Articles of Agreement dated September 27, 2004.
§ 63-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 70
(RESERVED)
Chapter 76
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 112.
§ 76-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person or property, and except as provided
in § 76-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful within the Township of Patton
for any person to use, fire or discharge any gun or other firearm within 150
yards of any dwelling or occupied building.
Since the ground snow load for the Centre Region as defined by Figure
1608.2 is defined as "CS" by virtue of elevation, the ground snow
load Pg to be used in determining the design snow loads for roofs in
accordance with this code is 40 per square foot.
83.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 62, Building Construction, Art. II, One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, was adopted 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-353.
§ 63-3 PATTON CODE § 76-2
76:172
§ 76-2. Air rifles, bows and arrows and similar devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow or similar device, or any
implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet of any kind with a
force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place
within the Township of Patton, except on a properly constructed target
range and in no case within 150 yards of any dwelling or occupied building,
and except as provided in § 76-3 of this chapter.
§ 76-3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the proper use of
firearms, bows and arrows or similar devices where their lawful use is
permitted in hunting as provided for by the Pennsylvania Game Law84 and
by the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Game Commission.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-440]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate or
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a proceeding commenced before a magisterial
district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures,
be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35, nor more than $1,000, plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 78
FIRE LANES
§ 78-1. Establishment of fire lanes. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
The Fire Marshall or the Chief of Police of Patton Township shall determine
when the parking of motor or other vehicles on any portion of any public
street or private street or shopping center or multifamily building parking
lot or school parking area is likely to interfere with public safety operations,
i.e., the fire company and the ambulance company, or seriously hamper
egress of occupants from buildings in case of fire. When either or both so
determine, they shall designate such areas, in writing, including the use of
maps or sketches, designated consecutively, to the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors shall consider such recommendations and shall
either approve or disapprove, by resolution, each of such designated
locations. Once approved, each such location shall be added to a list,
numbered consecutively, and maintained in the municipal offices of the
township. Such lists may be modified, added to or reduced from time to
84.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 76-2 FIREARMS § 78-1
76:173
time by the Board of Supervisors after written recommendations by the Fire
Marshall and/or the Chief of Police.
§ 78-2. Marking of fire lanes.
§ 78-3. Temporary no parking areas.
In the event of an emergency or special condition whereby the Fire Marshall
shall determine that the parking of vehicles is likely to interfere with the
operation of the fire company in any public street or private street or
shopping center or multifamily building parking lot or school parking area,
he shall direct the posting of signs in such areas reading "No Parking -
Temporary Fire Regulations - by order of the Fire Marshall". Such signs
shall be removed at the direction of the Fire Marshall when such emergency
or special condition ceases.
§ 78-4. Parking in designated fire lanes restricted. [Amended
2-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-287]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to park or
leave standing any vehicle within any fire lane established and marked as
set forth in §§ 78-1 and 78-2 herein, or in any temporary no-parking area set
forth in § 78-3 hereof, and provided, further, that the continued violation of
this chapter for a period of more than two hours shall constitute a new and
separate offense for each successive additional two-hour period.
§ 78-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-287]
A. Once fire lanes are established as set forth in § 78-1, such fire lanes
shall be marked under the direction of the Fire Marshall, using the
following appropriate methods:
(1) By posting signs in such areas reading "Fire Lane - No Parking" in
accordance with state regulations.
(2) By painting lines four inches in width on the road or parking
surface indicating the area.
(3) By painting the words "Fire Lane - No Parking" in letters three feet
in height on the roadway or parking lot surface.
B. The marking, by whatever means designated, is the responsibility of the
property owner and is to be accomplished within 30 days of notification.
A. The Board of Supervisors may establish by resolution the fines for
violation of this chapter. The fines enumerated herein shall remain in
effect until revised by a resolution of the Board. Persons convicted of
parking violations shall be sentenced to pay fines as specified below and
costs of prosecution.
§ 78-1 PATTON CODE § 78-5
76:174
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
Chapter 83
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLING
§ 83-1. State act and regulations adopted. [Amended 4-25-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-541]
Food establishments, as defined herein, are declared to be subject to the
provisions of the rules and regulations adopted by the Department of
Agriculture of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 7, Chapter 46,
Food Code Regulation,85 issued under the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of
201086 as now enacted and as may be hereafter amended. A copy of these
regulations shall be supplied to any person operating a food establishment,
on request.
§ 83-2. Definitions. [Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-541]
The definitions, as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Department
of Agriculture of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 7, Chapter 46,
as now enacted and as may be hereafter amended, are included herein by
reference. In addition to the definitions set forth in the Act, the following
words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
unless the context indicates otherwise:
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Both public eating and drinking places and
retail food establishments collectively.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE — The rules and
regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture of the
Violation Fine Not Less Than Nor More Than
Parking in Fire Lanes $25 $75
B. It shall be the duty of the peace officers of the township to report to the
Board of Supervisors all violations of any provisions of this chapter,
which notice shall contain instructions to the owner or operator of such
vehicle that if he shall report to the township and pay within 72 hours
after the time of such notice, for the use of the township, the minimum
(not less than) amount specified for each violation, the same shall save
such violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
hereinabove prescribed. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
85.Editor's Note: See 7 Pa. Code Chapter 46.
86.Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5701 et seq.
§ 78-5 FIREARMS § 83-2
76:175
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 7, Chapter 46, and the Retail Food
Facility Safety Act of 2010 as now enacted and as may be hereafter
amended.
§ 83-3. Licenses.
§ 83-4. Inspections.
The Township shall have the right of inspection at the submission of the
application and from time to time to determine compliance with the terms
of the Acts. The Township Supervisors shall from time to time designate and
appoint an inspector who shall carry out the inspections in accordance with
this chapter, the Acts and Department of Agriculture rules and regulations,
which are incorporated herein.
§ 83-5. Miscellaneous requirements.
A. In accordance with the Acts, no person shall conduct or operate a food
establishment within the Township without first obtaining a license
from the Township. No license shall be issued until inspection of the
premises, facilities, and equipment of such food establishment has been
made by the duly appointed representative of said municipality and
found to comply with the provisions of the Acts and Department of
Agriculture rules and regulations.
B. Application for a license and the required fee shall be submitted to the
Health Officer or his/her designee prior to erection, structural
alteration, occupancy, or operation of any food establishment and/or
prior to the issuance of any building permit by the Centre Region Code
Administration Department.
A. Home-processed foods. An applicant proposing to operate a food
establishment where only home-processed foods will be sold shall
provide verification of state licensing by the Department of Agriculture.
Upon receipt of verification, the applicant will be deemed to be in
compliance with this chapter, and no additional Township licenses will
be required.
B. Eating and drinking places. In addition to all other applicable local,
state and federal regulations, all eating and drinking places must
comply with the Pennsylvania Clean Indoor Air Act.87
C. Retail food establishments. In addition to all other applicable local,
state and federal regulations, all retail food establishments must
comply with the Pennsylvania Clean Indoor Air Act.88
D. Outdoor eating areas. Licensed food establishments that provide
exterior eating areas and allow smoking in these areas, shall provide
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq.
§ 83-2 PATTON CODE § 83-5
76:176
§ 83-6. Certification of food establishment employees. [Amended
4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-541]
cigarette butt disposal containers, and must keep their premises free
from the same. Failure to comply with this requirement is declared to
be a violation of this chapter and is subject to the penalties contained
herein.
E. Requirement. Licensed food establishments that sell or serve food or
beverages through a walk-up window shall provide interior lobby or
seating space for their customers. Such space shall be available to
customers whenever the establishment is open for business. The lobby
or seating space shall be sized so as to provide space for customers
waiting for service and so that they are not forced to block or obstruct
the public sidewalk. Establishments may not block or obstruct public
sidewalks in providing walk-up window service. Food establishments
with a walk-up window shall also provide at least one refuse receptacle
near the window and on their premises for their customers' use. Refuse
receptacles shall be maintained such that refuse is not allowed to spill
or blow onto the public right-of-way.
F. Hours of operation. Licensed food establishments that sell or serve food
or beverages through a walk-up window shall cease selling or serving
food through a walk-up window no later than 12:00 midnight, prevailing
time, and may reopen no earlier than 7:00 a.m., prevailing time.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
CERTIFIED FOOD EMPLOYEE — An employee of a food establishment
who is in a supervisory or management position or person in charge
with respect to other employees of the establishment and/or in some
way responsible for the operation of a food establishment.
B. Board-approved training. The State College Board of Health shall
approve training programs based on the state food establishment rules
and regulations, adopted herein, for the purpose of instructing
prospective certified food employees in the food-handling
requirements.
C. Certified food employee on duty. Each newly licensed food
establishment shall within 90 days have within their employ at least one
certified food employee who is available on the premises at all times or
available by phone. Retail food establishments that sell only
prepackaged non-potentially hazardous food shall be exempt from this
requirement.
D. Examinations. Each certified food employee shall be required to take a
written examination approved by the State College Board of Health and
to achieve a passing grade, which grade shall be determined by the
Board of Health.
E. Certification.
§ 83-5 FIREARMS § 83-6
76:177
§ 83-7. Fees.
(1) All certified food employees who shall have passed an examination
administered by the State College Department of Ordinance
Enforcement and Public Health, on payment of the fee provided for
herein, shall receive a certificate issued by the Department of
Ordinance Enforcement and Public Health.
(2) Certification shall be valid for five years from the date of issuance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked, and shall be reissued only
after successful reexamination and payment of the required fee. All
certificates issued shall be exhibited in a place conspicuous to
consumers and the State College Department of Ordinance
Enforcement and Public Health.
(3) The fees payable for certified food employee will be set by
resolution of Borough Council from time to time.
F. Responsibilities of certified food employee and/or person in charge.
Certified food employees and or the person in charge shall be required
to daily observe, instruct, and, if necessary, correct other food
establishment employees. Certified food employees shall further be
required to observe, practice, and conform with the provisions of
Chapter 46, Food Code, and the Retail Food Facility Safety Act of
2010.89
G. Suspension and revocation of certificates.
(1) Any person certified hereunder who knowingly fails to follow the
responsibilities set forth herein may be suspended by the State
College Department of Ordinance Enforcement and Public Health
for a specified period. Any person certified hereunder who
knowingly submits false information to any representative of the
State College Board of Health or, having previously been
suspended, fails to perform the responsibilities set forth herein
may have such certification revoked by the State College Health
Department.
(2) Any person whose certification is suspended or revoked shall be
notified of such action, in writing, and shall have the right, within
one week after receipt of such notice, to request, in writing, a
hearing before the State College Board of Health. The said Board
shall conduct such hearing as soon as possible thereafter and shall
determine whether such person shall have such certification
suspended, and the length of time thereof, or revoked. Any person
whose certification is revoked may not be recertified within one
year from the date of such revocation.
89.Editor's Note: See 7 Pa. Code Chapter 46 and 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5701 et seq., respectively.
§ 83-6 PATTON CODE § 83-7
76:178
§ 83-8. Proceedings in law or equity; restraint.
The Township shall have the power to institute in the Court of Common
Pleas of Centre County, Pennsylvania, proceedings in law or in equity to
restrain any and all violations of the Act and the provisions of this chapter.
Such proceedings shall be instituted in the name of the Township of Patton.
§ 83-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-541]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the
Acts or the rules, regulations or standards promulgated hereunder shall
be subject to the penalties set forth within the Retail Food Facility Safety
Act of 2010. Any person who resists or interferes with any authorized
representative of the municipality in the performance of his duties shall,
upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, to be paid to the
municipality. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 87
HOLDING TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 136. Stormwater management — See Ch. 147.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
A. License fee. The applicant shall pay a fee with the application for the
license, which fee shall be made payable to the Township and shall
cover the ordinary administration of this chapter, including the initial
and one additional inspection of the premises by the inspector. Such
fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Township.
B. Additional inspection. In the event that the Township deems it
necessary to make an additional inspection under the Acts and
regulations of the Department of Agriculture, as required to be made as
a result of any action or inaction by the applicant, the applicant shall
pay to the Township the actual cost of such additional inspection made
by the Township, which shall be paid to the Township prior to the
issuance of the license.
§ 83-7 FIREARMS § 87-1
76:179
retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is
hereby declared that the enactment of this chapter is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township, Centre
County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 87-3. Rights and privileges granted.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake
within the Township the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage
disposal and sewage collection and transportation thereof.
§ 87-4. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
such rules and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary
from time to time to effect the purposes therein.
§ 87-5. Conformity with applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors shall
be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
§ 87-1 PATTON CODE § 87-5
76:180
Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 87-6. Rates and charges.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge
and collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its
facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 87-7. Collection and transportation; receipts and reports.
§ 87-8. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 87-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus court costs, including reasonable attorney fees. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Board of Supervisors or its agent, and the
disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or sites as may be
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Board of Supervisors or its agent will receive, review and retain
pumping receipts from permitted holding tanks.
C. The Board of Supervisors or its agent will complete and retain annual
inspection reports for each permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Board of Supervisors and any administrative agency
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Board of Supervisors or its agent to inspect holding
tanks on an annual basis.
C. In default of Subsection A above, permit only the Board of Supervisors
or its agent to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 87-5 FIREARMS § 87-10
76:181
§ 87-10. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation
of § 87-8 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 92
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 92-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Patton Township Junkyard
and Refuse Ordinance."
§ 92-2. Definitions and interpretation. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 112]
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or former motor
vehicle which does not bear current registration and/or current
certificate of inspection and/or ascertainable vehicle identification
number.[Amended 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 88-227]
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township.
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to scrap metal, scrapped or junked motor vehicles, abandoned
vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers and
structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in
a proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal.[Amended
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage
in the business of buying, selling, salvaging and dealing in junk and who
maintains and operates a junk yard within the Township of Patton.
JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk, as hereinbefore defined, is
stored, disposed of or accumulated.
LICENSE — The permit granted to a person who accumulates, stores
or disposes of junk as hereinbefore defined.
§ 87-10 PATTON CODE § 92-2
76:182
§ 92-3. License.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer, or maintain a junkyard
without first having obtained a license from the Board, for which license a
fee in accordance with the schedule hereinafter set forth shall be paid to
the Township for the use of the Township. The license shall be issued for the
twelve-month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the following
year, and each license must be renewed annually on or before the first day
of July of each year.
§ 92-4. Application for license.
The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Board after
written application shall have been made therefore by the person desiring
to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to whom
such license is issued and the premises on which such business is to be
conducted, or such junkyard is to be maintained. Such license shall be
posted conspicuously upon the premises licensed thereunder. The written
application for license hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by
a form, every question of which must be answered, which form will be
supplied by the Board. Applicant shall also submit therewith a plot of the
premises used or to be used in connection with such license.
§ 92-5. Issuance of license. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 112;
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Upon receipt of an application by the Board, the Board, in accordance
with Chapter 175, Zoning, and the provisions herein, shall issue a license
or shall refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor after an
examination of the application and taking into consideration the suitability
of the proposed site to be used for the purpose of the license, the character
of the properties located nearby and the effect of the proposed use upon the
Township, both economic and aesthetic. In the event that the Board shall
issue a license, it may impose upon the license and the person applying
therefor, such terms and conditions in addition to the regulations herein
contained, and adopted pursuant to this chapter as may be deemed
necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter. No license shall
be issued for the use of a tract of land in excess of 20 acres, excluding
setback areas.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm,
corporation or other legal entity.
TOWNSHIP — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include both the feminine
and neuter.
§ 92-2 FIREARMS § 92-6
76:183
§ 92-6. License fee. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 112]
The license fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or renewal of a
license. The license fee shall be in accordance with a schedule adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.90 The fee shall be
determined by the actual land to be used by the person to whom the license
is issued, excluding setback areas.
§ 92-7. License limitation.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Township or maintain more than
one junkyard, for the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. No
person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the
place designated upon his license or maintain a junkyard in any place other
than the place designated upon his license.
§ 92-8. Transfer of license.
No license issued by the Board shall be transferable by the licensor to any
other person unless such transfer is authorized by the Board. Any person
desiring to transfer his license shall notify the Board, in writing, which
notification shall be accompanied by an application for license, as described
in § 92-4 of this chapter, by the transferee.
§ 92-9. Transfer fee. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 112]
In the event that the Board shall approve a transfer of a license, the
transferee shall immediately pay to the Township a transfer fee to be set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.91
§ 92-10. Records. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 112]
Every person licensed under this chapter shall provide and shall constantly
keep a book, in which shall be fairly written down in the English language
at the time of the purchase of any junk, a description of every article
or material purchased or received by him, the date and hour of such
purchase or receipt and the person from whom such article or material was
purchased, received or handled by such person and which shall at all times
be subject to the inspection of any official of the Township.
§ 92-11. Delay in disposal.
Every person, licensed under this chapter, shall keep and retain upon the
licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not disturb or
reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition until such
period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
90.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
91.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 92-6 PATTON CODE § 92-12
76:184
§ 92-12. Regulations.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in accordance with any special provisions imposed by the
Board and in the manner prescribed by this section and any subsequent
regulations adopted by the Board:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk,
all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom, gasoline in
an amount not exceeding 10 gallons may be stored aboveground in said
junkyards, provided that the same be placed in containers approved by
the Board. All other gasoline which is kept in the premises shall be
stored underground, which underground storage must be approved by
the Board.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises, and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. All junk kept, stored or arranged on the licensed premises shall at all
times be kept, stored and arranged within the junkyard as described in
the application for license hereunder and as limited under § 92-4
above.92
F. The premises to be licensed shall be set back a minimum distance of 50
feet from the right-of-way lines on all streets or roads and a minimum
distance of 25 feet from all other property lines. The area between the
setback line and the right-of-way line and all streets and roads and all
other property lines shall be at all times kept clear and vacant.
G. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare and appearance of
the Township, if the Board shall deem it necessary and desirable, the
premises to be licensed shall, at the setback lines be enclosed by a
fence of the type and style to be determined by the Board or by
evergreen screen plantings, or both. The Board will adopt regulations
concerning this which will be furnished to the applicant at the time of
the issuance of a license or at the time of renewal or transfer of the
license.
H. All junk shall be kept or stored at least 25 feet from any river or stream
or any other natural watercourse.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, prohibiting the burning of more than one motor
vehicle at a time and prohibiting the burning of dangerous materials, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 92-12 FIREARMS § 92-12
76:185
§ 92-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
112; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.93
Chapter 99
(RESERVED)
Chapter 103
(RESERVED)
Chapter 104
NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
I. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on such premises as
junk, all glass shall be removed from any broken windshield, window or
mirror.
J. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on such premises as
junk, all upholstery shall be removed.
K. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on such premises as
junk, all wheels shall be removed so that the said vehicle is rendered
incapable of movement.
L. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on such premises as
junk, the trunk lid shall be removed or its lock shall be removed.
93.Editor's Note: Former Section 14, Abatement of nuisance, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 92-12 PATTON CODE § 92-13
99:186
ARTICLE I
Homestead Farms
[Adopted 12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-537]
§ 104-1. Legislative findings.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has adopted enabling legislation,
specifically the Neighborhood Improvement District Act, 73 P.S. § 831, Act
No. 2000-130, authorizing the creation of neighborhood improvement
districts to enable property owners in neighborhoods to make
improvements within the neighborhood or to provide services to their
neighborhoods that supplement municipal services otherwise provided. The
legislation provides for the assessment of property owners within the
neighborhood improvement district (NID) to pay for the improvements
or additional services. The Board of Supervisors may create an NID, by
ordinance pursuant to Act No. 2000-130, when the Board believes that
such a district is necessary and desirable to improve the quality of life for
residents and commercial occupants within an Improvement District.
§ 104-2. Homestead Farms Neighborhood Improvement District
established.
A. Establishment of district. At the behest of the Board of Directors of the
Homestead Farms Corporation (HFC), acting on behalf of the member
residents of the Homestead Farms Neighborhood, and as authorized by
Act 2000-130, 73 P.S. § 831 et seq., known as the "Neighborhood
Improvement District Act of 2000" (Act), the Homestead Farms
Neighborhood Improvement District (NID) is established with
boundaries depicted on 104 Attachment 1, appended to this chapter,94
generally encompassing the residential properties within Patton
Township with driveway access onto East Shadow Lane, Sandy Ridge
Road and Crandall Drive. A companion NID will also be established in
the Ferguson Township portion of Homestead Farms.
B. District plan and improvements. Special assessment revenues shall be
used solely for administrative services and roadway improvements as
detailed in the "Final Plan for Establishing Neighborhood Improvement
Districts for Homestead Farms in Patton Township and Ferguson
Township," on file with the Township Secretary, and not for essential
governmental services provided by Patton Township.
C. Levy of special assessment. There is hereby levied an assessment to pay
the cost of the improvements computed as follows:
(1) Amount of assessment. The total assessment for the combined
Patton Township and Ferguson Township shall be based on the total
proposed project costs of $212,245.00.
94.Editor's Note: Said attachment is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 104-1 (RESERVED) § 104-2
103:187
(2) Method of assessment. The special assessment fees on each
property shall be based on the total proposed project costs divided
evenly among each of the 48 properties, comprised of 43 properties
in Patton Township and five properties in Ferguson Township. The
special assessment fees on each property shall be $4,421.77
[equals ($212,245.00/48].
(3) Payment of assessment.
(a) On behalf of the property owners, the Homestead Farms
Corporation shall provide an initial installment payment of
$30,000 to the NID in January 2012 as a credit of $625.00 for
each property against the special assessment fee.
(b) The remainder of the special assessment ($4,421.77 less the
initial installment payment of $625.00) shall be payable in 12
annual installments. Annual installment payments shall be due
on March 1 of each year from 2012 through 2023. The annual
installment payment of the special assessment fee on each
property is $316.40 [equals ($4,421.77 - $625.00)/12].
(c) A ten-percent penalty shall be applied to payments made after
March 1.
(d) Any outstanding balance of the special assessment may be
satisfied at any time without penalty.
(4) Liens. Assessments shall constitute liens and encumbrances upon
the assessed property and shall be collectible in accordance with
the provisions of § 7(d) of Act 130, 73 P.S. § 837(d) and in general
may be collected in the same manner as municipal tax claims,
notwithstanding the provision of this section as to installment
payments.
D. Collection of assessment. The assessment shall be collected by the
Patton Township Treasurer. The Treasurer shall mail initial notices to
owners of the benefited properties no later than January 15 of each
installment year. The Treasurer shall mail delinquent notices in a
manner consistent with Township practices for collection of delinquent
tax and assessment accounts.
E. Management. The Homestead Farms Corporation (HFC), a nonprofit
corporation, shall be the NID Management Association (NIDMA) for
both NIDs. As provided for in the agreement between the Patton
Township Board of Supervisors (PTBoS), the Ferguson Township Board
of Supervisors (FTBoS) and the HFC, the NIDMA shall meet annually
with a designated representative of the Townships to review the project
implementation. The Public Works Department of Patton Township shall
administer the projects and shall utilize Patton Township resources or
qualified contractors to complete projects as scheduled in the plan.
Contracts shall be awarded by the Township to the lowest responsive
§ 104-2 PATTON CODE § 104-2
103:188
bidder. Projects may be included in contracts that also include work
outside the NIDs (i.e., annual street overlay contracts).
F. Sunset provision. The Homestead Farms Neighborhood Improvement
District shall automatically terminate on December 31, 2023, unless
continued or extended by subsequent action in accordance with the
provisions of Act 130, 73 P.S. § 830 et seq.
§ 104-2 (RESERVED) § 104-2
103:189
Chapter 105
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 52.
§ 104-2 PATTON CODE § 104-2
103:190
ARTICLE I
Noise Control
[Adopted 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-595]
§ 105-1. Intent.
It is the purpose and scope of this article to provide regulations defining
the maximum sound levels that persons, vehicles, appliances and equipment
shall be allowed to produce. The residents of the Township recognize that
uncontrolled noise represents a danger to the health and welfare of their
neighbors and that each person in the community is entitled to live in an
environment in which the level of noise is minimized for the community
good.
§ 105-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the following unless exempted in § 105-3:
§ 105-3. Exemptions.
The following devices and/or activities are exempt from the provisions of
these regulations:
A. To all persons.
B. To all types of vehicles, appliances and equipment, whether privately or
publicly owned.
C. To both the owner and operator of vehicles, appliances, equipment,
devices, animals or any other object creating noises.
A. Aircraft (except model aircraft).
B. Police, fire, ambulance and other governmental emergency vehicles.
C. Backup alarm devices on trucks and other equipment when installed
and operated in accordance with Society of Automotive Engineers
recommended practice J 994, "Criteria for Back-up Alarm Devices."
D. Governmental warning devices (i.e., civil defense or fire siren).
E. Commercial agricultural activities within the A-1 District on parcels
where such activities are permitted under Chapter 175 of the Patton
Code. Includes customary accessory activities such as timbering, other
silvicultural activities, and related activities. Building construction on
these parcels is not exempt.
F. Commercial agricultural activities within districts other than the A-1
District where such activities were customarily practiced prior to the
effective date of the enabling ordinance for this article. Building
construction on these parcels is not exempt.
§ 105-1 (RESERVED) § 105-3
103:191
§ 105-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given in this section:
APPLIANCE — Any device or combination of devices used or capable of
being used as a means of accomplishing a desired end, such as a window
air-conditioning unit.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — Includes the use of heavy construction
equipment (including pile drivers, crawler-tractors, bulldozers, rotary drills
and augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes, derricks, motor graders, paving
machines, ditchers, trenchers, compactors, scrapers, pavement breakers,
compressors, pneumatic power equipment and similar devices) for the
duration of such construction and/or demolition work, provided such are
operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper operating
condition.
EQUIPMENT — Any devices or combination of devices to accomplish a
desired end, such as a chain saw, leafblower, bulldozer, etc.
G. Existing weapons firing ranges between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. or sundown, whichever is later.
H. Construction activities in compliance with § 105-6. Emergency
construction or repair activities in accordance with § 105-6B.
I. Bells, chimes and carillons used for religious purposes or in conjunction
with national celebrations or public holidays.
J. Residential property maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is later.
K. Snow removal. The operation of snow-removal equipment necessary for
the removal of snow or ice from public or private streets, alleys, drives,
sidewalks, and parking areas, provided that any motor vehicle used for
snow removal which is required to be licensed shall be equipped with
an exhaust system in good working order to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and shall be equipped to prevent engine noise in excess
of the limits established by the laws or statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Also, any motor-driven vehicle of a type not subject to
registration for road use or domestic snow-removal equipment shall be
equipped with an exhaust system or mufflers in good working order to
prevent excessive or unusual noise.
L. Fireworks authorized under Pennsylvania law may be discharged until
11:00 p.m., except on December 31 fireworks may be discharged from
11:45 p.m. until 12:15 a.m., of the following day (i.e. January 1).
Fireworks operators must comply with all applicable state laws and
local permitting.
§ 105-3 PATTON CODE § 105-4
103:192
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, animal, vehicle, appliance,
equipment or other device.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person appointed by the
Township with responsibility to enforce municipal ordinances; or any sworn
member of the Patton Township Police Department.
OWNER — The person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any
premises within the Township.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Sound that is of a volume, frequency, or pattern
that prevents, disrupts, injures, or endangers the health, safety, welfare,
comfort or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities within
Patton Township, given the time of day, location, and/or other relevant
factors in which and where the sound is made.
VEHICLE — Any device, or combination of devices, used for or capable
of being used for transporting persons or property. Vehicles include, but
are not limited to, the following: automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all- terrain vehicles, go-carts,
racers and like devices, farm machinery, industrial machinery, highway
graders, trailers, and semi-trailers.
§ 105-5. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to make or cause to be made any unreasonable noise or to allow
any unreasonable noise to be caused or made in or on any real or
personal property occupied or controlled by that person.
B. In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any person to
create, assist in creating or, as owner, lessee or occupant of the
property on which the activity is located, permit any of the following
acts:
(1) Radios, stereos, and musical instruments. The playing of any radio,
stereo, television set, amplified or unamplified musical instrument,
loudspeaker, tape recorder, compact disc player, or other such
electronic sound-producing devices, in such a manner or with
volume that is:
(a) Plainly audible beyond the property line of a single-family
dwelling unit from which it is generated or outside of the
duplex dwelling unit or individual dwelling unit of the multiplefamily
dwelling unit from which it is generated; or
(b) Plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle in
which it is generated; or
(c) Plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from its location on
public property or private property open to the general public.
§ 105-4 (RESERVED) § 105-5
103:193
§ 105-6. Construction activities.
Construction activities shall not begin before 7:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday, and not before 8:00 a.m. on Sunday, except as may be exempted
below. Construction activities shall be scheduled to conclude each day by
7:00 p.m. except as may be exempted below.
(d) Causing or has caused vibrations with a bass within a dwelling
unit or within a vehicle other than the unit or vehicle from
which it is/was generated.
(2) Shouting and whistling. Continuous or repeated yelling, shouting,
crying, calling, loud whistling, or loud singing, so as to disturb the
peace, comfort, or repose of others within the Township by being
plainly audible to persons within any dwelling, hotel, hospital,
office or other type of residence other than that from which it
originates.
(3) Other noises. By means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, drum,
clapper, hammer, horn, vuvuzelas, signaling device, siren, or by
other means which disturbs the peace, comfort, or repose of others
within the Township by being plainly audible to persons within any
dwelling, hotel, hospital, office or other type of residence other
than that from which it originates.
(4) Construction activities. See § 105-6.
(5) Other excessive noise. The creation of any other excessive or
unreasonably loud noise which disturbs the peace, comfort, or
repose of others within the Township by being plainly audible to
persons within any dwelling, hotel, hospital, office or other type of
residence other than that from which it originates.
A. Exceptions, modifications and waivers.
(1) The Board of Supervisors designates the Township Manager as the
point of contact for requests for exceptions, modifications or
waivers from this policy.
(2) In reviewing a request for an exception, modification or waiver, the
value of affording residents a quiet night's sleep will always far
outweigh a contractor's desire to schedule work hours outside of
the policy limits. In almost all circumstances, a request for an
exception, modification or waiver for work in a residential section
or near lodgings and dwellings will be denied.
(3) The Township Manager will engage with a requestor to determine
the least intrusive method available to address the contractor's
needs while still protecting residents.
(4) All decisions by the Manager for exceptions, modifications or
waivers will be in writing. Approvals may be conditioned on the
§ 105-5 PATTON CODE § 105-6
103:194
contractor's agreement to undertake certain mitigating actions.
Denials shall state the Manager's rationale for not approving the
request.
(5) The Manager may elect to send the request to the Board of
Supervisors for consideration. No special meetings of the Board
will be called to consider a request.
(6) The Manager's decision to deny or approve with conditions may be
appealed to the Board. The request for appeal must be in writing,
must provide the contractor's rationale for the appeal, and must
provide means to mitigate residents' disruption.
(7) All decisions by the Board for exceptions, modifications or waivers
will be in writing. Approvals may be conditioned on the contractor's
agreement to undertake certain mitigating actions. Denials shall
state the Board's rationale for not approving the request.
B. Emergencies. The Township recognizes that emergencies may occur,
both on public and private property, that would involve construction or
construction-like activities being utilized to address emerging issues
that can pose hazards to people and property. In such cases, as soon as
practicable, the Township shall be notified.
(1) Once an emerging issue has been stabilized, the Manager or his
designee will engage with the responsible party (owner, contractor,
or lead agency) to determine the remaining scope of the response
and recovery efforts. Based on the nature of the emergency and the
scope of the recovery, the Manager will offer guidance to the
responsible party to balance the recovery requirements and the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
(2) The Manager or his designee will continue to engage with the
responsible party until such time that the remaining activities enter
a nonemergency phase. After that point, the responsible party shall
comply with the policy or seek an exception, modification or waiver
(see above).
C. Exemptions.
(1) Construction activities within PennDOT's limited access rights-ofway.
(2) Work performed under an emergency declaration.
(3) Work performed as part of an emergency response under the
direction of an incident commander or a unified command.
(4) Certain seasonal activities wherein exposure to the elements can
be harmful to workers. For example, roofing work during hot
weather may commence prior to 7:00 a.m.
§ 105-6 (RESERVED) § 105-6
103:195
§ 105-7. Waivers for special events.
§ 105-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 105-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by Township police officers,
Township Ordinance Enforcement Officers, and others designated by the
Township Manager.
(5) Specific construction activities that involve materials that are
temperature sensitive. For example, large concrete placements
during hot weather may commence prior to 7:00 a.m.
A. In reviewing a request for a waiver, the value of affording residents a
quiet night's sleep will always far outweigh an applicant's desires. In
almost all circumstances, a request for a waiver that would impact a
residential section or nearby lodgings and dwellings will be denied.
B. Written applications for a waiver to this article shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors at least 60 days prior to the event.
(1) No special meetings of the Board will be called to consider a
request.
C. The application must be submitted on the form provided by the
Township (Waiver Application95).
D. The Board may engage with a requestor to determine the least intrusive
method available to address the applicant's needs while still protecting
residents.
E. All decisions by the Board for a waiver will be in writing. Approvals may
be conditioned on the applicant's agreement to undertake certain
mitigating actions. Denials shall state the Board's rationale for not
approving the request.
A. Any person found guilty of violating provisions of this article shall be
fined not less than $100 for the first offense, and not less than $500 for
any subsequent offenses in any one-hundred-twenty-day period and,
upon failure to pay such fine, shall be sentenced to jail for a term not to
exceed 30 days for each offense.
B. A penalty provided for under this article may be imposed in addition to
any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising
from the same conduct.
C. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day that a
violation of the terms of this article continues to exist.
95.Editor's Note: The Waiver Application is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-6 PATTON CODE § 105-9
103:196
Chapter 107
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 52.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 58.
Junkyards — See Ch. 92.
Pest control — See Ch. 118.
Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
§ 107-1. General provisions.
No person or municipality shall cause or permit to exist upon public lands,
or lands which are leased or occupied, any nuisance, including but not
limited to accumulations of garbage and rubbish, the outside storage of any
motor vehicle(s) not bearing current and valid inspection and registration
stickers, junk, the carrying on of offensive manufacturing or business, the
maintenance of a building structure built or located in violation of the
provisions of Chapter 62, Building Construction,96 relating to buildings
and other structures within the Township and excavation incident thereto,
except junkyards as licensed by and in conformance with Chapter 92,
Junkyards. However, nothing contained herein shall be construed to hinder
the development of natural resources or the establishment of an industrial
plant or plants for the processing of the same in Patton Township. (See
Chapter 92, Junkyards, § 92-2, Definitions and interpretations.)
§ 107-2. Notice to owners and occupants of premises.
A. Upon the discovery of the initial violation on a premises, the authorized
agent of the Township shall give a written notice of warning to the
owner and/or occupant of such violation. The owner and/or occupant
shall then have 72 hours to abate such violation.
B. After a period of no less than 72 hours after the issuance of the warning
notice, the Township's authorized agent may inspect the premises for
compliance with this chapter.
(1) If, after the 72 hours’ warning time, the Township's authorized
agent observes the premises to be in violation, an ordinance
violation notice shall be issued to the owner and/or occupant either
by personal delivery, by the United State mail directed to the last
known address, or by posting the violation notice upon the
premises where such violation occurs. Each twenty-four-hour
period shall constitute a separate violation, and an ordinance
violation notice may be issued every 24 hours.
96.Editor's Note: Ch. 62, Building construction, was repealed 6-16-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-430; see now Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 105-9 (RESERVED) § 107-2
103:197
§ 107-3. Violations and penalties.
A person, firm, association or corporation having the duty to remove a
nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall, upon failure to do
so within a reasonable time after notice has been given by the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, police officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Health
Officer or Building Inspector, be liable to the Township for the costs of the
removal of such nuisance. Also, upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding
commenced before a magisterial district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than
$35 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, provided each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice to the offender
shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
Chapter 110
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 52.
Parks — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
(2) Upon discovery of a subsequent violation on a specific premises,
similar in nature to a prior violation that may have been abated,
and occurring within 90 days of said prior violation, an ordinance
violation notice shall be issued to the owner and/or occupant in the
manner prescribed above. Each twenty-four-hour period shall
constitute a separate violation, and an ordinance violation notice
may be issued every 24 hours. [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-56997]
(3) If such owner and/or occupant shall, within seven days after the
delivery, mailing or leaving of such violation notice, pay to the
Treasurer of the Township the sum of $35 for the violation and have
abated the violation, the same will constitute full satisfaction for
the violation noted in said notice. The failure of such person to
make payment, as aforesaid, within seven days and/or abate the
violation shall render such owner and/or occupant subject to the
penalties as provided for in § 107-3, Violations and penalties.
[Amended 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-569]
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(2) as Subsection
B(3).
§ 107-2 PATTON CODE § 110-1
103:198
§ 110-1. Intent.
Patton Township has designated certain Township-owned properties as
recreation areas, distinct from active parkland, and has acquired or is in
possession of other certain open space properties specifically designated
to be preserved from development as residential, commercial, industrial,
or nonrecreational public uses. Recreation areas are intended to provide
recreational opportunities, such as, but not limited to, hiking, nature
enjoyment and cross-country skiing, that create minimal impacts on the
natural landscape. Standards of conduct are provided to promote
responsible use and enjoyment of these properties by residents and other
users.
§ 110-2. Applicability.
A. This chapter shall establish rules and regulations for conduct on tracts
of land that have been acquired by the Township for open space
preservation and/or designated by the Board of Supervisors as
recreation areas. This chapter establishes rules and regulations for
conduct for:
(1) Haugh Family Farm Open Space.
(2) Patton Woods Natural Recreation Area.
(3) Patton Township Gray's Woods Preserve. [Added 7-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-593]
(4) Toftrees' Rails to Trails and conservation easements. [Added
7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
B. In addition to general rules and regulations for conduct for Township
open space or recreation areas, property-specific rules and regulations
may be promulgated by the Patton Township Board of Supervisors. In
instances of conflict between general rules and regulations and
property-specific rules and regulations, the application of this chapter
shall be in accordance with the property-specific rules and regulations,
excepting that the lack of a prohibition of an activity within the
property-specific rules and regulations shall not be construed to permit
said activity if prohibited elsewhere in this chapter. Property-specific
rules and regulations are provided herein for:
(1) Haugh Family Farm Open Space, § 110-9.
(2) Patton Woods Natural Recreation Area, § 110-10.
(3) Patton Township Gray's Woods Preserve § 110-11. [Added
7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
(4) Toftrees' Rails to Trails and conservation easements § 110-12.
[Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
§ 110-1 (RESERVED) § 110-2
103:199
§ 110-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCRETA — All waste matter eliminated from the bodily system, such as,
but not limited to, sputum, vomit, urine or fecal matter.
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREAS — Shall be deemed to include
all lands, trails, parking areas, structures, fields, woodlots, wetlands and
also entrances and approaches thereto and land or property or structures
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors, and all other land now
or hereafter owned or acquired by Patton Township for open space
preservation or for use as designated recreation areas and specifically
designated by the Township as subject to the rules and regulations
contained herein.
C. In addition to general and property specific rules and regulations
contained herein, certain lands may be subject to additional restrictions
or conditions of use in accordance with a conservation easement or
other instrument. In instances of conflict between general rules and
regulations, property-specific rules and regulations, and restrictions or
conditions of use in accordance with a conservation easement or other
instrument, the application of this chapter shall be in accordance with
the conservation easement or other instrument, excepting that the lack
of a prohibition of an activity within a conservation easement or other
instrument shall not be construed to permit said activity if prohibited
elsewhere in this chapter. The following properties are governed by a
conservation easement or other instrument:
(1) Haugh Family Farm Open Space: Conservation easement recorded
at Book 1912, Pages 0707 to 0722, Centre County Recorder of
Deeds.
(2) Declaration of restrictive covenants and easements between Gray's
Woods Partnership and Patton Township recorded at Book 2211,
Page 944, Centre County Recorder of Deeds. [Added 7-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-593]
(3) Easement agreement between the Seigland Irrevocable Trust,
Patton Development Company I, Patton Development Company II,
Charlestown Partners, and Sherwood LP ("Grantors") and Patton
Township recorded at Book 2210, Page 264, Centre County
Recorder of Deeds. [Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
(4) Easement agreement between State College Friends Limited
Partnership and Patton Township recorded at Book 2211, Page 943,
Centre County Recorder of Deeds. [Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-593]
§ 110-2 PATTON CODE § 110-3
103:200
OWNER/CUSTODIAN CONTROL OF DOG — An off-leash dog under owner/
custodian control shall stop, stand or go to owner as commanded by voice,
whistle or other signal or means.
PERMIT — Any written authorization issued by or under the authority of
the Board of Supervisors permitting specified privilege or activity within a
Township open space or recreation area.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
POLICE OFFICER — Any peace officer of Patton Township or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any employee of the Township appointed
as a special park police officer for the purpose of the enforcement of law
and order within parks, open spaces and recreation areas.
§ 110-4. Interpretation of rules and regulations.
In the interpretation of the rules and regulations affecting open space and
recreation areas, their provisions shall be construed as follows:
§ 110-5. Conduct prohibited.
A. Terms in singular. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
B. Terms in masculine. Any term in the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
C. Extension of rules and regulations. Any requirement or provision of
these rules and regulations relating to any act shall respectively extend
to and include the causing, procuring, aiding or abetting, directly or
indirectly, of such act; or the permitting or the allowing of any minor in
the custody of any persons doing any act prohibited by any provisions
thereof.
D. Acts not unlawful. No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act
necessarily performed by any police officer or employee of the
Township in the line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his
agents or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the
terms of any agreement with the Township.
E. Permits. Any act otherwise prohibited by these rules and regulations,
provided that it is not otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance,
shall be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly in
compliance with the provisions of a permit and to the extent authorized
thereby.
F. State and federal laws. These rules and regulations are in addition to
and supplement all state and federal laws.
A. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace by any act.
§ 110-3 (RESERVED) § 110-5
103:201
B. Immorality and indecency. No person shall do any obscene or indecent
act, or display, expose or distribute any picture, banner or other object
suggestive of sex in a lewd, indecent or immoral way.
C. Unbecoming language. No person shall use threatening, abusive,
insulting, profane or obscene language or words.
D. Soliciting money. No person shall solicit money, subscriptions or
contributions for any purpose unless authorized by permit from the
Board of Supervisors.
E. Controlled substances and alcoholic beverages. No person shall enter a
Township open space or recreation area in an intoxicated condition nor
shall any person have in his possession or drink or use alcoholic
beverages nor shall any person have in his possession or use any
controlled substance.
F. Dangerous conduct. No person shall interfere with, encumber, obstruct
or render dangerous any Township open space or recreation area or
part thereof.
G. Excreta.
(1) No person shall emit, eject or cause to be deposited in any
Township recreation area any excreta of the human body, except in
proper receptacles designated for such purposes.
(2) Any person in control of a leashed or owner/custodian-controlled
dog or in control of an attended, well-broken horse shall remove
any deposited animal excreta on trails or pathways.
H. Improper admission. No person shall gain improper admission to, or
use of, or attempt admission to any Township open space or recreation
area facility for which a charge is made without paying the fixed charge
or price of admission.
I. Motorized vehicles. No use of snowmobiles, minibikes, motorcycles or
any motorized vehicles, recreational or otherwise.
J. Disobeying authorities and signs. No person shall, in any Township
open space or recreation area, disobey a proper order of a police officer
or any employee designated by the Board of Supervisors to give orders.
Nor shall any person in any Township open space or recreation area
disobey, disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation,
warning, prohibition, instruction or direction, posted or displayed by
sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster or when notified or informed as to its
existence by an employee or other authorized person.
K. Camping. Day or overnight camping of any type is prohibited except as
authorized by permit.
L. Safety zones. No person shall hunt for, shoot at, trap, take, chase or
disturb wildlife within 150 yards of any occupied residence, camp,
§ 110-5 PATTON CODE § 110-5
103:202
§ 110-6. Treatment of Township open space or recreation areas.
industrial or commercial building, farmhouse or farm building, school,
playground or sports fields. No person shall shoot into a safety zone,
even if hunting outside of the zone, nor drive game, even without a
firearm or bow within a safety zone. The safety zone for archery hunters
and crossbows is reduced to 50 yards, except around playgrounds,
sports fields, schools, nursery schools or day-care centers, the safety
zone remains 150 yards.
A. No person shall:
(1) Deface, plant, gather, cut, dig, remove, pluck, pull up or out, or
otherwise maliciously injure any plants or parts thereof, including
trees, shrubs, vines, flowering plants and cultivated crops.
(Mushrooms and fruits of berry-producing plants may be picked.)
(2) Break, injure, deface or destroy or cause damage to any building,
cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus,
way-finding map, historical or archeological resource, trail sign or
other appurtenance or mark or write upon any building,
monument, fence, bench or other structure or injure, deface or
remove any property real or personal structure, equipment, signs
or other Township open space or recreation area property.
(3) Occupy, use, construct, place or maintain structures or other
tangible property, except that portable hunting blinds and stands
may be used, provided no damage is caused to tree(s).
(4) Remove or attempt to remove any man-made or natural object,
except wildlife and fish lawfully taken. Objects that may not be
removed include animals, rocks, minerals, sand, and historical or
archaeological artifacts.
(5) Feed wildlife or place any food, fruit, hay, grain, chemical, salt or
other minerals.
B. Setting of fires. No fires shall be set in any Township open space or
recreation area except in areas where fires are designated as permitted
or except as authorized by permit.
C. Discharging in bodies of water. No person shall contaminate, pollute, or
degrade groundwaters or surface waters or waterways.
D. Animals in open space or recreation areas. No person owning or being
custodian of or having control of any animal shall cause or permit same
to go at large in any open space or recreation area, excepting dogs
which are permitted off-leash under owner/custodian control. No
person shall release any domestic animal, captive-bred or captiveraised
game or wildlife.
§ 110-5 (RESERVED) § 110-6
103:203
§ 110-7. Traffic control.
§ 110-8. Regulated uses.
E. Horses. Riders shall keep horses on established trails. No person shall
ride or lead a horse into or upon lawns or other prohibited areas in
Township open space or recreation areas, nor shall any person bring
into Township open space or recreation areas any horse not well
broken, any horse unattended or not mounted or any horse led by a
vehicle.
F. Waste matter. No person shall deposit, drop or leave any papers,
bottles, debris or other waste matter or refuse of any kind in Township
open space or recreation areas or part thereof except in such
receptacles as may be provided for the purpose.
A. Use of motorized vehicles. Motorized vehicles to be operated at a
reasonable speed, not to exceed 15 miles per hour unless otherwise
posted. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any roadway in
any Township open space or recreation area at any rate of speed
greater than is reasonable having regard to the width of the roadway,
traffic and use of such roadway, intersection with other roadways,
weather and other conditions, and in no event shall any vehicle be
operated on such roadway at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour
unless otherwise posted.
B. Parking. Vehicles to be operated on roadways and parked in approved
areas. No person shall operate any vehicle in any part of a Township
open space or recreation area except on roadways established for the
operation of vehicles, nor shall any person park any vehicle in any area
except those specifically designated for parking purposes. Parking is
permitted along Scotia Range Road at pull outs at trailheads.
C. Repairs to vehicles. No person shall make repairs to any vehicle in any
Township open space or recreation area except those of a minor nature,
and then only in cases of emergency.
D. Emergency and maintenance vehicles. Motorized vehicles are
prohibited outside of designated roadways and parking areas in
Township open space and recreation areas, except in cases deemed to
be an emergency or in cases of maintenance as deemed necessary by
police officers of the Township or state or Township employees.
A. Permits. A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as
it may be performed in strict accordance with the written terms and
conditions thereof. Any violation of any law, ordinance or rule or
regulation by the holder or agents of the holder of any permit shall
constitute grounds for revocation, which action shall be final. In case of
revocation, all moneys paid therefor shall, at the option of the Township
Manager, be forfeited and shall leave the violator liable for all damages
or loss suffered in excess of such forfeited or retained money, and such
§ 110-6 PATTON CODE § 110-8
103:204
§ 110-9. Haugh Family Farm open space.
§ 110-10. Patton Woods Natural Recreation Area.
moneys retained or damages paid, or both, shall not relieve such person
from liability to punishment for violation of any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
B. Public events. No person shall conduct, operate, present or manage in
Township open space or recreation areas a parade, drill, maneuver,
public meeting, ceremony, speech, address, public contest, exhibit,
dramatic performance, spectacle, play, motion picture, fair, circus or
show of any kind or nature, band, choir, glee club or orchestra without a
permit.
C. Selling concessions. No person shall in any Township open space or
recreation area exhibit, sell or offer for sale, hire, lease or let out any
object, service or merchandise or anything whatsoever, whether
corporal or incorporal, except under a permit.
D. Advertising. No person shall advertise in any Township open space or
recreation area in any manner whatsoever for any reason whatsoever,
except by permit.
A. Permitted activities:
(1) Agricultural use by lease from the Township.
(2) Walking, horseback riding on trails, cross-country skiing on trails,
nature study, bird watching, fishing and hunting, and bicycling (no
trail obstructions).
(3) Other educational or scientific activities consistent with and in
furtherance of the conservation objectives contained within the
conservation easement.
(4) Maintenance and improvement activities undertaken or approved
by the Township and in accordance with the conservation
stewardship plan.
(5) Dogs off-leash but under owner/custodian control.
B. Prohibited activities:
(1) ATV, snowmobile, dirt bike and other motorized off-road vehicles.
(2) Disturbance or removal of soil, rock and vegetative resources
except in accordance with the conservation stewardship plan.
(3) Disturbance, removal or damage of agricultural crops.
A. Permitted activities:
§ 110-8 (RESERVED) § 110-10
103:205
§ 110-11. Patton Township Gray's Woods Preserve. [Added
7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-59398]
(1) Hunting in compliance with state game regulations from
September 16 to January 31.
(2) Carrying unloaded weapons with safety engaged by hunters to and
from the adjacent State Game Lands 176 and the Haugh Family
Farm open space from February 1 to September 15.
(3) Removing game taken in compliance with state game regulations
on the adjacent Game Lands 176 and the Haugh Family Farm open
space.
(4) Dogs off-leash but under owner/custodian control.
(5) Twenty-four-hour usage, except camping.
B. Prohibited activities:
(1) Hunting from February 1 to September 15.
(2) ATV, snowmobile, dirt bike and other motorized off-road vehicles.
(3) Camping.
A. Permitted activities.
(1) Hunting in compliance with state game regulations.
(2) Walking, horseback riding on trails, cross-country skiing on trails,
nature study, bird watching, fishing and hunting, and bicycling (no
trail obstructions).
(3) Other educational or scientific activities consistent with and in
furtherance of the conservation objectives contained within a
conservation easement.
(4) Maintenance and improvement activities undertaken or approved
by the Township and in accordance with a conservation plan,
stewardship plan or best management practice.
(5) Dogs off-leash but under owner/custodian control.
(6) Twenty-four-hour usage, except camping.
B. Prohibited activities.
(1) ATV, snowmobile, dirt bike and other motorized off-road vehicles.
(2) Disturbance or removal of soil, rock and vegetative resources
except in accordance with a conservation stewardship plan.
98.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 110-11 and
110-12 as §§ 110-15 and 110-16, respectively.
§ 110-10 PATTON CODE § 110-12
103:206
§ 110-12. Toftrees' Rails to Trails and conservation easements.
[Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
§ 110-13. (Reserved)
§ 110-14. (Reserved)
§ 110-15. Temporary restrictions. [Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-593]
In order to preserve open space or recreation areas and facilities, and
protect the safety of users of the open space or recreation areas and their
facilities, the Township Manager shall have the authority to designate open
space or recreation areas and parts thereof as restricted to the use of the
public at certain times as he deems necessary.
§ 110-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-593]
A. Permitted activities.
(1) Walking, cross-country skiing on trails, nature study, bird watching,
and bicycling (no trail obstructions).
(2) Other educational or scientific activities consistent with and in
furtherance of the conservation objectives contained within a
conservation easement.
(3) Maintenance and improvement activities undertaken or approved
by the Township and in accordance with a conservation plan,
stewardship plan or best management practice.
(4) Twenty-four-hour usage, except camping.
B. Prohibited activities.
(1) ATV, snowmobile, dirt bike and other motorized off-road vehicles.
(2) Disturbance or removal of soil, rock and vegetative resources
except in accordance with a conservation stewardship plan.
(3) Hunting and fishing.
(4) Dogs off-leash.
A. Police officers of the Township or state, or Township employees
appointed as special park police, shall have the authority to enforce
these rules and regulations for municipal open space and recreation
areas.
B. Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate
or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding commenced before a
§ 110-12 (RESERVED) § 110-16
103:207
Chapter 112
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 52.
Firearms — See Ch. 76.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 167.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCRETA — All useless matter eliminated from the bodily system as
sputum, urine or fecal matter.
INTOXICATION — A state of any person being drunk, inebriated or under
the influence of alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquors, taken internally
or under the influence of narcotics or drugs.
PARK — The term park or parks unless specifically limited, shall be deemed
to include all parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, stadia, tennis courts, golf
courses, swimming pools, beaches, band shells, music pavilions,
recreational areas and structures, museums, geological and botanical
gardens and also entrances and approaches thereto and land or property
or structures under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Board, and
all other land now or hereafter owned or acquired by Patton Township for
park or recreation purposes and specifically designated by the township as
subject to the rules and regulations contained herein.
PERMIT — Any written authorization issued by or under the authority of the
Director of Parks and Recreation permitting specified park privilege.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
POLICE OFFICER — Any peace officer of Patton Township or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any employee of the Department of Parks
and Recreation appointed as a special police officer for the purpose of the
enforcement of law and order within parks.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter established by Patton Township as promulgated by the Director of
Parks and Recreation under authority herein conferred.
magisterial district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedures, be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35, nor
more than $1,000, plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
§ 110-16 PATTON CODE § 112-2
103:208
§ 112-2. Interpretation of rules and regulations.
In the interpretation of the rules and regulations affecting parks, their
provisions shall be construed as follows:
§ 112-3. Conduct prohibited in parks.
A. Terms in singular. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
B. Terms in masculine. Any term in the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter.
C. Extension of rules and regulations. Any requirement or provision of
these rules and regulations relating to any act shall respectively extend
to and include the causing, procuring, aiding or abetting, directly or
indirectly, of such act; or the permitting or the allowing of any minor in
the custody of any persons, doing any act prohibited by any provisions
thereof.
D. Acts not unlawful. No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act
necessarily performed by any police officer or employee of the
Department of Parks and Recreation in the line of duty or work as such,
or by any person, his agents or employees, in the proper and necessary
execution of the terms of any agreement with the Department of Parks
and Recreation.
E. Permits. Any act otherwise prohibited by these rules and regulations,
provided that it is not otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance,
shall be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly in
compliance with the provisions of a permit and to the extent authorized
thereby.
F. State and federal laws. These rules and regulations are in addition to
and supplement all state and federal laws.
G. Exceptions. Any act otherwise prohibited by these rules and
regulations, provided that it is not otherwise prohibited by law or local
ordinance, shall be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly in
compliance with the provisions of a resolution by the Board of
Supervisors enumerating the park(s) and exemption(s) and to the
extent authorized thereby. [Added 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-463]
A. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace in any park by
any act.
B. Immorality and indecency. No person shall do any obscene or indecent
act in any park, or display, expose or distribute any picture, banner or
other object suggestive of sex in a lewd, indecent, immoral way or enter
a comfort station or toilet set apart for the use of the opposite sex, nor
shall any person loiter in any comfort station or toilet at any time nor
shall any person dress or undress in any park except dressing rooms
provided for such persons.
§ 112-2 (RESERVED) § 112-3
103:209
C. Unbecoming language. No person shall use threatening, abusive,
insulting, profane or obscene language or words in any parks.
D. Soliciting money. No person shall solicit money, subscriptions or
contributions for any purpose in any park unless authorized by permit
from the Director of Parks and Recreation.
E. Intoxication. No person shall enter a park in an intoxicated condition
nor shall any person have in his possession or drink or use in any park
any alcoholic beverage nor shall any person have in his possession or
use in any park, narcotics or drugs of any kind.
F. Weapons, projectiles, etc. No person shall perform the following actions
within parks or playgrounds without having previously obtained written
consent and approval of the Director of the Centre Region Parks and
Recreation Department: carry or discharge an air rifle or air pistol, a
paintball gun or paintball marker; fireworks (including rockets) or other
missile-propelling instruments or explosives, a slingshot or a bow and
arrow, or other dangerous weapons, excepting firearms, which have
such properties as to cause annoyance or injury to any person or
property; provided, further, that no person shall discharge any firearm
within parks or playgrounds. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-528]
G. Throwing missiles. No person shall, in any park, throw, cast, lay, deposit
or propel any missile except in the performance of an authorized
recreational activity.
H. Dangerous conduct. No person shall interfere with, encumber, obstruct
or render dangerous any park or part thereof.
I. Excreta. No person shall emit, eject or cause to be deposited in any
park, any excreta of the human body, except in proper receptacles
designated for such purposes.
J. Improper admission. No person shall gain improper admission to, or
use of, or attempted admission to any park facility, for which a charge is
made, without paying the fixed charge or price of admission.
K. No use of snowmobiles, minibikes, motorcycles or any vehicle
recreational or otherwise except on designated roads, trails or areas set
aside for their use.
L. Disobeying authorities and signs. No person shall, in any park, disobey
a proper order of a police officer or any park and recreation employee
designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation to give orders. Nor
shall any person in any park disobey, disregard or fail to comply with
any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction,
posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster or when
notified or informed as to its existence by a park employee or other
authorized person.
§ 112-3 PATTON CODE § 112-3
103:210
§ 112-4. Treatment of park property.
M. Hunting. It is unlawful to hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture
or kill or aid or assist in the capturing or killing of in any manner, any
wild bird or wild animal of any description, either game or otherwise.
[Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-563.5]
N. Camping. Day or overnight camping of any type is prohibited except as
authorized by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
O. Remote-controlled or tethered model aircraft. Remote-controlled or
tethered model aircraft shall not be operated in any park without a
permit for the operation thereof issued by the Director of the Centre
Region Parks and Recreation Department. [Added 5-25-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-528]
A. Defacing, breaking and injuring trees, plants, benches, etc. No person
shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock,
building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure,
apparatus or property or pluck, pull up or out, take or remove any
shrub, bush, plant or flower or mark or write upon any building,
monument, fence, bench or other structure or injure, deface or remove
any property real or personal or any natural growth, structure,
equipment, animals, signs or other park property.
B. Setting of fires. No fires shall be set in any park except in areas where
fires are designated as permitted or except as authorized by permit
issued under the authority of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
C. Discharging in bodies of water. No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop or
discharge into or leave in any body of water in any park or in any storm
sewer or drain flowing into said water or in any gutter, sewer or basin,
any substance, matter or thing whatsoever.
D. Animals in parks. No person owning or being custodian or having
control of any animal, livestock or poultry, shall cause or permit same to
go at large in any park. A dog or other domesticated animal may be
brought into a park provided that such animal is continuously
restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, except that no
dog or other such animal shall be permitted in the immediate vicinity of
bathhouses, wading pools and children's play areas or in any area
designated by signs as prohibited areas.
E. Horses. No person shall ride or lead a horse into or upon lawns or other
prohibited areas in any park, nor shall any person bring into any park,
any horse not well broken, any horse unattended or not mounted or any
horse led by a vehicle.
F. Waste matter. No person shall deposit, drop or leave any papers,
bottles, debris or other waste matter or refuse of any kind in any park
or part thereof except in such receptacles as may be provided for the
purpose.
§ 112-3 (RESERVED) § 112-5
103:211
§ 112-5. Traffic control.
§ 112-6. Regulated uses.
A. Vehicles to be operated at reasonable speed, not to exceed 15 miles per
hour. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any roadway in any
park at any rate of speed greater than is reasonable having regard to
the width of the roadway, traffic and use of such roadway, intersection
with other roadways, weather and other conditions, and in no event
shall any vehicle be operated on such highway at a speed in excess of 15
miles per hour.
B. Repairs to vehicles. No person shall in any park make repairs to any
vehicle except those of a minor nature, and then only in cases of
emergency.
C. Vehicles to be operated on roadways and parked in approved areas. No
person shall operate any vehicle in any part of a park except on
roadways, established for the operation of vehicles, nor shall any
person park any vehicle in any area except those specifically designated
for parking purposes.
A. Permits. A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as
it may be performed in strict accordance with the written terms and
conditions thereof. Any violation of any law, ordinance or rule or
regulation by the holder or agents of the holder of any permit shall
constitute grounds for revocation, which action shall be final. In case of
revocation, all moneys paid therefor shall, at the option of the
Department of Parks and Recreation, be forfeited and shall leave the
violator liable for all damages or loss suffered in excess of such forfeited
or retained money, and such moneys retained or damages paid, or both,
and shall not relieve such person from liability to, punishment for
violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
B. Public events. No person shall conduct, operate, present or manage in
any park a parade, drill, maneuver, public meeting, ceremony, speech,
address, public contest, exhibit, dramatic performance, spectacle, play,
motion picture, fair, circus or show of any kind or nature, band, choir,
glee club or orchestra without a permit.
C. Picnics. All organized picnics or outings shall be authorized by permits
obtained previous to entering any park.
D. Baseball and softball fields. All organized teams, leagues, agencies,
schools, churches and other groups must obtain a permit for these
facilities before announcing schedules.
E. Selling concessions. No person shall in any park exhibit, sell or offer for
sale, hire, lease or let out any object, service or merchandise or
anything whatsoever, whether corporal or incorporal, except under a
permit.
§ 112-5 PATTON CODE § 112-6
103:212
§ 112-7. Director of Parks and Recreation.
In order to provide for equitable use of park facilities, preserve park areas
and facilities, and protect the safety of users of the parks and their facilities,
the Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the following authority, the
enumeration of which shall not restrict the general authority and control of
the Director over parks.
§ 112-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 129]
F. Advertising. No person shall advertise in any park in any manner
whatsoever for any reason whatsoever, except by permit.
G. Games in designated areas. No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick,
play with or strike any game ball whatsoever or engage in any sport,
game or competition except in places and during the time designated
therefor. Nor shall a person engage in or play a game or other sport or
contest of a nature different from the one for which the designated area
was created, except in such areas as are officially set aside for
diversified games.
A. To fix time. To fix the times when the parks or parts thereof shall be
open to public use.
B. To restrict use. To designate parks and parts thereof as restricted to the
use of certain portions of the public at certain times as he sees fit.
C. To issue permits. Under uniform conditions to be prescribed by him, to
issue permits for regulated uses as hereinbefore enumerated.
D. To fix charge and collect fees. To fix charge, and collect such fees and
deposits for the use of park areas or facilities or privileges as he deems
advisable to help defray the expense of the parks and their facilities.
A. Police officers of the township or state shall have the authority, or park
employees appointed as special park police, to enforce these rules and
regulations for parks.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation prescribed by the Township of Patton, pursuant thereto,
shall for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day's
continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
§ 112-6 (RESERVED) § 112-8
103:213
Chapter 116
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 149.
§ 116-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling, or has in his
possession or control, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from
house to house or by visitation to private residences or by entering in
or upon private property; within the said Township.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery or for
subscriptions or contributions upon any of the streets or sidewalks or
from house to house or by visitation to private residences or by entering
in or upon private property within the Township of Patton and shall
further mean the seeking or taking of contracts or orders for home or
other building repairs, improvement and alterations and also orders or
contracts for any mechanical, electrical, plumbing or heating device or
equipment for house or other building improvements or repairs, upon
or from the places aforesaid within said Township.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.
B. The words "soliciting" and "peddling" shall not apply to:
(1) Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own products.
(2) The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products.
(3) The sale of goods, wares, and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
§ 112-8 PATTON CODE § 116-1
103:214
§ 116-2. License required.
No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township of Patton
without first having taken out a license as herein provided.
§ 116-3. Application for license. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
113]
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
of Patton shall first make application to the Manager for a license. If such
person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county officer,
he shall, in making such application, exhibit a valid county license. Said
application shall be upon a blank provided by the Township Secretary
and shall contain at least the following information verified by oath or
affirmation:
(4) Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military
service who complies with the Acts of Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of 1867, April 8, P.L. 50, as
amended,99 and who procures from the Prothonotary of the proper
county a certificate in pursuance of said Act of Assembly.
(5) The seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for insurance.
(6) Persons, corporations, partnerships and associations, their agents
or employees, who have complied with the provisions of the Act of
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of 1935, P.L. 644,
as amended,100 governing solicitations for charitable, benevolent,
patriotic or other purposes.
(7) Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants for resale to an ultimate consumer.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
B. Permanent address.
C. Name of employer or a statement that such applicant is self-employed.
D. The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise offered for
sale.
99.Editor's Note: 60 P.S. § 61 and § 62, regarding military veterans exemption, was repealed
Nov. 24, 1992, by P.L. 717, No. 108, § 3.
100. Editor's Note: The Charitable Organization Reform Act 10 P.S. § 161.1 et seq. was
repealed. See now 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes
Act.
§ 116-1 (RESERVED) § 116-3
103:215
§ 116-4. Waiting period. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 113;
amended 11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-602]
§ 116-5. Fee. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 113]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the license fee, to be set
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be paid to the Township. A
separate application shall be filed and a separate license fee shall be paid
by each person who shall actually conduct the soliciting or peddling and
shall apply where an employer desires to secure licenses for his employees,
agents or servants.
§ 116-6. Term of license. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 113]
The license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the period as
stated in the license, and upon the expiration of any license, if the person
holding the same shall desire to continue or renew soliciting or peddling he
shall be required to file a new application for a license and pay a new license
fee. Such license may be issued, in advance, upon payment in advance of
the license fee as set by resolution.
§ 116-7. Contents of license; license to be carried by peddler or
solicitor.
Such license when issued shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold or
services to be rendered by the licensee. Every solicitor or peddler shall at
all times, when engaged in soliciting or peddling in the Township of Patton,
carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit it upon request, to all
E. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the nature of the
offense or offenses and the punishment or punishments imposed there.
F. The type of vehicle to be used, if any.101
A. No license shall be issued or denied under this chapter until a period of
at least 24 hours has elapsed from the time the application has been
filed with the Police Department.
B. Responsibility of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, shall conduct an investigation using the references and
information provided by the applicant and other sources to determine if
the applicant is of good character, has been convicted of any crime(s) or
has conducted his/her business in a fraudulent or unsatisfactory
manner. Based on the investigation, the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, shall either recommend approval or denial of the license and
the reasons thereof.
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, requiring the applicant to submit to fingerprinting
and furnish a photograph, which subsection immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 116-3 PATTON CODE § 116-7
103:216
police officers, Township officials and citizens. No solicitor or peddler shall
engage in selling any product or service not mentioned on such license.
§ 116-8. Hours of operation.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall engage
in soliciting or peddling on any day of the week before 9:00 a.m. or after
8:00 p.m. During the time of the year when Eastern standard time is
effective, the aforesaid hours shall be Eastern standard time, and during the
time of the year when Daylight saving time is effective, the aforesaid hours
shall be daylight saving time.
§ 116-9. Parking of vehicles.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall park
any vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the Township
in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares, services or
merchandise; nor shall any such person place or deposit any refuse on any
such streets, highways or alleys; nor shall any such person maintain or keep
a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street or
alley in the Township for longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to
persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 116-10. Fixed locations prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall occupy
any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks of the streets, highways, alleys
or sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of soliciting or peddling with
or without any stand or counter.
§ 116-11. Records. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 113]
The Manager shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter
and the Township Police shall apply daily for a list of licenses issued
hereunder since the previous day. The Township police shall supervise the
activities of all holders of such licenses.
§ 116-12. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 8-12-1975
by Ord. No. 113]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time by the Manager of the Township of Patton upon proof being furnished
to him that the application for the license contained false information or
that the applicant or licensee was convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude after the issuance of such license and that the licensee was
convicted of disorderly conduct under any law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any Ordinance of the Township of Patton.
§ 116-7 (RESERVED) § 116-13
103:217
§ 116-13. Noise.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this chapter shall hawk
or cry his wares or services upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the
Township nor shall be use any loudspeaker, bell, whistle or other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 116-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
113; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-441]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate or
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding commenced before a magisterial
district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures,
be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35, nor more than $1,000, plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 118
PEST CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 52.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
§ 118-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pest Control Ordinance."
§ 118-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
OCCUPANT — A person or persons who use or occupy a building or
structure whether as owner or tenant. A tenant who uses a part of a
building structure shall be deemed the occupant of that part of which he has
actual or constructive possession. The owner, agent or other person having
custody or control of a building structure shall be deemed an occupant of
that part that is vacant for common usage of two or more tenants.
OWNER — Includes the agent operating and managing the building
structure as well as the legal owner.
PEST CONTROL OPERATOR — Any person or company who engages for
compensation in the act of controlling pests.
§ 116-13 PATTON CODE § 118-2
103:218
PEST HARBORAGE — A place that provides shelter or protection for pests
and favorable conditions for their breeding.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any insects, rodents, fungi,
weeds or other pests.
PESTS — Any organism (plant or animal) that adversely influences the
health or best interests of man; pests of special significance in this light are:
Norway Rats, Rattus norvegicus (Berkenhout), black rats, Rattus ratturs
Linnaeus, house mice, Mus musculus Linnaeus, pigeons, Columba Livia
Gmelin, the house fly, Musca domestica linnaeus, mosquitoes (Culicinae)
and ragweeds of the genus Ambrosia, family Compositae.
§ 118-3. Investigation of complaints. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 114]
Whenever a complaint of a dangerous or unsanitary health condition related
to rodents or other pests or disease organisms borne by pest species is
reported to the Board of Supervisors of Patton Township, the Supervisors
shall make an investigation of the same and shall seek advice from
specialists or from the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture,
Environmental Protection or Health as to the necessity and means of
dealing with the complaint within 30 days after the complaint has been
received.
§ 118-4. Abatement of nuisances; notice and hearing.
A. Whenever the Supervisors of the Township of Patton have received a
complaint as set forth in § 118-3 of this chapter and, as a result of their
investigation, have determined that a building structure and/or
premises represents a pest harborage, they shall serve a notice upon
the owner or any other persons in possession of said building structure
or premises, stating the complaint and that they have determined that
the same constitutes a pest harborage and shall require the owner or
persons in possession of the same to show cause, if any they have, at a
time and place specified, not to exceed 30 days thereafter, why it should
not be determined that said condition is a health menace and
constitutes a public nuisance.
B. The owner and/or persons in possession of said building structure or
premises have a right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear
in person or otherwise and give such testimony at such hearing as they
so desire. The Supervisors shall hear the answer to such complaint and
shall make a determination whether or not the condition constitutes a
public nuisance by reason of the pest infestation. If the Supervisors
determine that such a building structure or premises constitutes a
public nuisance by reason of a pest infestation, the Supervisors shall
order the owner and/or persons in possession of said premises to abate
the same within a specified period of time. If the owner and/or persons
in possession fail to comply with said order by the date specified, then
§ 118-2 (RESERVED) § 118-4
103:219
§ 118-5. Complaints.
It shall be the responsibility of the citizens of Patton Township to request
the Supervisors of the Township to undertake an investigation of the pest
problem that any citizen considers to be a health hazard; such complaint
must be in writing and bear the signatures of five or more residents and
taxpayers of the Township of Patton, and such complaint shall contain all
of the relevant facts relating to the pest control problem. Such complaint
shall be presented the Supervisors of said Township at any of their regular
meetings.
§ 118-6. Use of pesticides by pest control operators and others.
It shall be the responsibility of all pest control operators and others using
pesticides in Patton Township to follow label recommendations approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration and the Department
of Agriculture of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It is suggested that
those using pesticides with which they are unfamiliar should contact their
State Agricultural Experiment Station or their county farm agent for
instructions on the safe use of such materials.
§ 118-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
114; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
the Supervisors of Patton Township may employ a pest control operator
to abate such nuisance and they shall have the right to enter upon
private premises for such purpose and the costs of the same may be
placed upon the owner and/or person in possession of such premises,
and the Supervisors shall have the right to file a lien for the costs of
abating such nuisance in the same manner as other Township liens are
filed and collected as now provided by law.
A. No pest control operator or other person shall use potentially explosive
pesticides for pest control within any building or structure without first
notifying the Township Police Official and the Fire Department.
B. No pest control operator or other persons shall undertake a pest control
program without observing proper precautions. These precautions shall
include notifying persons having immediate charge and/or occupants of
a building structure or premises of the pesticide used, marking
containers "poison" when they contain a hazardous pesticide,
accounting for all poison containers upon completion of a treatment,
disposal of all empty and partially used poison containers so that they
pose no hazard to humans, animals or other valuable plants and closing
and posting building structures and premises with warning signs that
are undergoing treatment with hazardous pesticides.
§ 118-4 PATTON CODE § 118-7
103:220
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 118-8. Inspections.
The duly appointed representative of the Supervisors of Patton Township
have a right to inspect a building structure or premises reported to be a pest
harborage as described in § 118-5 of this chapter. A pest control operator
employed by the Supervisors of Patton Township to abate a pest infestation
shall have the right to carry out the necessary remedial program without
interference from owners or occupants. The Township police officials shall
make the necessary legal arrangements if they are required.
Chapter 123
(RESERVED)
Chapter 127
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND FIRE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 58.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Holding tanks — See Ch. 87.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Pest control — See Ch. 118.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 136.
Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
§ 127-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern property
maintenance code, which will prescribe effective standards and minimum
requirements for buildings and premises in the municipality. This code is
designed to cover every facet of housing and property maintenance in order
to insure that persons in or visiting the municipality are provided with a safe
and sanitary environment.
§ 127-2. Repeal of ordinances.
The provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2010-519 and 2011-529, as amended, that
provide for the adoption and modification of the Centre Region Building
Safety and Property Maintenance Code /2010 are hereby repealed.
§ 118-7 (RESERVED) § 127-3
123:221
§ 127-3. Adoption of Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 edition.
It is hereby adopted by Patton Township for the purposes set forth in § 127-1
that certain code known as the "Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 edition," as promulgated by the Centre Region
Council of Governments, except such provisions which may be in conflict
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations
issued by an agency of the Commonwealth by virtue of such laws and which
provide a more stringent standard and which are required to be observed
by the municipality or the provisions of other ordinances of this jurisdiction
which are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, regardless of the
strictness of the provisions. The provisions of the Centre Region Building
Safety and Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as amended, are set
forth in the copy presently on file in the office of the Patton Township
Manager, and are hereby adopted as fully as if set forth in length herein,
and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of Patton Township, except as
modified by this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 127-4. Amendments; deletions; alterations.
§ 127-5. Health officer.
Any health officer of a participating municipality which has adopted the
Centre Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance Code, 2017
edition, as amended, may enforce the provisions of this Code.
A. The following sections of the Centre Region Building Safety and
Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as amended, are deleted in
its entirety:
(1) Section 302.11 Trees.
(2) Table 404.5.2 Minimum habitable space (square feet [square
meters]) applies to all properties receiving a rental housing permit
for the first time after January 1, 2003.
(3) Section 702.6.1 Three story one or two family dwelling.
(4) Section 807 Student home license.
B. The following sections of the Centre Region Building Safety and
Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as amended, are amended to
read as follows:
(1) Table 404.5.1 Minimum habitable space (square feet [square
meters]) applies to all properties receiving a rental housing permit
for the first time after January 1, 1998.
§ 127-3 PATTON CODE § 127-6
123:222
§ 127-6. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 1, 2017.
§ 127-7. Severability clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Centre Region Building Safety and
Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, as cited
in § 127-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired, or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 136
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agreement for enforcement of pretreatment
program — See Ch. 4, Art. V.
Authorities — See Ch. 10.
Construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
§ 127-6 (RESERVED) § 127-7
123:223

ARTICLE I
Connection to Sewer System
[Adopted 1-24-1968 by Ord. No. 58]
§ 136-1. Purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Township.
§ 136-2. Definitions
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — University Area Joint Authority, a Pennsylvania Municipality
Authority.[Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within this Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including
such ground, surface or stormwater as may be present.
LATERAL — That part of the sewage collection system extending from a
sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line or,
if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of,
or place in, a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property, including such ground-, surface or storm water
as may be present.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewage collection
system, used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time,
for collecting, pumping, transporting and/or disposing of sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned,
maintained and operated by the Authority.
§ 136-1 (RESERVED) § 136-2
123:225
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania, a
political subdivision, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 136-3. Use of public sewers required.
§ 136-4. Discharge of sewage and industrial waste.
§ 136-5. Privy vaults, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tank or other
receptacles.
A. The owner of any improved property which is located in this Township
and is accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet of
the Sewage Collection System, shall connect such improved property
herewith, in such manner as this Township and the Authority may
require, within 60 days after notice to such owner from this Township to
make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all Sanitary
Sewage and Industrial Wastes from such improved property, subject to
such limitations and restrictions as shall be established by this
Township or the Authority, from time to time.
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer, shall be
required under Subsection A to be conducted into a sewer, subject to
such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or
otherwise shall be established by this Township or the Authority from
time to time.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of § 136-3.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of § 136-3, except where suitable treatment has been provided
which is satisfactory to this Township.
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
§ 136-3 to be connected to a sewer.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this
Township, shall be cleansed and filled under the direction and
supervision of this Township; and any such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if
required by this Township, cleansed and filled, shall constitute a
nuisance and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the
expense of the owner of such improved property.
§ 136-2 PATTON CODE § 136-6
123:226
§ 136-6. Connection of receptacles to sewer prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at any
time shall be connected with a sewer.
§ 136-7. Notice to connect. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 118]
The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in § 136-3, shall consist of a written or printed document requiring such
connection in accordance with the provisions of this article and specifying
that such connection shall be made within 60 days from the date such notice
is given. Such notice may be given at any time after a sewer is in place
which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for
treatment and disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice
shall be served upon the owner either by personal service or by registered
mail or by such other method as at the time may be provided by law.
§ 136-8. Connections to be separate; exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a building
sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building sewer
shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for good
sanitary reasons or other good cause shown and then only after special
permission of this Township and the Authority, in writing, shall have been
secured.
§ 136-9. Costs of connection.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne
by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner
shall indemnify and save harmless this Township and the Authority from all
loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a
sewer.
§ 136-10. Point of connection.
§ 136-11. Completion of connection by Township; billing; lien.
If the owner of any improved property located in this Township and
accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet from the
A. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by the Authority and where the lateral is provided.
B. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the
same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral
shall be made secure and watertight.
§ 136-6 (RESERVED) § 136-11
123:227
sewage collection system, after 60 days' notice from this Township, in
accordance with § 136-3, shall fail to connect such improved property, as
required, this Township may make such connection and may collect from
such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In such case, this Township
shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the
cost of the construction of such connection to the owner of the improved
property to which connection has been so made, which bill shall be payable
forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by the owner of such improved
property to pay said bill, this Township shall file a municipal lien for said
construction within six months of the date of the completion of the
construction of said connection, the same to be subject to all respects to the
general law provided for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 136-12. Existing house sewer lines.
Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is required,
shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device, the existing
house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such sewage
disposal system or device and attachment shall be made, with proper
fittings, to continue such house sewer line, as a building sewer.
§ 136-13. Inspections; cost.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved
by this Township and the Authority. If any part of a building sewer is
covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to
be connected to a sewer.
§ 136-14. Maintenance of building sewers.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in
a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
§ 136-15. Excavations.
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Streets,
sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner
of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this
Township.
§ 136-16. Refusal to remedy unsatisfactory condition.
If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this Township
or the authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of such notice, this
Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to discharge
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the sewage collection system
§ 136-11 PATTON CODE § 136-16
123:228
until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the
satisfaction of this Township and the Authority.
§ 136-17. Adoption of rules and regulations authorized.
This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewage collection system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be
construed as part of this article.
§ 136-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
118; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 136-19. Recovery of fines and costs.
Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law.
§ 136-16 (RESERVED) § 136-19
123:229

ARTICLE II
Individual and Community Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 5-27-1975 by Ord. No. 104]
§ 136-20. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Patton Township
Ordinance Implementing Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
§ 136-21. Definitions.
§ 136-22. Permits.
A. The definitions as set forth in Section 2 of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, being the Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as
amended,102 are incorporated herein by reference.
B. In addition to the definition set forth in the Act, the following words and
phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, the Act of January 24,
1966, P.L. 1535, hereinbefore or hereinafter amended.103
APPROVING BODY — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
IRSIS — An individual residential spray irrigation system (or systems)
as further defined and described in the Act. IRSIS shall be considered
an on-lot sewage disposal system.[Added 2-12-1997 by Ord. No.
97-337]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
A. Notwithstanding Section 7 of the Act,104 no person shall install an
individual or community sewage disposal system or construct any
building in which an individual or community sewage disposal system is
to be installed within the Township without first obtaining a permit
indicating that the site and the plans and specifications of such system
are in compliance with the provisions of this article, the Act and the
standards, rules and regulations adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental protection.
B. Applications for a permit shall be in writing, to the Secretary of the
Township, and shall be made on a formal application blank which shall
be furnished by the Secretary of the Township and each application
shall include such data as shall be prescribed by the technical
standards adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Environmental Protection.
102. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.2.
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7.
§ 136-20 (RESERVED) § 136-22
123:231
§ 136-23. Inspections.
Inspections of applications and the site and the installation itself shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 of the Act. The Township
Supervisors shall from time to time designate and appoint a Sewage
Enforcement Officer who shall carry out the inspections in accordance with
this article, with Section 7 of the Act and also with the rules and regulations
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection, which are incorporated herein.
§ 136-24. Rules and regulations. [Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord. No.
87-223; 2-12-1997 by Ord. No. 97-337]
This Township hereby enacts and ordains and adopts as part of this article,
the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, including Title 25, Chapters 71,
72 and 73, as amended. All such rules, regulations and standards are
incorporated in this article by reference. Copies of these regulations shall
be available for inspection at the time of application for a permit. This
Township further reserves the right to adopt, by resolution, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
individual and community sewage disposal systems, which additional rules
and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be construed as part of
this article. In the event of conflicting requirements, the more stringent
requirement shall prevail.
§ 136-25. Fees.
C. Issuance of permits shall be in accordance with Section 7 of the Act and
all of the provisions of Section 7 of the Act are incorporated herein by
reference.105
D. As a condition to the issuance of a permit for a property to be served by
an IRSIS: [Added 2-12-1997 by Ord. No. 97-337]
(1) An installation and maintenance agreement, in a form acceptable
to DEP and the Township Board of Supervisors or its designee, shall
be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
(2) Surety shall be provided in the amount required by the Township's
rules and regulations for IRSIS, in order to ensure the property
operation and maintenance of the system.
A. Permit fees. The applicant shall pay a fee with the application for the
permit, which fee shall be made payable to the Township and shall
cover the ordinary administration of this article, including initial
completion of the application, issuance of the permit, and closer
inspection of premises by the Sewage Enforcement Officer for a
standard subsurface sewerage system. Such fee shall be established
105. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7.
§ 136-22 PATTON CODE § 136-25
123:232
§ 136-26. Adoption of installation and construction standards.
[Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord. No. 87-223]
from time to time by resolution of the Township, and shall be paid
prior to any on-site soil testing.106 [Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord. No.
87-223]
B. Additional inspections and tests. In the event that the municipality
deems it necessary to make additional inspections or to make additional
percolation tests or any other tests as required to be made by the
applicant under provisions of this article or the Act and the regulations
of the Department of Environmental Protection, the applicant shall pay
to the Township the actual cost of such additional inspections or such
percolation tests or other tests made by the Township, which shall be
paid to the Township prior to the issuance of the permit. [Amended
9-23-1987 by Ord. No. 87-223]
C. Denial of permit. In the event that the application for the subsurface
sewerage system is denied and the applicant desires to install an
alternate subsurface sewerage system, a separate application and fee
shall be required before a permit is issued. Such additional fees shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the Township.107
A. In addition to the standards presented in Chapter 73, as amended, of
the Department of Environmental Protection Rules and Regulations, the
following provisions shall apply in Patton Township. In the event of a
conflict between the provisions hereinafter presented and standards
within Chapter 73, the more stringent standard will apply, as
determined by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
B. Dual absorption areas. After the effective date of this article, individual
on-lot sewage system permits will only be issued if two acceptable
absorption areas are identified on the lot for which the permit is
requested. Each area must be of sufficient capacity to handle the entire
effluent loading and must have piping which distinctly separates it from
the other. Both areas must be staked out during residence construction
to assure their integrity. Destruction of one of the absorption areas
during construction will result in revocation of the building permit
unless a replacement area is found. Furthermore, all deeds must carry
a restrictive covenant assuring the alternate bed area is identified and
protected from subsequent construction activity.
(1) In the case of a proposed subdivision plan, evidence of two
acceptable absorption areas per lot will be required before the plan
is approved. Both areas must accurately be shown on the
subdivision plan.
106. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
107. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 136-25 (RESERVED) § 136-26
123:233
§ 136-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord. No.
87-223; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or of the
Act or the rules, regulations or standards promulgated hereunder, or who
resists or interferes with any officer, agent or employee of the Township in
the performance of his duties shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before any District Justice in the county in which the offense
was committed, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and court
(2) In the case of a lot which exists prior to the effective date of this
amendment, the requirements of this section will apply unless a
replacement area cannot be found. A permit may be issued under
such circumstances, and such permit must bear a notation that no
suitable replacement area exist.
(3) At the option of the homebuilder, the dual absorption area
requirement may be met by installing both at the same time. In
those cases, gate valves shall be installed in the effluent piping
from the septic tank to control the flow so that only one area is in
use at a time.
(4) In the case of an IRSIS, a second acceptable absorption area will
not be required. The IRSIS absorption area shall be clearly
demarked on the final subdivision plan. [Added 2-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-337]
C. All excavation for absorption areas shall be with hoe-type equipment to
protect the soil within the area. Trucks and other heavy equipment shall
not run on excavated areas.
D. The piping used within gravity distribution drainfields shall be rigid and
perforated. Slotted pipe is not acceptable, nor is coiled plastic pipe. The
rigid pipe shall have standard dimension ratio no greater than 41.
E. The piping used for building sewers, across backfill areas and under
traffic areas shall be Schedule 40 plastic pipe or an equivalent
acceptable to the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
F. Effective with adoption of Ordinance 2007-487, the following
construction standards shall apply: [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-487]
(1) Existing metal septic tanks shall be replaced with a precast
concrete tank upon notice from the SEO.
(2) All access and inspection ports to septic tank and other belowground
system appurtenances shall be extended to within 12
inches of ground surface.
(3) An inlet inspection port shall be provided on all septic tanks.
(4) An outlet filter shall be provided on all septic tanks.
§ 136-26 PATTON CODE § 136-27
123:234
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, and not more than $600 and court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, to be paid to the Township of
Patton. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
§ 136-28. Variances. [Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord. No. 87-223]
Any request for a variance from the requirements of this article shall be
made to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
§ 175-65, Zoning.
§ 136-29. Proceedings by Township. [Amended 9-23-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-223]
In accordance with Section 11 of the Act,108 the Township shall have the
power to institute in the Court of Common Pleas of Centre County,
Pennsylvania, proceedings in law or in equity to restrain any and all
violations of Section 7 of the Act109 and the provisions of this article. Such
proceedings shall be instituted in the name of the Township of Patton.
108. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.11.
109. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7.
§ 136-27 (RESERVED) § 136-29
123:235

ARTICLE III
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 6-27-1990 by Ord. No. 90-253]
§ 136-30. Short title; introduction; purpose.
§ 136-31. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT 247 — The Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., known at the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code."[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-487]
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A certified sewage enforcement officer, code
enforcement officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, municipal
secretary or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated by
the municipality to function within specified limits as the agent of the
municipality to carry out the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Patton Township, Centre County,
Pennsylvania.
CODES ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — An individual employed by the
municipality to administer and enforce other ordinances in the municipality.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "A Sewage Management
Program for Patton Township."
B. As mandated by the municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§§ 691.1), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as "Act
537"), municipalities have the power and the duty to provide for
adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection of the
public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for Patton
Township, entitled the "1990 Centre Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities
Plan" indicates that it is necessary to formulate and implement a
sewage management program to effectively prevent and abate water
pollution and hazards to the public health caused by improper
treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the inspection, maintenance
and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems, to further permit
the municipality to intervene in situations which are public nuisances or
hazards to the public health and to establish penalties and appeal
procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
§ 136-30 (RESERVED) § 136-31
123:237
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other
site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of this commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into
groundwaters of this commonwealth, into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into the building connected to the system or
otherwise causes a nuisance hazard to the public health or pollution of
ground or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the
conditions noted above occur for any length of time during any period of the
year.
MUNICIPALITY — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — The 1990 Centre Region Act 537
Sewage Facilities Plan.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of sewage
involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the clarified sewage into
the soil for final treatment and disposal, including both individual sewage
systems and community sewage systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
district, authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the
term "person" shall include the members of an association, partnership or
firm and the officers of any local agency or municipal, public or private
corporation for profit or not for profit.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or replace
an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA — A portion of a lot or a developed property, sized to
allow the installation of subsurface sewage disposal area, which is reserved
to allow that installation in the event of the malfunction of the originally
installed on-lot sewage disposal system.
SEPTAGE — The residual scum and sludge pumped from septic
systems.[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-487]
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
§ 136-31 PATTON CODE § 136-31
123:238
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams Law," as
amended.110
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The official of the local
agency who issues and reviews permit applications and conducts such
investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement Act 537 and
the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of a municipality
for which a sewage management program is defined by a resolution of the
municipality.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal and
administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of this article
and other administrative requirements adopted by the municipality to
effectively enforce and administer this article.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall include
as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts remaining after other lots
have been subdivided therefrom.
§ 136-32. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the municipality identified as a Sewage Management District.
Within such an area or areas, the provisions of this article shall apply to
all persons owning any property serviced by an on-lot sewage disposal
system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage disposal
systems. If necessary, the entire municipality may be identified as a Sewage
Management District.
§ 136-33. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and the plans and
specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act111 and the standards adopted
pursuant to that Act.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 690.1 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 136-31 (RESERVED) § 136-33
123:239
§ 136-34. Replacement areas.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer. If
72 hours have elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the
Sewage Enforcement Officer issuing the permit received notification of
completion of construction, the applicant may cover said system or
structure unless permission has been specifically refused by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
C. The municipality may require applicants for sewage permits to notify
the municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer of the schedule
for construction of the permitted on-lot sewage disposal system so that
inspection(s), in addition to the final inspection required by Act 537,
may be scheduled and performed by the municipality's certified Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the municipality or
its Codes Enforcement Officer for a new building which will contain
sewage generating facilities until a valid sewage permit has been
obtained from the municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until the municipality's Codes
Enforcement Officer and the structure's owner receive from the
municipality's Sewage Enforcement Officer either a permit for
alteration or replacement of the existing sewage disposal system or
written notification that such a permit will not be required. The
certified Sewage Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the
proposed alteration or conversion of the structure will result in
increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a certified Sewage Enforcement
Officer employed by the municipality for that express purpose. The
Department of Environmental Protection shall be notified by the
municipality as to the identity of their currently employed certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
G. No final Act 247 approval of a subdivision or land development plan
may be made and no recording of deeds for newly created lots
completed until formal Act 537 planning approval by DEP is received.
[Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-487]
A. Any supplements or revisions to the municipality's Official Sewage
Facilities Plan, which are prepared pursuant to the applicable
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for subdivision or development of land within an identified
Sewage Management District, shall provide for the testing,
§ 136-33 PATTON CODE § 136-34
123:240
§ 136-35. Inspections. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-487]
identification and reservation of an area of each lot or developed
property suitable for the installation of a replacement on-lot sewage
disposal system. This requirement is in addition to the testing,
identification and reservation of an area for the primary sewage
disposal system.
B. No permit shall be issued for any proposed new on-lot sewage disposal
system on any newly created or subdivided property in any Sewage
Management District unless and until a replacement area is tested,
identified and reserved. In the case of an IRSIS, a second acceptable
absorption area will not be required. [Amended 2-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-337]
A. Any on-lot sewage treatment, holding, or disposal system may be
inspected by the municipality's authorized agent at any reasonable time
as of the effective date of this ordinance but in no case shall an
inspection of every on-lot disposal system be conducted less frequently
than once every six years. This requirement applies to all private
systems, including but not limited to drain fields, sand mounds, small
flow systems (SFTF), spray irrigation (IRSIS), drip irrigation, holding
tanks, and privies. Inspection of COLDS systems shall include
inspection at each structure connected to the COLDS and inspection of
the common elements.
B. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure. A copy of the inspection report
shall be furnished to the owner and current resident, which shall
include all of the following information: date of inspection; name and
address of system owner; description and diagram of the location of the
system, including location of access hatches, risers, and markers; size
of tanks and disposal field; condition of baffles in tank(s), current
occupant's name and number of users; indication of any suspected
system malfunction observed; and results of any and all soils and water
tests.
C. The municipality's certified SEO or authorized agent shall have the
right to enter upon land for the purposes of inspections described
above. In the event access to inspect the property is denied, the
following steps shall be taken:
(1) The matter will be officially referred to the governing body of the
municipality for action.
(2) The governing body of the municipality may schedule a review at
the next scheduled meeting of the municipal board/council or, if the
§ 136-34 (RESERVED) § 136-35
123:241
§ 136-36. Operation.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system.
situation threatens the health or safety of the residents of the
municipality, the board/council may commence an immediate
procedure to obtain a search warrant from the District Justice.
(3) Upon receipt of a search warrant to inspect the property, the
certified SEO or authorized agent of the municipality shall be
accompanied by an officer of the municipal or State Police and the
inspection shall be completed in accordance with this subsection.
D. An initial inspection shall be conducted by the municipality's certified
SEO or authorized agent within six years of the effective date of this
ordinance for the purpose of determining the type and functional status
of each sewage disposal system in the Sewage Management District. A
written report shall be furnished to the owner of each property
inspected, and a copy of said report shall be maintained in the
municipal records.
E. A routine inspection of each sewage disposal system in the municipality
will be scheduled every six years to assure the proper function of all
systems in the municipality.
F. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall inspect systems known to be, or
alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the
system is indeed malfunctioning, the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall
take action to require the correction of the malfunction. If total
correction is not technically or financially feasible, in the opinion of the
SEO and a representative of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
G. There may arise geographic areas within the municipality where
numerous on-lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A
resolution of these areawide problems may necessitate detailed
planning and a municipally sponsored revision to that area's Act 537
official sewage facilities plan. When a DEP-authorized official sewage
facilities plan revision has been undertaken by the municipality,
mandatory repair or replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage
disposal systems within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion
of the municipality, pending the outcome of the plan revision process.
However, the municipality may compel immediate corrective action
whenever a malfunction, as determined by municipal officials and the
Pennsylvania DEP, represents a serious public health or environmental
threat. This corrective action may include the use of a holding tank.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
§ 136-35 PATTON CODE § 136-36
123:242
§ 136-37. Maintenance. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-487]
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
A. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall have the septic tank, and any dosing tank or transfer tank
in the system, pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler within six years of
the effective date of this ordinance. Thereafter, that person shall have
the tank pumped at least once every three years. Receipts from the
pumper/hauler shall be submitted to the municipality or authorized
agent within 30 days of the date of pumping.
B. An option will be provided to allow the property owner to request a
waiver from pumping every three years if, because of tank size,
household size, or seasonal use, it is determined to the satisfaction of
the municipality's certified SEO that such pumping is not needed. In
such cases, a waiver from pumping can be granted at the discretion of
the municipality's certified SEO when an inspection of the tank by the
municipal SEO reveals that the solids are less than 1/3 the liquid depth
of the tank.
C. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the municipality's authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if
solids buildup in the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the
system increases significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is
used in the building, if the system malfunctions or for other good cause
shown.
D. If any person can prove that his or her system tank(s) had been pumped
within three years of the six-month anniversary of the effective date of
this ordinance, then the municipality may delay that person's initial
required pumping to conform with the general pumping frequency
requirement.
E. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to the municipality
within six months of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, service
receipts shall be submitted to the municipality at the intervals specified
by the manufacturer's recommendations. In no case may the service or
pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks exceed those for those
required for septic tanks.
§ 136-36 (RESERVED) § 136-37
123:243
§ 136-38. System rehabilitation.
F. Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well shall
have that system pumped according to the schedule prescribed from
septic tanks as noted in § 136-37A. As an alternative to this scheduled
pumping of the cesspool or dry well, the owner may secure a sewage
permit from the certified Sewage Enforcement Officer for a septic tank
to be installed preceding the cesspool or dry well. For a system
consisting of a cesspool or dry well preceded by an approved septic
tank, only the septic tank must be pumped at the prescribed interval.
G. The municipality may require additional maintenance activity as
needed, including, but not necessarily limited to, the cleaning and
unclogging of piping, the servicing and the repair of mechanical
equipment, the leveling of distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal
of obstructing roots or trees, the diversion of surface water away from
the disposal area, etc.
H. Each time a septic tank or other subsurface waste disposal tank is
pumped out, the municipality, its authorized agent, or a private septage
pumper/hauler, whichever provides the service, shall provide to the
owner of the on-lot disposal system a signed pumper's report/receipt
containing, at minimum, the following information:
(1) Date of pumping.
(2) Name and address of system owner.
(3) Address of tank's location, if different from owner's.
(4) Amount of septage or other solid or semisolid material removed.
(5) Destination of septage (name of treatment facility).
I. Upon completion of each required pumping, the pumper/hauler shall fill
out and submit a pumper's report/receipt, copies of which shall be
provided by the municipality or its authorized agent to all registered
pumpers/haulers. The pumper/hauler shall provide one copy of the
pumper's report/receipt to the owner and one copy to the municipality
or its authorized agent. Copies must be received by the municipality or
its authorized agent within 30 days of the date of pumping.
A. No person shall operate and maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment system or tank. No sewage system shall
discharge untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the
ground or into the waters of the commonwealth unless a permit to
discharge has been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 136-37 PATTON CODE § 136-38
123:244
B. The municipality or its authorized agent shall issue a written notice of
violation to any person who is the owner of a property in the
municipality which is found to be served by a malfunctioning on-lot
sewage disposal system or which is discharging raw or partially treated
sewage without a permit. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-487]
C. Within seven days of notification by the municipality that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer for a permit to
repair or replace the malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial
notification by the municipality, construction of the permitted repair or
replacement shall commence. Within 60 days of the original notification
by the municipality, the construction shall be completed unless seasonal
or unique conditions mandate a longer period in which case the
municipality shall set an extended completion date.
D. The municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require the repair of any malfunction by the following
methods: cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing
system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's
treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal area, replacing the
existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a
pressurized system or other alternatives as appropriate for the specific
site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, the municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer may require the
installation of water conservation equipment and the institution of
water conservation practices in structures served. Water using devices
and appliances in the structure may be required to be retrofitted with
water saving appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by
water conserving devices and appliances. Wastewater generation in the
structure may also be reduced by requiring changes in water usage
patterns in the structure served.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or do not prove effective, the municipality may
require the owner to apply to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for a permit to install a single residence
treatment and discharge system. Upon receipt of said permit the owner
shall complete construction of the system within 60 days.
G. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage disposal
system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for that
malfunction. The municipality may require whatever action is necessary
to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent that it feels
necessary.
§ 136-38 (RESERVED) § 136-39
123:245
§ 136-39. Fees.
Costs for the completion of water quality testing and Municipal Sewage
Enforcement Officer inspections shall be assessed to property owners
within the appropriate Sewage Management Districts. It shall be each
individual property owner's responsibility to contract with a qualified
pumper/hauler for the pumping of the owner's septic tank.
§ 136-40. Liens.
The municipality, upon written notice from the municipal Sewage
Enforcement Officer that an imminent health hazard exists due to failure of
a property owner to maintain, repair or replace an on-lot sewage disposal
system as provided under the terms of this article, shall have the authority
to perform or contract to have performed, the work required by the certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer. The owner shall be charged for the work
performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefore in accordance
with law.
§ 136-41. Disposal of septage. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-487]
A. All septage originating within the Municipal Sewage Management
District shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Approved sites
or facilities shall include the following: septage treatment facilities,
wastewater treatment plants, composting sites and approved
farmlands. The property owner is required to submit a receipt to the
municipality documenting the tank was pumped and indicating the DEP
permitted site where the septage was disposed.
B. All septage pumpers/haulers operating within the municipality shall be
licensed by the DEP and permitted by the municipality or its authorized
agent. Pumper/haulers shall comply with all reporting requirements
established by the municipality.
C. All septage of pumper/haulers operating within the municipality shall
operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 to
6018.1003. Any septage pumper/hauler who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter or regulations of the municipality, the
conditions of its state permit, or any state or local law governing its
operation shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $5,000 and costs and, in default of the payment thereof, shall
be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. If any
pumper/hauler shall have been convicted on two occasions of any
violation of this ordinance or for violating the conditions of its state
permit or of any state or local law governing its operation, the
municipal board/council shall have the power to suspend said pumper/
hauler from operating within the municipality for a period of not less
than six months nor more than two years for each violation, as
§ 136-39 PATTON CODE § 136-41
123:246
§ 136-42. Administration.
§ 136-43. Appeals.
determined by the municipality. Each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. The municipality shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The municipality shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees shall include a certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer and may include a Codes Enforcement
Officer, Secretary, Administrator or other persons as required. The
municipality may also contract with private qualified persons or firms
as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material relating to
the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the Sewage Management District shall
become the property of the municipality. Existing and future records
shall be available for public inspection during required business hours
at the official municipal office. All records pertaining to sewage
permits, building permits, occupancy permits and all other aspects of
the municipality is sewage management program shall be made
available, upon request, for inspection by representatives of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
D. The Board shall establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect fees,
to cover the cost to the municipality of administering this program.
Costs for the completion of water quality testing and municipal Sewage
Enforcement Officer inspections will be assessed to property owners
within the appropriate Sewage Management Districts. It shall be the
responsibility of each individual property owner to contract with a
qualified pumper/hauler for septic tank pumping.
E. The municipal board/borough council shall establish all administrative
procedures necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this
chapter. [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-487]
A. Appeals from decisions of the municipality or its authorized agents
under this article shall be made to the Board, in writing, within 30 days
from the date of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board at its next
prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14 days of the next
regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
subsequent meeting. The municipality shall thereafter affirm, modify, or
reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a
good cause shown by the appellant or the municipality. Additional
§ 136-41 (RESERVED) § 136-43
123:247
§ 136-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
Any person failing to comply with any provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 and court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, and not more than $600 and court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day of noncompliance shall
constitute a separate offense.
evidence may be introduced at the hearing provided that it is submitted
with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 30 days, the release sought
by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
§ 136-43 PATTON CODE § 136-44
123:248
ARTICLE IV
Industrial Pretreatment Program
[Adopted 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-328]
§ 136-45. Title; when effective.
This article shall be known as the "Industrial Pretreatment Program (IPP)
Ordinance," and the provisions hereof shall become effective upon the date
of enactment hereof and shall remain in effect thereafter unless the same
shall be repealed.
§ 136-46. Prohibited wastes and pollutant limitations; definitions.
[Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-423]
§ 136-47. Fees.
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
industrial users of the sewer system for the implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program established herein. The University Area Joint
Authority may establish a system of rates and charges for implementation of
the industrial pretreatment program authorized and adopted by this article,
which shall be applicable to users in the Township.
§ 136-48. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, into the
sewer system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant, wastewater, or
combination of wastewaters which will, alone or in conjunction with
other discharges, cause or contribute to interference or pass-through.
To provide for the effective monitoring and control of discharges to the
sewer system, the industrial pretreatment program resolution adopted
by the University Area Joint Authority on May 20, 1996, and being
Resolution No. 96-001 of said Authority, is hereby incorporated, in its
entirety, and made a part hereof.112
B. Effective November 19, 2003, the University Area Joint Authority
adopted a resolution, a copy of which is attached to this chapter as
Appendix A, supplementing Resolution No. 96-001 of May 20, 1996,
cited in § 136-46A above. The November 2003 resolution establishes
local limits for industrial waste discharges through revisions to existing
limits and the establishment of limits for additional pollutants and
authorizes the enforcement of such limits and the inclusion of local
limits in wastewater discharge permits, and is hereby incorporated in
its entirety and made a part hereof.
C. The terms and definitions used in this article are defined as they appear
in the industrial pretreatment program resolution.
112. Editor's Note: Said resolution is on file in the Township offices.
§ 136-45 (RESERVED) § 136-48
123:249
§ 136-49. Remedies not exclusive.
The enumeration of remedies in § 136-48 of this article and in the University
Area Joint Authority Resolution does not restrict their application and shall
not be deemed to preclude any other Township remedies, enforcement
responses or other causes of action, including those available under
common law. Nothing in this article, any enforcement response plan, or
any provision of the University Area Joint Authority's approved industrial
pretreatment program shall be intended to limit the enforcement discretion
of the Township or the University Area Joint Authority to enforce this article
and the industrial pretreatment program and their provisions as otherwise
provided for by law.
§ 136-50. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in conjunction
with use and operation of the sewage collection system, which rules and
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be subject to a
civil monetary penalty pursuant to applicable law. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
Township may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at
law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. Except for a violation
which has been subject to a civil or criminal penalty by the Township,
nothing shall be deemed to preclude the University Area Joint Authority
from commencing an action seeking a penalty of up to $25,000 per day
for each violation, pursuant to the Publicly Owned Works Penalty Law,
Pennsylvania Act 9 of 1992, P.L. 32 (35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.).
B. In addition to any applicable civil or criminal penalty, the user is liable
for:
(1) All damage which its discharge causes to the sewer system or
University Area Joint Authority Sewage Treatment Plant if that
damage is caused, in whole or in part, by the user's violation of its
wastewater discharge permit or any applicable law, ordinance,
resolution, regulation, rule or pretreatment requirement
established by the Township or the University Area Joint Authority.
(2) Any penalty imposed upon the Township or the University Area
Joint Authority (whether by judicial or administrative order or the
settlement of a judicial or administrative penalty action) where the
liability of the Township or the University Area Joint Authority was
caused by the user, either alone or in conjunction with discharge(s)
from other source(s).
§ 136-48 PATTON CODE § 136-50
123:250
regulations shall be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this
article.
§ 136-51. Appointment of agent.
The Township appoints the University Area Joint Authority as its agent
in all aspects for the administration and enforcement of this article and
the Industrial Pretreatment Program established herein, to the extent
permitted by law. The administrative and enforcement powers granted
to the University Area Joint Authority include but are not limited to the
following:
A. Local limits on the control of discharge of pollutants may be developed,
enforced and revised from time to time by the University Area Joint
Authority.
B. Wastewater discharge permits or other permits for the discharge of
wastes to the sewer system shall be issued or denied, and may be
suspended or revoked, by the University Area Joint Authority.
Conditions contained in wastewater discharge permits and other
permits may be developed by the University Area Joint Authority.
C. Hearings provided for by this article, including those established by the
University Area Joint Authority Pretreatment Program Resolution, shall
be held by the University Area Joint Authority Board or its delegates as
provided by the Industrial Pretreatment Program Resolution.
D. Written directions and notices of violation may be issued by the
University Area Joint Authority acting for and in the name of the
Township.
E. Special agreements and/or waivers of Industrial Pretreatment Program
requirements may be made by the University Area Joint Authority
acting in the name of and after written approval from the Township.
F. The University Area Joint Authority shall have the right under this
section, as agent for the Township, to commence legal action to enforce
the provisions of the article.
G. Proper records retention, including the protection of confidential
information, as required by the industrial pretreatment program, is the
responsibility of the University Area Joint Authority.
§ 136-50 (RESERVED) § 136-51
123:251

ARTICLE V
Community On-Lot Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 98-355]
§ 136-52. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the design,
installation, use and maintenance of community on-lot sewage disposal
systems (COLDS) for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage. It
is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this Township.
§ 136-53. Scope. [Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
As part of any subdivision or land development plan proposing the use of
a COLDS, compliance with these rules and regulations and the policies,
regulations and specifications of the University Area Joint Authority shall
be a condition of approval. All COLDS, as herein defined, to be constructed
shall have as the official permittee the University Area Joint Authority. Upon
the issuance of a permit for a COLDS by the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer, the COLDS shall be dedicated by the developer to the Authority. No
COLDS shall be accepted for dedication except in accordance with these
rules and regulations and the specifications of the University Area Joint
Authority. COLDS are only permitted in areas zoned A-1 (Rural), R-1 (Rural
Residence) and R-2 (Low-Density Residence) that are located outside of the
Centre Region Act 537 Sewage Facility Plan's existing and five-year sewer
service areas.
§ 136-54. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
described unless otherwise provided:
AUTHORITY — The University Area Joint Authority (UAJA).
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township.
CAPITAL RESERVE FUND — An interest-bearing revolving fund,
established for or by the Authority with moneys contributed by each COLDS
user, for the purpose of financing major equipment and facility repair,
replacement or upgrade.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (COLDS) — Any
sanitary sewage treatment and disposal system which collects, treats and
disposes of sewage generated from two or more equivalent dwelling units
(EDU's) by utilizing a subsurface absorption bed. The calculation of EDU's
will be determined as per 25 PA Code Chapter 73.
D.E.P. — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 136-52 (RESERVED) § 136-54
123:253
DESIGN STANDARDS — Design standards for COLDS as established by
DEP (25 PA Code Chapter 73) as well as all relevant installation and
locational standards established by such regulations and specifications for
the design, installation and use of COLDS as set forth by the Authority.
ENGINEER — The Township's or Authority's duly appointed engineer or
engineering firm which provides the Board or Authority with technical and
engineering consultation.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings and from which structure sewage shall
or may be discharged.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEO — The Patton Township Sewage Enforcement Officer.
SEWAGE — A substance that contains waste products or excrement or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and noxious
or deleterious substances harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or
for recreation. For the purposes of this article, the term includes substances
which constitute pollution under the Clean Stream Law, with the exception
of wastewater of industrial origin.
TOWNSHIP — Patton Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
§ 136-55. Rights and privileges granted.
§ 136-56. Use and design standards; regulations.
A. The Board hereby authorizes and empowers the Authority to undertake
within the Township the control of methods of COLDS design,
installation and operation and maintenance. Permits for COLDS shall be
issued by the Township-appointed SEO.
B. The Board hereby authorizes and empowers the Authority, as its acting
agent, to enter into or acquire escrow agreements, construction and
performance bonds and engineering services to ensure COLDS are
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with
any applicable specifications, rules and regulations of the Board.
C. The Board authorizes the Authority to take ownership of all operating
COLDS within the Township following the issuance of a permit by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. Method and manner of
possession of COLDS will be as dictated by the Board's rules and
regulations and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. The Board hereby authorizes and empowers the Authority to oversee,
operate, maintain, improve and/or discontinue the use of any COLDS
within Patton Township.
§ 136-54 PATTON CODE § 136-56
123:254
§ 136-57. Rates and charges authorized.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges at reasonable and uniform rates as
authorized by applicable law.
§ 136-58. Exclusivity of rights and privileges.
The collection, treatment and disposal of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a COLDS shall be done solely by the Authority or its
authorized representative.
§ 136-59. Developer responsibilities.
The developer of any proposed COLDS shall be responsible for obtaining all
required permits from the Township, the Authority, the DEP and any other
agencies requiring permits for such an installation. The developer of any
proposed COLDS shall be responsible for its construction and start up in
accordance with the requirements of this article and the specifications of
the Authority.
A. COLDS can only be used in locations outside of the Centre Region Act
537 Sewage Facility Plan's existing and five-year sewer service area.
B. All COLDS must be designed and constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the Authority.
C. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning COLDS which it may deem necessary from
time to time to effect the purposes herein. Any proposed regulations
proposed by the Authority shall be provided to Patton Township for
review and comment.
D. All such policies, regulations and specifications of the Authority shall be
in conformance with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township and all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. All COLDS must have two absorption areas, designed according to site
characteristics, each with a capacity sufficient to serve all equivalent
dwelling units which can be connected to the system.
F. COLDS must be designed to include an inspection portal which may be
used by the Authority to monitor the depth of solids in the tank. In
addition, each COLD system shall contain a riser which can be used for
pumping purposes.
G. The Authority shall be responsible for the maintenance of all COLDS
within Patton Township approved after the enactment of this article.
§ 136-56 (RESERVED) § 136-60
123:255
§ 136-60. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that
a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 136-60 PATTON CODE § 136-60
123:256
Chapter 140
SIGNS
§ 140-1. Long title.
The long title of this chapter is as follows: "An ordinance to establish
regulations for the construction, erection, maintenance and removal of
signs; providing for materials, sizes, number, height, lighting and location;
specifying license fees, permits and inspections; and providing provisions
for enforcement and penalties for violations."
§ 140-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Sign Ordinance."
§ 140-3. Intent.
The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this chapter are
made in accordance with an overall plan and program for the public safety,
area development, preservation of property values and the general welfare
of the Township of Patton and are intended to aid in traffic control and
traffic safety, preserve and protect property values, lessen congestion of
land and air space, mitigate concentrations of signs which distract and
endanger traffic safety and traffic flow, establish reasonable standards for
commercial and other advertising through the use of signs in order to
maintain and encourage business activity and area development, avoid
uncontrolled proliferation of signs, avoid glare and diversions that could
distract motorists, recognize the rights of the public in roads, streets,
highways and the areas adjacent to those roads, streets, and highways,
preserve the wholesome and attractive character of Patton Township and to
recognize that the general welfare includes a community plan that shall be
beautiful as well as healthy and spacious, as well as clean and well-balanced
in its growth and development.
§ 140-4. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings given in this section:
MENU BOARD — A sign which details the sale of goods or services
available on the property and which is not intended to be seen from
roadways or parking lots.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
PREMISES — The area occupied by a business or other public
enterprise. When more than one business occupies a single building
on the ground floor, each business area shall be considered a separate
premises. Businesses or other public enterprises which occupy other
floors shall be considered separate premises.
§ 136-60 (RESERVED) § 140-4
123:257
SHOPPING CENTER — A cohesive unit of stores or other commercial
businesses arranged and constructed according to a plan and contained
within a separate parcel of land.
SIGN — A sign is any structure, device, light or natural object, including
the ground itself, or any part thereof, or any device attached thereto
or painted or represented thereon, which shall be used to identify,
advertise or attract attention to any object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity, profession,
enterprise, industry or business or which shall display or include any
announcement, direction or advertisement and which is intended to be
seen from off the premises or from a parking lot. No other indoor sign
shall be deemed a sign within this chapter.[Amended 11-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-597]
GROUND-POLE SIGN — A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
(1)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that provides artificial light directly,
or through any transparent or translucent material, from a source
of light connected with such sign, or a sign illuminated by a light
focused upon or chiefly directed at the surface of the sign.
(2)
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which contains a
message unrelated to a business or profession conducted upon
the premises where such sign is located or which is unrelated to
a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located.
(3)
(4) PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which projects from and is supported
by a wall of a building.
(5)
POLITICAL/PERSONAL SIGN — A noncommercial sign
communicating a political, issue-oriented, religious, or personal
message that is not an advertisement, name, address, directional
sign, or real estate sign.
(6)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A nonpermanent sign erected or maintained
on a premises for a short, fixed period of time.
(7)
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon
a building wall and which does not extend more than 12 inches
therefrom nor extend above the roofline.
(8)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and maintained upon or above the
roof of any building.
(9)
FLAG — Any fabric or other flexible material attached to or
designed to be flown from a flagpole or similar device.
(10)
§ 140-4 PATTON CODE § 140-4
123:258
§ 140-5. General regulations on signs in all districts.
The following regulations shall be observed in all districts within Patton
Township:
§ 140-6. Signs permitted in all districts.
Signs listed in this section are permitted in all zones and shall not require
licenses, and they shall not be counted when calculating the number of
signs on a premises. However, such signs shall conform with the general
regulations for signs enumerated in the remainder of this section.
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest triangle, rectangle or circle
which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. All visible faces
of a multifaced sign shall be counted separately and then totaled in
calculating sign area. Three-dimensional signs shall be treated as dualfaced
signs, such that the total area shall be twice the area of the
smallest triangle, rectangle or circle which can totally circumscribe the
sign in the plane of its largest dimension.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include both the feminine
and the neuter.
A. Notwithstanding any other regulation in Chapter 140 or elsewhere in
the Patton Township Code, noncommercial messages shall be permitted
wherever commercial messages are permitted.
B. Consistent with § 1-14 of the Patton Township Code, the regulations of
Chapter 140 are severable. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word is declared
invalid by a court of law, the remainder of Chapter 140 shall remain
valid.
A. Name and address of resident, but not to include any commercial
advertising of not more than two square feet in sign area.
B. Signs regulating the use of a property, such as no hunting, no fishing, no
trespassing, etc., of no more than two square feet in sign area in
residential zones and five square feet in all commercial and industrial
zones.
C. Real estate signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area in
residential zones, and 25 square feet in all commercial and industrial
zones, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon
which said signs are located. Such real estate signs shall be removed
within 10 days after the premises advertised has been sold, rented or
leased. "Sold" signs are prohibited.
D. Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions, when
located on the premises thereof, and with a sign area of no more than
§ 140-4 (RESERVED) § 140-6
123:259
25 square feet if single-faced, nor more than 50 square feet if doublefaced,
and if used exclusively for noncommercial announcement.
E. Signs regulating on-premises traffic, parking or other functional
subdivision such as lavatory facilities, telephone, signs denoting other
sections of a building such as lubrication, office, etc., when less than
five square feet in area and bearing no commercial advertising.
F. Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a
body, and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs,
railroad crossing signs, safety signs, signs identifying public schools
and playgrounds and the like.
G. Historical markers, memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the
date of erection of buildings.
H. The flag, pennant or insignia of any government or of any religious,
charitable or fraternal organization.
I. Temporary signs no larger than 10 square feet in area advertising the
sale of farm products produced on the premises or advertising auctions
and special events of charitable or public service groups. Such signs
shall be removed as soon as the activity advertised thereon has taken
place.
J. Permanent residential development signs at major entrances designed
to identify a residential subdivision and containing no commercial
advertising. Maximum area: 25 square feet of surface area per sign face
or 50 square feet in total surface area.
K. Signs identifying places of worship when located on the premises
thereof and not exceeding 25 square feet of surface area per sign face
or 50 square feet in total surface area.
L. Signs identifying a golf course or country club or other recreational
facility when located on the premises thereof and containing no
commercial advertising.
M. Political/personal signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area per
sign face (not exceeding 10 square feet total) on residential lots or 25
total square feet on commercial lots.
N. Contractor, artisan, or property maintenance signs identifying the
contractor or property maintenance company working on the premises
on which the sign is located. No more than one sign per street abuttal
shall be located on any lot. Such signs must be removed immediately
upon completion of the project, and no one sign shall be larger than 16
square feet on a residential lot or 32 square feet on a commercial lot.
O. Real estate management signs for premises including six or more units,
indicating only the name of the property and the name, address, and
telephone number of the real estate management company. Such signs
shall not exceed five square feet.
§ 140-6 PATTON CODE § 140-7
123:260
§ 140-7. Signs prohibited in all districts.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
district, notwithstanding anything else contained in this chapter or
elsewhere:
A. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing, moving, or
changing illumination or sign faces or with illumination which varies in
intensity or which varies in color, and signs which have any visible
moving part, visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement of
any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by
electrical pulsations or by actions of normal wind currents, except when
not visible from motor vehicles traveling on public roadways. Electronic
screen signs, using technologies such as (but not limited to) LCD or
LED screens, are prohibited within clear sight of public roadways,
except when used as necessary traffic control devices by either Patton
Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation under the
guidelines of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (most
recent edition).
(1) Flags, banners, and pennants are exempt from this requirement.
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-597]
B. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or
health.
C. Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination obstruct the vision of drivers, either when driving a
roadway or driveway or when entering a roadway from another
roadway, or obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of
any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads.
D. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire escape,
door, window or other required exitway.
E. Signs which make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one-way,"
"danger," "yield" or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
F. Any obsolete sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or a product sold. In any case, 90 days shall be allowed for
removal of an obsolete sign.
G. Signs on public property or public rights-of-way, unless erected by a
governmental body, or unless required to be so located by order of a
governmental body. No sign located on public property or a public rightof-
way shall bear any commercial advertising or announcement.
H. Signs painted on, attached to or supported by a tree, stone, cliff or other
natural object, except signs permitted under § 140-6I.
§ 140-7 (RESERVED) § 140-7
123:261
§ 140-7.1. Illumination.
§ 140-8. Limit on number of signs per premises. [Amended
11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-597]
Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter or elsewhere, no more than
five signs may be erected or maintained on any premises at any one time,
except that when a premises is located on a corner lot and has public
entrances on two or more public ways, or where a building has both
a front and rear public entrance, one additional sign may be erected.
In calculating the total number of signs on a premises, both permanent
and temporary signs shall be combined in the total. A double-faced sign
shall count as a single sign. Flags and ground-pole signs shall be counted
towards the sign limit. No more than one flag shall be permitted per parcel.
Signs enumerated in § 140-6, "Signs permitted in all districts," shall not
be counted in calculating the total. Directional menu signs permitted by
§ 140-18 and special event signs permitted by § 140-28F shall also not be
counted towards the sign limit.
§ 140-9. Limit on height of signs. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-597]
No sign, or any part thereof, including braces, supports or lights, shall
exceed a height of 25 feet, except that a wall sign may reach a height of 25
feet or 75% of the height to the roofline of the building to which it is affixed,
whichever is higher. A flag may reach a height of 25 feet or a height equal
to the roofline of the tallest building(s) to which it is associated; whichever
is higher. Height shall be measured from grade level directly below the face
of the sign to the highest part of the sign.
I. String lights, other than temporary holiday decorations, which are
unshielded from off the property on which they are located.
J. Searchlights, spinners, and streamers, except for occasions such as
grand openings and then only with special permission of the Planning
Commission or the Sign Inspector. Use shall be limited to a fifteen-day
period. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-597; 5-22-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-599]
A. Light sources which cast light on signs shall be shielded by opaque
material so that the bulbs, floodlights or tubes are not visible off the
property on which the signs are located. Glare or light may not be cast
on adjacent roadways or surrounding property.
B. In addition to complying with the provisions of this chapter, all
illumination must be in compliance with the provisions for illumination
at § 175-48.2 of the Patton Township Code.
C. Sign illumination should use the most energy-efficient technology that
is available and feasible at the time of installation. The use of lessefficient,
incandescent bulbs is discouraged.
§ 140-7 PATTON CODE § 140-10
123:262
§ 140-10. Limit on sign area.
§ 140-11. Limit on content of largest sign on property.
The largest sign on a premises shall not advertise any particular article
of merchandise unless it is the principal product sold or manufactured on
the premises, except for off-premises signs which shall be regulated by
§ 140-17.
§ 140-12. Safety and maintenance.
A. Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter or elsewhere, the total
sign area per premises, including both permanent and temporary signs,
shall not exceed two square feet per linear front foot of the main
building on the premises, except that no premises shall be limited to
fewer than 20 square feet of total sign area. In no case shall the total
sign area of all signs on one premises exceed 200 square feet, except
that shopping centers in Planned Commercial Districts may have one
additional shopping center identification sign located along each street
frontage used as an entrance. Such sign shall be subject to the
requirements of § 140-15. Flags, except those enumerated in § 140-6,
Signs permitted in all districts, shall be counted towards the limit on
sign area and shall be of a size no larger than 50 square feet.
Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter, the total sign area for a
basement premises shall not exceed 20 square feet. Directional menu
signs permitted by § 140-18 and special event signs permitted by
Section 140-28F shall not be counted towards the total sign area of a
premises. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-597]
B. Menu boards are permitted and shall comply with applicable
regulations for a wall sign, ground-pole sign or roof sign and may be
placed in addition to other signs allowed for by the provisions of this
chapter. Menu boards shall not be included in the calculation of total
signs and total sign area permitted in §§ 140-8 and 140-10A above. The
following standards shall apply to menu boards: [Amended 9-22-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-526]
A. Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, anchors and wiring systems, shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with the latest adopted version of the
Building, Electrical, and Fire Prevention Codes.113 In the absence of an
electrical ordinance, the latest version of the National Electrical Code
(NFPA-70) shall be used as the standard for all wiring systems.
(1) Each ordering lane shall be limited to one menu board.
(2) Each menu board shall be limited to a single face with a maximum
sign area of 45 square feet.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 140-10 (RESERVED) § 140-12
123:263
§ 140-13. Projecting signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all projecting signs:
§ 140-14. Wall signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all wall signs:
§ 140-15. Ground-pole signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all ground-pole signs:
B. All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state of repair and
maintenance.
A. No projecting sign shall project more than five feet beyond the building
line in the direction of the street, nor shall any portion of any projecting
sign be closer than two feet to the face of the street curb or curbline.
B. No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet above grade
level.
C. No single face of a projecting sign shall exceed 15 square feet in sign
area.
D. No projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension greater than six feet.
E. There shall be no more than one projecting sign for any premises unless
the premises is located on a corner lot or has public entrances on two or
more public ways, in which case one projecting sign may be erected for
and toward each public way.
A. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is
placed.
B. No wall sign, or any part thereof, shall project more than 12 inches from
the wall upon which it is mounted. If external lighting is used, reflectors
must be 10 feet above the surface of the sidewalk equipped with wire
mesh guards, and no part may extend more than two feet from the wall
of the building.
C. No wall sign shall extend beyond the left and right extremities of the
wall to which it is attached.
A. Every ground-pole sign and all parts, braces and supports thereof shall
be located entirely behind the property line and shall not project over
public rights-of-way or other adjoining lands. However, ground-pole
signs may be permitted between the property line and the building
setback lines.
§ 140-12 PATTON CODE § 140-15
123:264
§ 140-16. Roof signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all roof signs:
§ 140-17. Off-premises advertising signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all off-premises advertising signs, except
directional signs:
B. No ground-pole sign shall be larger than 25 square feet in sign area on
a single sign face, nor larger than 50 square feet of sign area for both
faces combined, nor in excess of 10 feet in any dimension of the sign
face.
C. A premises may erect and maintain one projecting sign or one groundpole
sign, but not both. However, no individual business or other
enterprise within a shopping center may erect or maintain a groundpole
sign.
D. No more than one sign shall be mounted to the supporting structure of
any ground-pole sign, except for directional sign permitted in § 140-18.
E. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any property
located on a corner lot or having public entrance to two or more public
ways, one ground-pole sign may be erected for and toward each public
way. On a corner lot, neither sign may be located within 50 feet of the
property corner closest to the intersecting roads.
A. When viewed from a distance of 50 feet directly in front of the sign
surface, and at a point five feet above ground level, a roof sign shall
exhibit a background which contains nothing other than a portion of the
building which supports the sign.
B. No more than one roof sign may be erected or maintained on a single
premises.
A. Off-premises advertising signs shall be located in space provided at
roadside turnoffs or in pedestrian display areas. It is the intent of this
provision to permit off-premises advertising for the Centre Region, of
which the Township is a member, in roadside turnoffs or pedestrian
display areas.
B. To provide maximum direction and information to the traveling public
without disturbing neighborhoods or causing unnecessary visual
clutter, roadside turnoffs may be located in the centrally located I-1
District. Pedestrian display areas may be located in C-1, C-2, and I-1
districts. No off-premises advertising signs are permitted outside of the
C-1, C-2, and I-1 Districts.
§ 140-15 (RESERVED) § 140-17
123:265
C. A maximum sign area of 10 square feet at each roadside turnoff and five
square feet in pedestrian display areas shall be allowed each
commercial enterprise, institution or organization using these areas.
No off-premises advertising sign in Patton Township shall exceed 10
square feet in size or 10 feet in height.
D. Vehicular access shall be designed in accordance with adopted
standards of the Township's subdivision regulations114 and shall be
subject to sight distance standards adopted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT). All areas devoted to
vehicular usage shall be paved or covered with dust-free material; rest
room facilities, water supply and sewage disposal, if provided, shall be
subject to Township and state requirements; storm drainage shall be
approved by the Township Engineer; and lighting shall be provided for
vehicular and pedestrian areas in accordance with Township
regulations. Outdoor malls shall be located so as to be seen from parked
vehicles or by pedestrians and shall not be designed to convey
messages from off the site. No structures or parts thereof shall exceed
25 feet in height. All structures and parking facilities shall be located at
least 30 feet behind the front property line of the site.
E. Roadside turnoffs shall permit either an outdoor advertising mall or
enclosed information center or both. The site may also include picnic
tables, rest rooms, playground equipment, cooking grills or other
noncommercial activities or utilities. Individual advertisers may have
direct telephone lines to their place of business.
F. Site approval.
(1) Anyone wishing to construct a roadside turnoff shall apply, in
writing, to the Township Board of Supervisors for location
approval. The Board shall, within seven days, forward the request
to the Township Planning Commission for recommendations prior
to acting upon the request. The Planning Commission shall make
its report within 30 days after formally receiving the request from
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a preliminary plan of the
site showing topographic and other physical features, boundary
dimensions and property size.
G. Submission of final site plans. Final site plans shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors for its approval.
H. Review of final site plans.
(1) By Planning Commission. Within seven days of formal receipt, the
Board of Supervisors shall submit final site plans to the Township
Planning Commission. The Commission shall submit its
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 140-17 PATTON CODE § 140-17
123:266
§ 140-18. Directional menu signs.
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors within 60 days of
formal receipt.115
I. Final site plan requirements. The final site plan shall indicate final
grading, parking and driveways, ingress and egress, landscaping,
detailed plans of all improvements and, if provided, methods of waste
disposal and water supply.
J. Pedestrian display structures shall be subject to review procedures as
stated above.
A. Within the C-2, C-T, PC, OBD, OBD2, and Industrial Zoning Districts,
directional menu signs, as defined in this section, may be placed in
shopping centers or multibuilding office/business parks under single
ownership and/or approved simultaneously under a single development
plan. The signs shall be the property and responsibility of the single
ownership or tenant association.
B. Such directional menu signs will only be permitted on parcels greater
than five acres in size.
C. Such directional menu signs must be located on site.
D. Directional menu signs shall not be located closer than 75 feet to any
vehicular entrance into the involved shopping center or office/business
park.
E. Directional menu signs shall address automobile and pedestrian traffic
that is either on site or passing along a local public road that bisects the
site. To this end, they shall not be located within 150 feet of a freeway,
expressway, arterial highway, or urban collector as defined by the
Federal Functional Classification System.
F. Directional menu signs facing the same direction of travel may be no
closer than 200 feet to each other.
G. Directional menu signs shall:
(1) Be no greater than seven feet in height, with no more than 20
square feet of sign area per side where they are located along a
local road and no more than 15 square feet of sign area per side
where they are located in an off-street parking area.
(2) Have no more than two sides oriented back to back.
(3) Consist of a top panel that gives the name of the shopping center or
office/business park, as well as lower panels that list and direct
traffic to tenants.
115. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H(2), regarding the Sign Review Board, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-599.
§ 140-17 (RESERVED) § 140-18
123:267
§ 140-19. Real estate development signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all real estate development signs:
(a) The lower panels that list and direct traffic to tenants shall use
a uniform, nonserif, mixed-case font (e.g., Futura, Aerial,
Helvetica, Universe 65) that is no greater than six inches tall
and no smaller than three inches tall. They shall be dark panels
with lighter-colored text and shall contain no advertising. The
lower panels shall be composed of a uniform color scheme, and
each shall be the same size with the same-sized text.
(b) No one business or tenant may be listed on more than one of
the lower panels or may have more than one line of text.
(c) The top panel that gives the name of the shopping center or
office/business park shall use text or graphics that are no
greater than six inches tall.
(4) Be uniform throughout each shopping center or office park, using a
uniform shape, font, and color scheme.
(5) Match the architecture and surface materials of the shopping
center or multibuilding office/business park as much as is possible.
H. Directional signs shall either use reflective lettering or be lighted via an
interior light source. If an interior light source is used, however, the
entire sign must be a dark color with lighter-colored text.
The following illustration of a directional menu sign is for illustrative
purposes only and in no way should be interpreted as containing any
regulatory power.
A. The use of real estate development signs shall be limited to those
developers or owners having for sale a minimum of six lots in one
subdivision.
B. Such signs must be located on the premises which are for sale.
C. Such signs may advertise only the subdivision in which the sign is
located and not the sale of lots elsewhere or the realtor's, developer's or
landowner's business in general. The content of such signs shall be
§ 140-18 PATTON CODE § 140-19
123:268
§ 140-20. Professional occupation signs.
Denoting only the name, office hours, symbol and/or profession of an
occupant and not exceeding one sign per occupant and not exceeding five
square feet per occupant, the total area for all such signs shall not exceed
25 square feet per building.
§ 140-21. Shopping center signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to shopping centers:
§ 140-22. Signs in low-density residential zones (R-1 and R-2).
limited to the name of the development, the developer's name and the
telephone number of the developer or his sales agents.
D. Such signs shall conform to relevant setback line requirements. If any
person shall use more than one sign for the same development or area,
no two signs shall be closer to each other than 1,000 feet measured in a
straight line between said signs.
E. The maximum sign area of any such single-faced sign shall be 25 square
feet, and for any such double-faced sign, 50 feet. No part of such sign
shall be more than 10 feet above grade or in excess of 10 feet in any
dimension.
F. Such signs shall be removed when 75% of the lots in the subdivision
have been sold or leased.
G. Artificial illumination of such signs is prohibited.
A. Only ground-pole signs which bear the name of the shopping center
may be erected on the lands occupied by the center, subject to the
provisions of § 140-15. Also, directional signs that meet the
requirements of § 140-18 may be erected in shopping centers.
B. All other signs identifying each individual business shall be erected in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. All signs are prohibited in low-density residential zones except those
signs enumerated in §§ 140-6 and 140-20, "Signs permitted in all
districts" and "Professional occupation signs."
B. Illuminated signs are prohibited in low-density residential zones, except
for street address signs, signs indicating doctors of medicine, signs
indicating churches or other places of worship and signs necessary for
public safety.
C. Regardless of anything else in this chapter, no sign may be erected or
maintained in a low-density residential zone which exceeds 25 square
feet of area on a single face or 50 square feet of area on a double-faced
sign.
§ 140-19 (RESERVED) § 140-23
123:269
§ 140-23. Signs in medium-density residential zones (R-3).
§ 140-24. Special exceptions. [Amended 5-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-599]
A. All signs are prohibited in medium-density residential zones except
those enumerated as follows:
(1) Signs permitted in low-density residential zones.
(2) Wall signs denoting the name of an apartment building, fraternity
or sorority house, boarding-house or rooming house, tourist home,
nonprofit club, community or municipal center, funeral home or any
other similar enterprises as are now allowed or may hereafter be
allowed in these zones.
B. Illumination and sign area restrictions in medium-density residential
zones are the same as in low-density residential zones.
A. The intent of this section is to allow certain provisions of this chapter to
be modified where such modification will encourage excellence in the
planning and design of signs. Nothing in this section, however, is
intended to permit the erection or maintenance of signs that are
prohibited in § 140-7, (Signs prohibited in all areas).
B. In the event that any person wishes to retain, construct or install a sign
or signs other than as permitted in this chapter, that person shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Planning Commission for special
exceptions. Any person requesting a variance for hardship shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with § 140-25, Variances.
C. The Planning Commission will consider requests for special exceptions
to the provisions of this chapter in the following manner:
(1) Requests for special exceptions shall be made, in writing, to the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and provided to the
Secretary of the municipality.
(2) The Planning Commission shall have the power to hear all cases
that involve a special exception from the terms of this chapter prior
to submission to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Planning
Commission shall also review final plans for roadside turnoffs and
pedestrian display areas prior to submission to the Zoning Hearing
Board and shall approve applications for directional signs prior to
issuance of a sign permit by the Sign Inspector.
(a) The Planning Commission may recommend a special exception,
provided that all of the following findings are made where
relevant in a given case:
[1] The sign material, design or construction should be
nonstandard. Signs of substantially the same material,
§ 140-23 PATTON CODE § 140-24
123:270
§ 140-25. Variances.
design or construction as existing signs in the Township or
commonly used signs for a multisite business interest do
not demonstrate excellence in design.
[2] The sign shall include some unique element or elements,
other than the written message, related to the use, or the
sign shall provide a visual tie to other features on the site,
or the sign shall convey additional information.
[3] Evidence must be provided demonstrating that the sign
has been integrated into the site or building design in the
design phase of the project. "Excellence in planning" is
demonstrated by linking site, architectural, and signage
elements together early in the process.
[4] It must be demonstrated that due to the unique elements
of the sign it is not possible to comply with all aspects of
the Sign Ordinance, or it must be demonstrated that there
is a compelling reason related to other design features on
the site that lead to a design outside the Sign Ordinance,
and it must be demonstrated that the requested special
exception represents the minimum deviation that will
afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
(b) The Planning Commission may request sketches, drawings or
photographs showing the entire property and the proposed
sign or signs, and the applicant shall explain briefly in the
written request where the sign or signs vary from the
provisions of this chapter and why an exception is needed.
(3) After the meeting and hearing on any application, the Planning
Commission shall decide the application and make its
determination known to the applicant within 30 days of having
received such application. Subsequent to review of any application
for a special exception from the terms of this chapter, the Planning
Commission shall also make its determination known to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 30 days of having received such application.
This action will constitute a formal application to the Zoning
Hearing Board, provided that upon receipt of notice from the
Planning Commission the applicant submits such forms and fees as
required by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall determine that the Planning Commission has correctly
applied the express criteria stated in § 140-24C(5) and may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards it may deem necessary.
(4) In considering an application, the Planning Commission may not
consider reasons of hardship.
§ 140-24 (RESERVED) § 140-25
123:271
§ 140-26. Sign Inspector.
A. Variances, for hardship, to this chapter shall be granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board under the variance provisions of Chapter 175, Zoning,
and in accordance with the variance criteria established by the
Municipalities Planning Code.116 The Board shall hear requests for
variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the Sign Ordinance
inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The hearings shall be
convened and conducted in accordance with § 175-64, Hearings.
(1) The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Sign Ordinance.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be signed in strict
conformity with the provisions of the Sign Ordinance and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this Act and the Zoning Ordinance.117
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to hear and rule on
appeals from the decision of the Sign Inspector. Such appeals must be
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the Sign
Inspector's decision.
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 140-25 PATTON CODE § 140-26
123:272
§ 140-27. Licenses for permanent signs.
A. Appointment. The Township Supervisors shall appoint a Sign Inspector
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Duties of the Sign Inspector.
(1) The Sign Inspector shall examine all applications for permits for
erection of signs, issue licenses for new signs and for continued use
of signs which conform with the requirements of this chapter,
record and file all applications for permits with any accompanying
plans and documents, make an annual inspection of all signs in the
Township and make such reports as the Township may require.
(2) If the Sign Inspector shall find that any sign has been constructed
or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, he shall promptly notify the owner or lessor thereof, in
writing. If the owner or lessor fails to remove or alter the sign so as
to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days, the
Sign Inspector shall cause such sign to be removed or altered in
such way as to conform with the provisions of this chapter. The cost
of such removal or alteration shall be borne by the owner or lessor
of such sign and shall be a lien upon the premises.
(3) The Sign Inspector shall cause any sign which is in immediate peril
to persons or property to be removed immediately. The cost of such
removal shall be borne by the owner or lessor of such sign and shall
be a lien upon the premises.
A. General provisions for all permanent signs.
(1) All permanent signs except those enumerated in § 140-6, Signs
permitted in all districts, must be licensed.
(2) Application for a license for a permanent sign shall be made on a
form provided by the Sign Inspector. Licenses for permanent signs
must be kept on the premises where the sign is displayed and must
be shown to the Sign Inspector at his request.
(3) Licenses for permanent signs are valid for three years. If such sign
is found to be in violation of this chapter at time of license renewal,
it shall be subject to a new license fee.
B. Permits to build new permanent signs or to alter or move existing
permanent signs.
(1) No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered
or moved until the person proposing to erect, alter or move such
sign shall have obtained a permit therefor from the Sign Inspector.
Such permit shall be issued only when the Sign Inspector is
satisfied that such sign will, in every respect, comply with all of the
§ 140-26 (RESERVED) § 140-27
123:273
applicable provisions of this chapter. Such permit shall be valid for
180 days.
(2) Any person desiring such a permit shall file application therefor
upon a form which shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) A map showing the location of the building, structure or lot to
which the sign is to be attached or erected and showing the
position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and
thoroughfares; such a map must be to scale.
(c) A plan showing the design of the sign, materials used and
method of construction and means of attachment to the
building or the ground; such plans must be to scale.
(d) The name of the person, firm, corporation or association
erecting, altering or moving said sign.
(e) Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to
be erected, altered or relocated.
(f) Any electrical or building permit required and issued for said
sign under Township ordinances.
(g) Any other information as the Sign Inspector shall require in
order to show full compliance with this and all other applicable
laws of the Township.
(3) After permission to erect, alter or move a permanent sign has been
obtained and said sign has been constructed, painted and placed as
specified in the permit application, the owner of the sign shall
notify the Sign Inspector, who shall inspect the sign. If the sign is as
specified in the permit application and does not violate any
provision of this or other applicable ordinances, a license shall be
issued to the owner, valid for the current year.
C. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Eligible nonconforming signs may be relicensed annually until said
signs are structurally altered or moved, at which time they shall be
considered new signs.
(2) No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, nor shall the location of
any nonconforming sign be changed.
(3) Nonconforming signs may be repaired and maintained. Repairing
and maintaining shall include, but not be limited to, the
replacement of certain portions of a sign, or the entire sign, if
necessary, to repair damage from collision or natural causes such
§ 140-27 PATTON CODE § 140-27
123:274
§ 140-28. Licenses for temporary signs.
§ 140-29. Fees.
as a windstorm or fire or from intentional damage such as
vandalism.
A. All temporary signs as they are defined in this chapter, except those
signs enumerated in § 140-6, Signs permitted in all districts, must be
licensed. Possession of a valid license for a temporary sign shall entitle
the licensee to display one temporary sign at any given time.
B. Application for a license for a temporary sign shall be made on a form
provided by the Sign Inspector. Licenses for temporary signs must be
kept on the premises where signs are displayed and must be shown to
the Sign Inspector at his request.
C. Size, content and location of a temporary sign may be varied at any time
so long as the variations remain within the overall restrictions of this
chapter.
D. Licenses for temporary signs are valid for one year and shall be
renewed annually.
E. No temporary sign need be licensed until one year after the passage of
this chapter. Thereafter, nonconforming temporary signs shall not be
permitted, and the Sign Inspector may cause any such nonconforming
temporary sign to be removed without notice.
F. Each premises may display one temporary "special event sign" per year
that does not count towards the maximum number of signs permitted
per premises by § 140-8 and does not count towards the maximum
amount of sign area allowed per premises by § 140-10A. This one sign
shall not exceed 25 square feet in size and shall remain in place for no
more than 20 days. It shall be placed against an existing building wall
or freestanding wall, and it must meet all other requirements of this
chapter beyond those exempted here. Each sign must display its
expiration date on the sign itself.
A. Every applicant, before being granted a license hereunder, shall pay to
the Township Secretary a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time to time.
B. Signs exempt from license fee. The following signs shall be exempt from
license fees. Such signs must be licensed, however.
(1) One sign on any premises, provided that such sign does not exceed
25 square feet in sign area and conforms in all respects to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any sign which existed at the time this chapter was passed and on
which a previous permit fee had been paid. Such signs shall be
§ 140-27 (RESERVED) § 140-29
123:275
§ 140-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 142
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 142-1. General regulations.
exempted from payment of fees upon presentation of a valid sign
license or bona fide receipt for such license.
(3) No off-premises sign shall be exempt from license fees.
A. Location.
(1) Primary use solar energy systems may only be located in the zoning
districts where they are listed as a permitted use, conditional use,
or designated use.
(2) Accessory use solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning
districts.
(3) In the University Planned District, ground-mounted solar energy
systems, whether primary or accessory, shall be located only in the
subdistricts that permit utility uses, facilities, and structures. The
exception to this shall be ground-mounted systems that are
minimal in size and designed to only provide energy to an adjacent
device or structure.
(4) In the Planned Airport District, solar energy systems must
additionally conform to all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations as specified in § 175-36C, Use regulations.
B. Height. All solar energy systems shall follow the maximum height
requirements of the zoning district they are located in with the
following additional requirements for building-mounted systems:
§ 140-29 PATTON CODE § 142-1
123:276
(1) Systems on sloped roofs that face an adjacent right-of-way shall be
installed at the same angle as the roof with a maximum distance,
measured perpendicular to the roof, of 18 inches between the roof
and highest edge of the system.
(2) Systems on sloped roofs that do not face an adjacent right-of-way
shall be installed at any angle, given that the highest point of the
system does not exceed the highest point of the roof it is attached
to.
(3) Systems on flat roofs shall be installed so that the highest point is
no greater than six feet above the roof to which it is attached.
C. Setbacks.
(1) No portion of any solar energy system or its related appurtenances
may be located within the setback areas specified by the zoning
district in which they are located.
(2) Building-mounted systems shall not extend beyond the edge of the
roof, wall, or other surface they are located on.
(3) Systems located on roofs of primary use structures shall maintain
at least a thirty-inch-wide pathway on at least three sides of the
system except on flat roofs, in which case all four sides of the
system must have a minimum thirty-inch-wide pathway.
(a) If the thirty-inch pathway limits the effective size of the system,
the Township Zoning Officer may request that the Centre
Region Fire Director determine whether a lesser width
pathway is permissible and that it will not jeopardize the safety
of firefighters in the event of an emergency.
(b) In the event that a sloped roof has two roof planes that meet to
form hips or valleys, the 30 inches shall be measured between
the solar energy systems located on each roof plane.
(c) This requirement shall not apply to nonhabitable accessory
structures such as garages, carports, sheds, and the like.
D. Lot coverage. The horizontal area projected by the system in addition to
all impervious surfaces shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage
allowed in the zoning district. For a tracking solar collector or other
moveable solar energy system, the horizontal projection area shall be
calculated at a thirty-three-percent tilt angle.
E. Battery. If the system utilizes a battery system, the battery(s) must be
placed in a secure container or enclosure.
F. Aviation notification. All proposals for systems 7,500 square feet or
greater in size, or which are intended to produce 100 kilowatts or
greater, and which are located within five miles of the end of the
University Park Airport runway will be forwarded to the University Park
§ 142-1 (RESERVED) § 142-1
123:277
§ 142-2. Solar energy systems as primary uses.
Airport by the Township to ensure that there are no aviation-related
concerns.
A. Applicability. A solar energy system shall be considered a primary use
under the following conditions:
(1) The system is a utility scale solar energy system, as defined in
§ 175-6, Definitions; interpretations of regulations.
(2) The system is connected into the utility grid and produces
electricity at a capacity that consistently provides energy to the
grid. Grid-connected systems that are only utilized periodically will
be considered an accessory use to the primary permitted use of the
lot(s) and regulated as such.
B. Screening and visibility.
(1) All building-mounted solar energy system appurtenances should be
painted and/or coated a color similar to the surface upon which
they are mounted or otherwise designed to be as inconspicuous as
possible.
(2) All ground-mounted system installations must adhere to the
following buffering requirements:
(a) In the Industrial, General Commercial, and Planned
Commercial Districts, installations must meet the
requirements of § 175-44, Districts design and landscaping
controls for R-3, Commercial (C), Office Buffer (OB) and
Industrial (I) Districts.
(b) In the Commercial Transitional District, installations shall
adhere to the buffering requirements of § 175-17.3G(1),
Screening.
(c) In the Planned Community District, installations shall meet the
buffering requirements of § 175-24A(4), Buffer yards and
landscaping.
(d) In the Planned Airport District, installations shall follow the
buffering requirements of § 175-40, Design and improvement
standards.
(e) In the Rural, Natural Resources, Natural Resources and
Recycling Districts, and the University Planned District,
installations must adhere to the buffering requirements of
§ 175-42, Procedures and criteria for conditional uses.
(f) Any installations within the I-99 Interchange Overlay District
shall adhere to the additional buffering requirements of
§ 175-40.3, Setbacks and landscaping.
§ 142-1 PATTON CODE § 142-2
123:278
C. Warning signage. The identification and contact information of the
owner, installer, or manufacturer of the system and warning signage
shall be posted at the site in a clearly visible manner.
D. Fencing. Primary use systems shall be enclosed by perimeter fencing of
an appropriate height to restrict unauthorized access.
E. Power lines. To the greatest extent possible, on-site power lines shall be
placed underground.
F. Glare. Primary use solar energy systems shall be designed and installed
in a manner as to not project any glare or glint onto any adjoining
property or roadway as follows:
(1) A glare and glint study report from the latest version of the
ForgeSolar GlareGauge© tool, or equivalent, shall be provided to
the Township by a registered professional, as defined in § 147-11,
Definitions and word usage. The tool shall be used to determine
that the solar energy system will have no ocular impact or low
potential for temporary after-image ocular impact as illustrated by
the solar glare ocular hazard plot in Figure 1. The observation
points used with the tool shall be determined in coordination with
the Township.
Solar Glare Ocular Hazard Plot: The potential ocular hazard from
solar glare is a function of retinal irradiance and the subtended
angle (size/distance) of the glare source. It should be noted that
the ratio of spectrally weighted solar illuminance to solar
irradiance at the earth's surface yields a conversion factor of ˜100
lumens/W. Plot adapted from Ho et al., 2011.
Chart References: Ho, C.K., C.M. Ghanbari, and R.B. Diver, 2011,
Methodology to Assess Potential Glint and Glare Hazards from
Concentrating Solar Power Plants: Analytical Models and
Experimental Validation, J. Solar Energy Engineering, August
2011. Vol. 133.031021-1 - 031021-9.
(2) The Township reserves the right to require one or more of the
following to limit glare:
(a) Modification of the location, angle of tilt, and/or azimuth angle
of the solar collector(s).
§ 142-2 (RESERVED) § 142-2
123:279
§ 142-3. Accessory solar energy systems.
(b) Placement of landscaping or other physical object to limit the
projection of glare or glint.
(c) Utilization of anti-reflective (AR) glass on the solar energy
system.
(d) Utilization of glass with a light-diffusing texture on the front
surface.
G. Procedure. All applications for primary use systems shall be reviewed
and approved pursuant to the plan review procedures of Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Removal.
(1) If a primary use system ceases to perform for more than 12
consecutive months, it shall be considered abandoned, and all
equipment, devices, and other appurtenances shall be removed by
the owner within 90 days.
(2) Upon determining that a primary use system has been abandoned,
the Zoning Officer shall issue notice to the property owner. The
owner shall have the right to respond to within 30 days of receipt of
the notice.
(3) If all equipment, devices, and other appurtenances are not
removed or repaired within 90 days of receipt of the notice of
abandonment, the Township may pursue legal action to have the
solar energy system removed at the owner's expense.
A. Applicability. A solar energy system shall be considered an accessory
use under the following conditions:
(1) The system does not meet the criteria for a utility scale solar
energy system, as defined in § 175-6, Definitions; interpretations of
regulations.
(2) Large developments or institutions may utilize a solar energy
system as an accessory use given that its capacity is such that it is
designed to supplement the energy needs of the development or
institution.
(3) Interconnection of a system into the utility grid shall not disqualify
it from being an accessory use, given that the interconnection is
only utilized periodically and the system can be defined as a
customer-generator under 52 Pa. Code § 75.1.
B. Glare. Glare or glint from a solar energy system shall be regulated as
follows:
§ 142-2 PATTON CODE § 142-3
123:280
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate to the
Township that the proposed system will be installed in a manner
that will limit glare or glint.
(2) The latest version of the ForgeSolar GlareGauge© tool or an
acceptable equivalent may be used to demonstrate to the Township
the amount, location, and time of day that glare may be projected
onto any habitable structure(s) on an adjacent property or right-ofway.
(3) Any ground-mounted or building-mounted solar energy system with
a solar collector surface area greater than 1/2 acre shall perform a
solar glare analysis study in accordance with the regulations for
primary use solar energy systems.
(4) The Township reserves the right to require one or more of the
following to limit glare:
(a) Modification of the location, angle of tilt, and/or azimuth angle
of the solar collector(s).
(b) Placement of landscaping or other physical object to limit the
projection of glare or glint.
(c) Utilization of anti-reflective (AR) glass on the solar energy
system.
(d) Utilization of glass with a light-diffusing texture on the front
surface.
C. Building-integrated solar energy systems. The regulations herein shall
not apply to building-integrated solar energy systems, given that they
do not make the structure nonconforming with any other zoning
regulations.
D. Self-contained solar energy systems. Solar energy systems located on a
light fixture, sign, or other similar device shall be permitted with the
following regulations:
(1) The system is limited in size so that it provides only enough energy
for the device it is mounted on.
(2) No part of the system shall extend more than three feet above the
device it is mounted to or the maximum height permitted in the
district, whichever is greater.
E. Parking lots and structures. Solar energy systems placed in parking lots
shall be designed and installed as follows:
(1) Systems shall be placed at a minimum height to sufficiently allow
access for motor vehicles to park underneath them. If the system is
placed over a drive aisle, the minimum clearance at the lowest
point of the system shall be 14 feet.
§ 142-3 (RESERVED) § 142-3
123:281
Chapter 144
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107. Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
(2) A system located over the top level of a multilevel parking structure
shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet as measured from the
driving surface to the highest point of the system.
F. Procedure. All solar energy systems as defined herein shall require a
zoning permit pursuant to § 175-56, Zoning permit.
§ 142-3 PATTON CODE § 142-3
123:282
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
§ 144-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Patton Township Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance."
§ 144-2. Purpose.
§ 144-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK WASTE — All waste materials too large for collection in ordinary
containers. Examples of bulk waste include furniture, appliances, carpeting
and similar items. Bulk waste shall not consist of any items that may be
packaged and disposed of using regular trash collection procedures.
COMMERCIAL — Any establishment engaged in a nonmanufacturing or
nonprocessing business including, but not limited to, stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters. Multifamily dwelling
units, manufactured home parks, hotels, motels, mixed-use properties
(combined business/residential on a single parcel) and farms which use
commercial dumpsters shall be considered commercial establishments.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and to eliminate public health hazards,
environmental pollution and economic loss by providing that all
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional municipal solid
waste accumulated or stored upon any property within the municipality
shall be collected, transported and disposed of within the following
conditions:
(1) All residential properties shall be served by the municipality's
contracted hauler.
(2) All nonresidential properties not subject to the municipality's
contract shall have contracted waste service with a hauler.
(3) All municipal solid waste shall be disposed of at an approved
facility, in accordance with the Centre County Solid Waste
Management Plan, as well as municipal, state, federal and county
laws and ordinances.
B. These conditions are established to assure municipality compliance
with the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act,
Act of July 28, 1988, (P.L. 528, No. 101), "Pennsylvania Act 101."118
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 144-1 (RESERVED) § 144-3
123:283
Does not include properties where primary permitted use is residential and
accessory use is commercial (i.e., home occupations).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
CUSTOMER — The owner of any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional property located within the municipality.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An agent such as the Centre Region Council
of Governments acting on behalf of a municipality whose powers and
responsibilities are established in an intergovernmental agreement or
similar document.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms on premises which have cooking
facilities and are arranged for occupancy by one person, two or more
persons living together or one family. Each dwelling unit within a
noncommercial building shall be considered an individual residential
customer served by curbside refuse and recycling collection.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by Patton Township,
or its designated agent, with a private person or corporation for the
collection and disposal of all municipal waste generated within the
boundaries of the municipality to the extent provided by this article and the
agreement.
FARM — A single parcel of land of at least 10 acres, which is used for
normal agricultural purposes, including barns, greenhouses and not more
than three single-family dwelling units.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports and/or disposes of municipal
solid waste, recyclable materials and bulk waste from residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments or community
activity. The term may be applied to a person having the exclusive right
to collect within the municipality. All such haulers shall comply with the
provisions under the Pennsylvania waste transportation safety act (act
90),119 as well as all federal, state, county and local laws, rules and
regulations.
INDUSTRIAL — Any establishment engaging in manufacturing or
processing, including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills,
processing plants and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL — Any establishment engaged in service to persons,
including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools
and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and
similar material but not including grass clippings (Act 101, Section 103120).
119. Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
§ 144-3 PATTON CODE § 144-3
123:284
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A type of residential property either
under single ownership or organized as a condominium or cooperative form
of housing, which contains five or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPALITY — A political unit, such as a city, town, or village,
incorporated for local self-government.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and any other material including solid waste, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual
or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal,
commercial, industrial or institutional water supply treatment plant, waste
water treatment plant or air pollution control facility (Pennsylvania Act 101,
Section 103).121
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECYCLABLES — The collection and separation of aluminum, steel, and
bimetal cans; green, brown, blue, and clear glass; newsprint and bundles
of magazines; unwanted mail; mixed office paper; paperboard; all plastic
bottles (1 through 7); domestic corrugated cardboard; empty aerosol and
paint cans; and any other materials per section 1501 of State Act 101122
or added as material accepted by the Centre County Solid Waste Authority
("CCSWA") from time to time.
REFUSE — All municipal solid waste which is regulated by State Act
101 and the Centre County Solid Waste Authority, except the following
categories of solid waste:
A. Bulk waste, including tires and appliances.
B. Construction/demolition waste.
C. Sludge.
D. Infectious/pathological waste.
E. Ash residue.
F. Friable asbestos waste.
G. Source separated recyclable materials.
H. Household hazardous waste.
I. Oversized refuse items.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
122. Editor's note: See 53 P.S.§ 4000.1501.
§ 144-3 (RESERVED) § 144-3
123:285
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A "dwelling unit" under single ownership or
organized as a condominium or cooperative form of housing, which contains
one, two, three or four dwelling units.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility, or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal
refuse as defined in the Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act."123 The term shall not
include treatment sludge from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a
valid permit issued pursuant to the act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394),
known as the "Clean Streams Law" (Pennsylvania Act 101, Section 103).124
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The following categories of solid waste:
J. Grass clippings.
K. Leaf waste.
L. Unacceptable waste.
A. Hazardous waste.
B. Residual waste.
C. Unsterilized or unprocessed infectious or pathological waste.
D. Chemotherapeutic waste.
E. Gas cylinders.
F. Explosives and ordnance materials.
Liquid waste (i.e., containing less than twenty-percent solids by weight
or flowable).
G.
Drums, barrels and buckets unless lids have been removed and
interiors cleaned and free of any residue.
H.
I. Radioactive materials.
J. Any solid waste generated outside of the municipality.
123. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
124. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 144-3 PATTON CODE § 144-4
123:286
§ 144-4. Maintenance of containers.
It shall be the duty of every person owning a residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional property within the municipality where municipal
solid waste is generated and accumulated, by his/her own expense and
cost, except as otherwise specified in this article, to provide and keep at
all times a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal solid waste
accumulated between intervals of collection of such waste by a hauler; and
to ensure the sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in accordance with
this article and all other municipal, state and federal applicable laws and
regulations.
§ 144-5. Storage on residential properties.
A. All refuse accumulated by owners of residential properties and/or the
occupants of residential properties shall be placed in containers for
collection by a hauler. Refuse containers used for curbside collection
shall be watertight, covered plastic or metallic cans or durable and
lightweight plastic bags that can be easily and quickly handled by one
person. Refuse containers shall be not less than five gallons nor more
than 35 gallons in capacity. The weight of a single filled container shall
not exceed 40 pounds. Use of bulk containers at multifamily
establishments shall comply with the provisions of § 144-6A below.
B. It shall be the responsibility of each customer to keep all refuse
receptacles in good repair and sanitary condition. Any receptacle which
does not conform to the provisions of this article or that may have
ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the
hauler shall be promptly replaced upon notice. Failure to comply within
10 days will result in the removal of the defective receptacle as refuse.
C. A sufficient number of refuse receptacles shall be provided by the
customer of the premises. No container shall be so filled that the lid will
not fit tightly.
D. More than one family or living unit on the same premises may use the
same containers but each family must pay the established rate as
though a separate container is being used.
E. Location of containers.
(1) For residential properties with curbside collection, each refuse
container shall be placed for collection so as to be accessible to the
hauler at ground level and at a point immediately behind the
curbline of the street, within no more than 10 feet of the cartway of
the street or alley from which the collection with a vehicle is made
if there is no curbing, or at a location mutually agreeable between
the resident, the municipality and the hauler. Failure to place
containers at such locations may result in refuse not being
collected.. Pickup at alternate locations may occur in accordance
with agreement between customer and hauler.
§ 144-4 (RESERVED) § 144-5
123:287
§ 144-6. Storage on commercial, industrial and institutional
properties.
§ 144-7. Collection of municipal solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than persons defined herein to
collect and/or transport municipal solid waste, which is generated within
the municipality, as a regular hauling business. The municipality may decide
to enter into an exclusive contract for residential and/or commercial refuse
collection or any part thereof.
§ 144-8. Transportation of municipal solid waste.
(2) Location of bulk containers at multifamily dwelling units shall be in
accordance with § 144-6B below.
F. Failure to remove refuse containers from the curb or street after seven
days shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, subject to the
penalties contained herein.
G. Persons with physical disabilities (due to age, poor health, or as defined
in the Americans with Disabilities Act) whose residence is included
under the municipality's exclusive contract may place refuse at otherthan-
street-or-alley locations at no additional charge when approved by
the Township Manager or his/her designee.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal solid waste on commercial, industrial
and institutional properties shall be done in a dumpster for collection
by a hauler. If the amount of waste generated per week is less than a
two-yard dumpster, the same type of containers as required for
residential properties as defined in § 144-5 shall be allowed if agreed
upon by both the customer and the hauler.
B. Location of containers. Dumpsters for the storage and collection of
municipal solid waste at commercial, industrial or institutional
properties shall be placed, whenever possible, at ground level and at a
point on the property being serviced by the hauler which will enable
clear and easy access to the dumpster by the hauler's vehicle. The
location on the customer's premises shall be at a place agreed upon by
the customer of the commercial, industrial or institutional property and
the hauler. This location and buffering, if required, shall be in
compliance with zoning or other applicable municipal requirements for
the location of such containers. Such locations shall not interfere with
regular travel upon public or private sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and exits of public or
private buildings.
A. Any person transporting municipal solid waste within the municipality
shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in
the transport of such municipal solid waste. The haulers shall collect
municipal solid waste in vehicles which are suitable for such collection,
§ 144-5 PATTON CODE § 144-8
123:288
§ 144-9. Disposal of municipal solid waste.
All municipal solid waste produced, collected and transported from within
the jurisdictional limits of the municipality shall be disposed of at the
facilities designated in the Centre County Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 144-10. Unlawful disposition of municipal solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any municipal solid waste into
Patton Township or to transport municipal solid waste from one address
to another within or outside of the municipality for the purpose of taking
advantage of the collection service to avoid the cost of collection.
§ 144-11. Bulk waste.
§ 144-12. Construction and demolition waste.
All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alteration, repair,
construction or demolition of buildings or structures shall be disposed of
which are dedicated for use in performance of such collection, and
which bear prominent legible marking, signs, or decals identifying them
as being municipal solid waste collection vehicles, and stating the
name and phone number of the hauler. The vehicles shall be securely
covered, watertight, strongly built and kept thoroughly cleaned and
well maintained. Except for roll-offs, open trucks or trucks covered with
tarps will not be used for the collection of municipal solid waste. Open
trucks may be used for the collection of bulk waste, provided that the
truck is tarped.
B. The municipality, or its designated agent, shall have the authority to
inspect the vehicles used for the transport of municipal solid waste as it
deems necessary to determine compliance with this article or any other
ordinance, resolution and/or regulation of the municipality. The hauler
shall correct deficiencies immediately upon notification by the
municipality or its designated agent, and said vehicle shall not be used
for refuse collection until the deficiencies have been corrected.
A. Bulk waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the Centre County
Solid Waste Management Plan at a permitted disposal facility, a facility
especially designated by the municipality to take such bulk items or a
legitimate salvage dealer that is in the business of disposing or
recycling such items. Bulk waste may be transported in a vehicle
appropriate to the type of waste so as to prevent spillage, accidental
loss, etc.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid waste
from hauling his/her bulk waste to a permitted disposal facility or to a
disposal facility as designated by the municipality in accordance with
the regulations of the disposal facility.
§ 144-8 (RESERVED) § 144-12
123:289
as permitted by applicable municipality, county, state and federal laws and
regulations as may be in effect or as may be subsequently imposed. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure the disposal of
such waste in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not regularly
engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid waste from hauling
his/her construction and demolition waste to a state-permitted disposal
facility or to a disposal facility as designated by the municipality in
accordance with the regulations of the disposal facility.
§ 144-13. Exclusions.
§ 144-14. Accumulation of refuse prohibited.
For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person
to accumulate or permit to accumulate upon private property in the
municipality any of the types of refuse and bulk waste defined within
§ 144-3 of this article.
§ 144-15. Service fee required.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and every
person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the
municipality where municipal solid waste is generated to pay a service fee
for the collection and disposal of this waste, except as otherwise provided
by this article, to a hauler, exclusive contractor or to the municipality. A
hauler, exclusive contractor or the municipality may discontinue service
for nonpayment of service fees by a residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment. To discontinue residential service, the customer
shall be in arrears a minimum of 90 days and shall have received during
this period a minimum of two written notices from the hauler regarding
the amount due and procedures for payment. The second notice shall be
sent by certified mail. At the time of the discontinuance of service, the
A. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste, not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land applications. All such practices must be
conducted in compliance with applicable municipal, state and federal
laws and regulations as may be in effect or subsequently imposed.
B. The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste and do
not apply, therefore, to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act and its amendments.125 All
hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable municipal, state and federal laws and regulations as may be
in effect or subsequently imposed.
125. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 144-12 PATTON CODE § 144-15
123:290
customer shall be considered in violation of this article. Discontinuance of
service due to nonpayment of service fees shall not relieve the resident
or establishment from abiding by all of the requirements of this article.
The municipality, or its designated agent, hauler or exclusive contractor
may impose an administrative fee to reinstate customers whose service is
disconnected.
§ 144-16. Service charges.
The cost of such residential or commercial municipal solid waste collection
service, and the responsibility of payment therefor, shall be borne by the
owner of the premises from which said municipal solid waste is collected or
upon which premises said municipal solid waste is generated and disposed
of. No agreement between an owner and occupant or other person shall
relieve the owner of any premises from liability for payments as set forth
hereinafter.
§ 144-17. Charges to be established by resolution.
All service fees established under an exclusive contract for the collection
of municipal solid waste by the municipality shall be established by a
resolution of the municipality Board of Supervisors. Service charges so
established shall be reviewed at least annually and adjusted as necessary
to ensure that all costs involved in the collection and disposal of municipal
solid waste under the exclusive contract, including the administrative costs
of the municipality, or its designated agent, are covered by the service
charges.
§ 144-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction by a District Justice, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or imprisonment
in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Every violator of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense each and every day such violation continues and
shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every
separate offense.
§ 144-19. Other remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the municipality may require the owner
or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of waste as identified
under § 144-14, and should said person fail to remove such waste after five
days following written notice, the municipality may cause the waste to be
collected and disposed of with the cost for such action to be charged to the
owner or occupant of the property. Failure by the owner or occupant of the
§ 144-15 (RESERVED) § 144-19
123:291
property to pay said charges within 30 days will result in a lien being filed
against the property.
§ 144-20. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
§ 144-21. Amendments.
This chapter or any part thereof may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the procedures as established by law.
§ 144-19 PATTON CODE § 144-21
123:292
ARTICLE II
Recycling
§ 144-22. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Patton Township Recycling Ordinance,"
and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 144-23. Purpose.
The Township of Patton recognizing the reclamation of recyclable materials
has become an important method for addressing the growing solid waste
disposal problem through conservation of landfill space, preservation of
natural resources and a reduction in energy consumption, does hereby
authorize the storage, collection and transportation of recyclable materials
in accordance with the provisions of the municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (No. 101),126 the Centre County Solid
Waste Management Plan, and this article. This article is intended to be an
integral part of an overall system designed to facilitate recycling and foster
the cooperation of the residents.
§ 144-24. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
article:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
AUTHORITY — Centre County Solid Waste Authority.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty beverage or food containers consisting of
two metals such as steel, tin or aluminum.
COMMERCIAL — Any establishment engaged in a nonmanufacturing or
nonprocessing business including, but not limited to, stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters. Multifamily dwelling
units, manufactured home parks, hotels, motels, mixed-use properties
(combined business/residential on a single parcel) and farms which use
commercial dumpsters shall be considered commercial establishments.
Does not include properties where the primary permitted use is residential
and accessory use is commercial (i.e., home occupations).
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Church, school, civic, service group,
municipal functions and all other such functions.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transportation of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other area
designated by the collector.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 144-22 (RESERVED) § 144-24
123:293
CUSTOMER — The owner of any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional property located within the municipality.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An agent, such as the Centre Region Council
of Governments, acting on behalf of the municipality whose powers and
responsibilities are established in an intergovernmental agreement or
similar document.
DROP-OFF SITES — Those specified locations, staffed or unstaffed, where
recyclable materials may be taken at specified times.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms on premises which have cooking
facilities and are arranged for occupancy by one person, two or more
persons living together or one family. Each dwelling unit within a
noncommercial building shall be considered an individual residential
customer served by curbside refuse and recycling collection..
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated herein or otherwise
charged with the responsibilities of administering this article, or the official
authorized representative.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by Patton Township,
or its designated agent, with a private person or corporation for the
collection and disposal of all municipal waste generated within the
boundaries of the municipality to the extent provided by this article and the
agreement.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or amber
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, automobile glass, plate
glass, blue glass, lead crystal and porcelain and ceramic products.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports and/or disposes of municipal
solid waste, recyclable materials and bulk waste from residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments or community
activity. The term may be applied to a person having the exclusive right
to collect within the municipality. All such haulers shall comply with the
provisions under State Act 90,127 as well as all federal, state, county and
local laws, rules and regulations.
HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) CONTAINERS — Plastic bottles
and jars made exclusively from noncolored high-density polyethylene, such
as milk and water jugs.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper, and computer
paper used in commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments.
INDUSTRIAL — Any establishment engaging in manufacturing or
processing, including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills,
processing plants and refineries.
127. Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201.
§ 144-24 PATTON CODE § 144-24
123:294
INSTITUTIONAL — Any establishment engaged in service to persons,
including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools
and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes, but not be limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and
similar material but not including grass clippings (Act 101, section 103128).
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A type of residential property either
under single ownership or organized as a condominium or cooperative form
of housing, which contains five or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPALITY — A political unit, such as a city, town, or village,
incorporated for local self-government.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and any other material including solid waste, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual
or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal,
commercial, industrial or institutional water supply treatment plant, waste
water treatment plant, or air pollution control facilities (Pennsylvania Act
101, Section 103).129
NEWSPAPERS — All paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at fixed intervals having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are newspapers which are wet, yellowed or soiled.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE (PET) CONTAINERS — Plastic soda
bottles composed of the polymer PET.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The collection and separation of aluminum,
steel, and bimetal cans; green, brown, blue, and clear glass; newsprint and
bundles of magazines; unwanted mail; mixed office paper; paperboard; all
plastic bottles (1 through 7); domestic corrugated cardboard; empty aerosol
and paint cans; and any other materials per section 1501 of State Act 101130
or added as material accepted by the Centre County Solid Waste Authority
("CCSWA") from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A "dwelling unit" under single ownership or
organized as a condominium or cooperative form of housing, which contains
one, two, three or four dwelling units.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
130. Editor's note: See 53 P.S.§ 4000.1501.
§ 144-24 (RESERVED) § 144-24
123:295
STEEL CANS — Empty all-steel food and beverage containers.
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
§ 144-25. General provisions.
Those recyclable materials separated under the provisions of this article
shall not be considered municipal waste and shall not be subject to the
provisions of municipal ordinances which require disposal of municipal solid
waste at the Centre County Solid Waste Authority facilities by a hauler as
defined herein.
§ 144-26. Recycling program established.
The municipality hereby establishes a program for the mandatory
separation of recyclables from municipal solid waste by residential
dwellings and commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
§ 144-27. Drop-off facilities.
Drop-off facilities may be sited for use by those residential and commercial
properties located within Centre County not serviced by a curbside route.
Occupants of these residential and commercial properties shall be
responsible for the separation of recyclable materials from municipal solid
waste and their preparation and delivery to drop-off sites established by the
municipality.
§ 144-28. Containers.
§ 144-29. Recycling by hauler.
A. All recyclable material accumulated by owners of residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional properties and/or occupants of
said properties shall be placed in containers for collection by a hauler.
B. It shall be the responsibility of each customer to keep all recycling
receptacles in good repair and sanitary condition.
C. More than one family or dwelling unit on the same premises may use
the same containers but each family must pay the established rate as
though a separate container is being used.
D. Location of containers. For residential and commercial properties,
recycling containers shall be placed near refuse containers for
collection. Pickup at alternate locations may occur in accordance with
agreement between customer and hauler.
A. All recyclable materials generated within the municipality shall be
collected by a hauler. A commercial, industrial and institutional
establishment may utilize an individual recycling program in
conformance with § 144-30.
§ 144-24 PATTON CODE § 144-29
123:296
§ 144-30. Individual recycling plan.
§ 144-31. Establishment of regulations.
The municipality or its designated agent shall establish and promulgate
regulations on the manner, days and time of collection of recyclable
materials and for the bundling, handling, location and time of placement
of such materials for collection. Regulations shall be promulgated for each
B. The municipality or its designated agent may, through a competitive
bidding process, award an exclusive service contract for all or part of
residential recycling collection.
A. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments conducting
their own recycling programs, not in conjunction with a hauler or under
an exclusive contract as may be established by the municipality for the
collection of municipal waste and recyclables, shall file with the
municipality or its designated agent and have approved by the
municipality or its designated agent, plans for individual recycling
programs which provide for, at a minimum, the recycling of items listed
in rules and regulations for the recycling program.
B. In addition to filing an individual recycling plan, commercial, industrial
and institutional customers who choose to establish an individual
recycling program are required to submit semiannually to the
municipality or its designated agent, weigh slips or other certification
which show by weight and type of material recycled by that
establishment. If weigh slips are not used, the form of certification
requires the prior approval of the municipality or its designated agent.
Required information is due within 60 days of the end of the reporting
period designated in the regulations for the recycling program.
C. An individual recycling plan for commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments shall provide the following information:
(1) Applicant's company name, address, telephone number, contact
person and owner's name.
(2) Company name, address, telephone number, and contact person for
entity providing the recycling service.
(3) Description of materials to be recycled, frequency of collection,
method of storage and how service will be provided.
(4) Form of certification to assure proper disposal of recyclable
materials.
(5) Municipality in which the establishment is located.
(6) Other information as may be required by the municipality or its
designated agent which is intended to assure the proper disposal of
recyclable materials.
§ 144-29 (RESERVED) § 144-31
123:297
of the programs undertaken for residential dwelling units, and commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments.
§ 144-32. Special items.
§ 144-33. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It is understood that any recyclable materials located at the curbline are
the property of the municipality. It is further understood that any recyclable
materials deposited in storage bins associated with commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments belong to the property owner. Recyclable
materials deposited in containers owned by the Centre County Solid Waste
Authority are the property of the Authority.
§ 144-34. Accumulation of recyclables prohibited.
For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person
to accumulate or permit to accumulate upon private property in the
municipality, any of the types of recyclables defined within § 144-24 of this
article.
§ 144-35. Enforcement and administration.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint an enforcement officer or officers to
enforce and administer the provisions of this article.
§ 144-36. Alternative disposition of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations. Otherwise, such materials are to be placed at curbside,
in drop-off facilities or storage bins or similar authorized locations for
collection by the exclusive contractor or hauler as applicable.
§ 144-37. Violations and penalties.
A. Lead acid batteries. No person shall place a used lead acid battery in
mixed municipal solid waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid
battery except by delivery to an automotive battery retailer or
wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter permitted by the Environmental
Protection Agency, or to a collection or recycling facility authorized
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Leaf collection. All residential customers and commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments who gather leaves shall separate all leaf
waste from municipal solid waste and place it for collection at the times
and in the manner heretofore or hereafter prescribed by the
municipality. Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaf
waste or prevent any person from utilizing leaf waste for compost,
mulch or other agriculture, horticulture, silvicultural, gardening or
landscape purposes.
§ 144-31 PATTON CODE § 144-37
123:298
A. Nonparticipation.
(1) Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this article,
the municipality may, through its authorized agent, give notice to
the owner or occupant of a violation hereunder, either by personal
delivery to such owner or occupant, by United States Mail directed
to the last known address of such person or persons, as shown in
the real estate registry records of the municipality, or by leaving
the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
(2) Such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or
leaving of such notice, make settlement by paying to the Treasurer
of the municipality a sum of not more than $600 for the violation.
Upon the failure of such person to make a settlement, as aforesaid,
within seven days, the municipality may institute an action for
violation pursuant to Subsection B.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall affect, in any way, the
provisions of this article regarding separate offenses for every day
any violation occurs.
B. Fines for nonparticipation or nonpayment. On neglect or refusal of the
occupant of any dwelling serviced by curbside recycling collection,
residential dwelling unit or commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment, to separate recyclable materials from municipal solid
waste and place them at curbside or sites established by the
municipality or its designated agent, or make a settlement as provided
in Subsection A, that person shall, upon conviction before a District
Justice of such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than
30 days. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. Unauthorized collection. If any person, firm, corporation or other entity,
unauthorized by the municipality or its designated agent collects or
removes or causes to be collected or removed any such recyclable
materials as specified in the Patton Township regulations, or in violation
of the provisions of this article, such person, firm, corporation or other
entity shall, upon conviction by a District Justice in a summary
proceeding, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or imprisonment in the
Centre County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate summary
proceedings before a District Justice, and subject to a penalty imposed
by this section for each and every such violation shall continue.
§ 144-37 (RESERVED) § 144-37
123:299
D. Pilfering of collection containers. If any person is responsible for
pilfering of collection containers issued to a residence slated for either
curbside collection or any other phase of the Patton Township Recycling
Program, such person shall, upon conviction by a District Justice in a
summary proceeding, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than
30 days. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day of a violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate summary
proceedings before a District Justice and subject to a penalty imposed
by this article for each and every such violation shall continue. The
affected resident will be responsible for replacing any missing
container through purchase from the municipality or its designated
agent.
§ 144-37 PATTON CODE § 144-37
123:300
Chapter 147
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 10.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 144-37 (RESERVED) § 144-37
123:301

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 147-1. Statement of findings.
The governing body of Patton Township finds that:
§ 147-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Patton Township through provisions designed to:
§ 147-3. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act
A. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater best management practices
(BMPs) causes loss of water quality, flooding, and other problems.
B. Federal and state regulations require this municipality to obtain a
permit for discharges from its MS4 and to implement a program of
stormwater controls.
C. A comprehensive program of reasonable regulation of connections and
discharges to municipal stormwater management facilities is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of the municipality of all the people of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important resource.
E. Federal and state regulations require this municipality to obtain a
permit for discharges from its MS4 and to implement a program of
stormwater controls.
A. Manage accelerated runoff, erosion, aggradation, and degradation.
B. Comply with NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
C. Meet state water quality requirements.
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
municipality and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities that are constructed in the basin.
G. Provide procedures and standards for stormwater management and
planning.
H. Protect groundwater and surface water quality.
§ 147-1 (RESERVED) § 147-3
123:303
167), Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management
Act," and § 2704 of the Second Class Township Code and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805 as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.)
§ 147-4. Applicability.
§ 147-5. Municipal liability.
The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the municipality, any appointed or elected
official of the municipality, the Centre County Conservation District or any
officer, engineer or employee thereof for any erosion, sedimentation or flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 147-6. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall apply to all land and watercourses within Patton
Township.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities and BMPs constructed as part of any of the regulated activities
listed in this section and to the ownership and maintenance of said
facilities and BMPs. Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment pollution control during construction activities are specifically
not regulated by this chapter, but shall continue to be regulated under
existing laws and ordinances.
C. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development;
(2) Subdivisions;
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (roadways, driveways, parking lots, etc.);
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or manmade stream channel;
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
§ 147-3 PATTON CODE § 147-7
123:304
§ 147-7. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, statutes, or
ordinances. If more stringent requirements concerning regulation of
stormwater, erosion and sediment pollution control and floodplain
management are contained in the other code, rule, act or ordinance, the
more stringent regulation shall apply.
§ 147-8. Landowner responsibility.
The granting of any exemption, permit, or approval by the municipality
does not relieve the landowner from assuring that stormwater runoff from
the development site will not cause injury or damage to other persons or
property.
§ 147-9. References.
Specific methods and publications indicated in this chapter shall, in all
cases, refer to the latest available edition and include revisions or
amendments thereto.
§ 147-10. Exemptions.
A. Activities identified below are exempt from the requirement to submit a
stormwater management plan to the municipality for review. Exemption
shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, and property. These measures
include adequate and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as
it leaves the site. This exemption shall not relieve the developer or
owner from meeting the special requirements for water quality and
groundwater recharge for high quality (HQ) and exceptional value (EV)
watersheds (DEP Chapter 93 and antidegradation requirement), and
§ 147-15C and E of this chapter relative to recharge and water quality
volume requirements.
(1) All development activities having impervious coverage of less than
10% of the total site area up to a maximum impervious area of
5,000 square feet. However, adequate and safe conveyance of
stormwater from the site must be provided. For developments that
are to be constructed in phases, the sum of all final phases must be
considered in establishing exemption eligibility. Impervious cover
shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway
areas, and any new streets and sidewalks, or bikeways.
(2) Land disturbance associated with the construction or alteration of
one- and two-family dwellings, provided that the disturbance does
not alter any stormwater condition beyond the boundaries of the lot
or alter provisions of a previously approved stormwater
management plan for the lot or encompassing subdivision.
§ 147-7 (RESERVED) § 147-10
123:305
(3) Any site less than one acre in size that decreases the total site
impervious area following development, and:
(a) Is not located within a recognized sensitive area (as defined in
Article II, Definitions, of this chapter);
(b) Is not defined as a water quality sensitive (WQS) development
(as defined in Article II, Definitions, and Appendix B, Maps131);
and
(c) Is not located in an area where existing downstream
stormwater problems are known to occur (the Municipal
Engineer shall make the final determination as to preexisting
problems, but the municipality must have supporting
documentation of past problems).
(4) In addition, the Municipal Engineer may waive the requirement to
prepare a stormwater management plan for sites larger than 1.0
acre for which the overall site impervious area is being decreased,
and which meets the other conditions identified above.
B. The diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel or
the installation of stormwater management facilities or modifications
thereto cannot be exempted. These activities always require the
submission of a stormwater management plan. The exemptions in
Subsection A(1) and (2) cannot be combined for use with small
residential subdivisions. Multiple (greater than two) lot subdivisions
cannot be exempted.
C. In addition to the general exemptions identified above, exemptions for
specific technical criteria are identified where applicable in Article III.
131. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-10 PATTON CODE § 147-10
123:306
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 147-11. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as presented below. Additional definitions are
provided in the Stormwater Management Plan for the Spring Creek
Watershed Centre County, Pennsylvania, definitions Appendix.
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like, kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this chapter
shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings
given to them in this section. All words and terms not defined herein or
in the stormwater management plan for the Spring Creek Watershed or
in the Patton Township Code of Ordinances' other chapters shall be
used with a meaning or standard usage.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and heavy use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 147-11
of this chapter.
§ 147-11 (RESERVED) § 147-11
123:307
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BUFFER AREA — Area that is protected from development in order to
prevent degradation of the water body or water quality.
CAPTURE DEPTH — Depth of runoff captured from a given area and
either allowed to evaporate, infiltrate, or be discharged through a
spillway at a negligible rate.
CARBONATE — A sediment formed by the organic or inorganic
precipitation of mineral compounds characterized by the fundamental
chemical ion CO3, the principal element in limestone and dolomite.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway, which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, having a definite
bed and banks which confine the water.
CLOSED OR UNDRAINED DEPRESSION — In a karst geologic area, a
distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land surface; size and amplitude
are variable; drainage is internal. It differs from a sinkhole in that the
ground surface is unbroken and usually occurs in greater density per
unit area.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Centre County Conservation
District.
CREDITS — A deduction from the required amount. In this chapter,
implies reduction of required water quality volumes due to using a
recommended practice.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 147-11 PATTON CODE § 147-11
123:308
DESIGNEE — The agent of a planning commission and/or agent of
the governing body involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DOLOMITE —
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — The natural or man-made path of surface water from
a given area.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that
is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
A mineral consisting of calcium magnesium carbonate found as
compact limestone; or
(1)
(2) Limestone or marble rich in magnesium carbonate.
§ 147-11 (RESERVED) § 147-11
123:309
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by Federal Insurance and Mitigation
Administration (FIMA). In an area where no FIMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of each bank of the stream.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of underground water
supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake
rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according
to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after
prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides
a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS 3,4).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (AREA) — A surface that prevents the
infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor living
spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any
new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are
not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION RATE — The infiltration rate of a soil is related to the
soil's final infiltration capacity and represents the rate at which water
enters the soil/air interface at the top of the soil profile. Infiltration
rates are measured in units of length/time.
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone, dolomite,
or gypsum by bedrock solution, and that is characterized by closed
depressions or sinkholes, caves, and underground drainage (from
American Geologic Institute, Glossary of Geology, 1972).
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Inclusive of any or all of the following
meanings:
§ 147-11 PATTON CODE § 147-11
123:310
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other
activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LAND USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or
a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or
occupied or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on
in a building or other structure on a tract of land.
LIMESTONE — A rock that, by accumulation of organic remains,
consists mainly of calcium carbonate.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Spring Creek hydrologic
model.
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE — In relation to this chapter, the
minimum rate that can be discharged for any drainage area for design
storm events up to and including the ten-year event regardless of the
modeled predevelopment runoff estimate.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Patton Centre County,
Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONSERVATION AREAS — A natural area protected during
development for its water quality or recharge-enhancing abilities.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System as
established by the Federal Clean Water Act, the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1-691.1001) and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows form a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PA DEP — Pennsylvania State Department of Environmental Protection.
PA DOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of
or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
(3)
§ 147-11 (RESERVED) § 147-11
123:311
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERCOLATION RATE — The rate at which water moves through a soil
profile. Percolation rates are measured in units of time/length.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
POINT DISCHARGE — The discharge from a pipe or channel that
concentrates runoff at a single area.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A soil scientist, geologist,
hydrogeologist, geotechnical engineer or other professional who is
qualified by the basis of training and experienced to render opinions
and recommendations regarding recharge and sinkholes as stated in
this chapter. The Municipal Engineer shall determine, based on the
professional's record of training and experience, if an individual is
qualified to provide opinions and recommendations as stated in this
chapter.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL — An individual registered in and
licensed by the State of Pennsylvania and authorized to certify
subdivision and land development plans in accordance with § 503.(1) of
the Municipal Planning Code.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 147-4 of this
chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92a, 25 Pa.
Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall has a four-percent
probability of occurring in any given year.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SAFE PASSAGE — The routing of peak runoff events, usually the onehundred-
year design event, safely through a structure without failure
of that structure.
SCOUR — Generally refers to the change in a channel configuration
provoked by sediment imbalance, due to natural or man-made causes,
between the supply and transport capacity of the channel.
§ 147-11 PATTON CODE § 147-11
123:312
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by water.
SENSITIVE (WATER QUALITY) AREA — An area protected because
development within that area could potentially cause contamination
of groundwater reservoirs. These sensitive land areas are defined in
Appendix B, Exhibit 1.132
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thick,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SINKHOLE — A localized, gradual or rapid sinking of the land surface
to a variable depth, occurring in areas of carbonate bedrock; generally
characterized by a roughly circular outline, a distinct breaking of the
ground surface and downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
SPRING CREEK WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
— The plan for managing stormwater runoff in the Spring Creek
Watershed adopted by the Centre County Commissioners on June 21,
2002, as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167),
and known as the "Spring Creek Watershed Action 167 Stormwater
Management Plan."
STABILIZATION — The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil,
rock or earth to ensure their resistance to erosion, sliding or other
movement.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter.
132. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-11 (RESERVED) § 147-11
123:313
STORMWATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STRUCTURAL FILL — For the purposes of this chapter, shall imply any
soil mass that is compacted in lifts to some tested criteria (standard
or modified proctor) such as those under foundations or adjacent to
retaining walls. Areas that for several years after construction respond
to precipitation events similar to impervious areas.
SUBSURFACE EXFILTRATION — The process by which water or
moisture moves from a subsurface trench, bed, or other feature into the
subsoil. Exfiltration is best measured by a soil's percolation rate.
SWALE — A natural low-lying stretch of land or minor man-made
conveyance channel which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
TOPOGRAPHY — The general configuration of a land surface or any
part of the earth's surface, including its relief and position of its natural
and man-made features. The natural or physical surface features of a
region, considered collectively as to its form.
UNDETAINED AREA — An area of a site that cannot be routed to
a stormwater management facility because of its location. Generally
small areas around access drives or below stormwater management
facilities.
WATER QUALITY DEPTH — Depth of precipitation required to be used
in computing the water quality volume based on the percentage of
imperviousness of a site.
WATER QUALITY SENSITIVE (WQS) DEVELOPMENT — Land
development projects that have a high potential to cause catastrophic
loss to local water quality and could potentially threaten groundwater
reservoirs. See § 147-13 for additional definition.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — Volume of runoff required to be
controlled from a site in a water quality BMP.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial, a drainage basin or
subbasin.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — Upper surface of a layer of saturated material in the
soil.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
§ 147-11 PATTON CODE § 147-11
123:314
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
§ 147-11 (RESERVED) § 147-11
123:315

ARTICLE III
Prohibition of Nonstormwater Discharges
§ 147-11.1. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the municipality's storm sewer system
which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided
in Subsection A(2) below and discharges allowed under a state or
federal permit.
(2) Discharges that may be allowed, based on a finding by the
municipality as determined by the Municipal Engineer, that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution of surface
waters of the commonwealth, are:
(a) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(b) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and
fire hydrant flushings.
(c) Irrigation drainage.
(d) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(e) Air-conditioning condensate.
(f) Water from individual residential care washing.
(g) Springs.
(h) Water from crawl space pumps.
(i) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(j) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(k) Lawn watering.
(l) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(m) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(n) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(3) In the event that the municipality determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection A(2) above significantly
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so
notified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
§ 147-11.1 (RESERVED) § 147-11.1
123:317
Protection (PA DEP), the municipality will notify the responsible
person to cease the discharge.
(4) Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection A(3)
above, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined
by the municipality, to case the discharge consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
B. Prohibited connections. The following connections are prohibited,
except as provided in Subsection A(2) above.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm sewer
system, and any connection to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks.
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by
the municipality.
§ 147-11.1 PATTON CODE § 147-11.1
123:318
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management
§ 147-12. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the municipality which do not fall under the
exemption criteria shown in § 147-10 of this chapter shall submit a
stormwater management plan to the governing municipality for review.
This plan must be consistent with the Spring Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan. These criteria shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in phases.
Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas
designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be
impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver criteria. The
DEP stormwater BMP Manual, as amended and updated, shall be used
for design of stormwater management facilities. No disturbances may
be performed prior to approval of a stormwater management site plan.
B. Stormwater drainage system shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
(1) Stormwater management facilities and related installations also
shall be provided:
(a) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the
curbline of streets.
(b) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extend and grade of the area drained,
and to prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or
flooded intersections during storms, in accordance with the
procedures contained in Design Manual Part 2 (DM-2),
Chapter 10, of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PA DOT).
(c) To ensure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater under
driveways in, near, or across natural watercourses or drainage
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterways shall be provided as
necessary.
(d) To property drain stormwater runoff from all land development
projects, except as required by recharge criteria. All lot and
open areas shall be designed to drain to the nearest practical
street or drainage system, existing or proposed, as defined by
the Municipal Engineer, with no impact on adjoining
properties, unless an area specifically designed for stormwater
detention is provided.
§ 147-12 (RESERVED) § 147-12
123:319
C. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the
affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge. If, in the opinion of the Municipal Engineer, based upon the
analysis above, that there will be an impact on the downstream
adjacent property, the municipality may require that the developer
obtain a stormwater easement.
E. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easement shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement.
Developers are encouraged to allow stormwater easements to revert to
a natural condition. Mowing or similar types of vegetative control are
discouraged while removal of invasive species are encouraged.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, through
the general permit process.
G. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint
permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP,
the general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands;
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PA DEP.
H. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PA DOT).
I. Low-impact development (LID) is to be used to the maximum extent
practical. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff
§ 147-12 PATTON CODE § 147-12
123:320
through seepage beds, recharge trenches, etc., are encouraged, where
soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities.
J. To promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater,
roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers, or roadside ditches unless approved by the municipality on a
case-by-case basis.
K. Where deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer, the applicant
shall submit an analysis of the impacts of detained stormwater flows on
downstream areas within the watershed. These impacts shall be
identified with concurrence from the Municipal Engineer. The analysis
shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations necessary to
determine the impact peak discharges from the proposed development
on critical locations such as dams, tributaries, existing developments,
undersized culverts, floodprone areas, etc.
L. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the analysis of downstream impacts shall
be submitted to the downstream municipality's engineer for review and
comment.
M. The applicant shall notify the owners of all adjacent properties.
Notification shall be via United States certified mail with copies of the
return receipts provided to the Township. Notification is to include the
following language: "A land development plan is being considered by
Patton Township for Tax Parcel (inserted parcel number) as shown on
the attached exhibit. Public comment for this land development will be
received at a meeting of the Patton Township Planning Commission on
(insert date). If you cannot attend this public meeting, comments may
be directed to Patton Township at 814-234-0271." A letter and location
map exhibit must be approved by the Township prior to distribution to
the owners of the adjacent properties.
N. Approved stormwater management site plans must be on site at all
times during construction.
O. Use of alternate and/or new stormwater management controls will be
considered by the Township. A description of the proposed alternate
controls must be submitted to the Township, the Centre County
Conservation District, and to DEP. The Township will coordinate any
approvals with the CCCD and/or DEP.
P. The stormwater management site plan must contain a proper long term
ownership, operation and maintenance plan in accordance with Article
VII of this chapter.
Q. Postconstruction runoff control requirements.
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activity (any earth disturbance of
one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or
§ 147-12 (RESERVED) § 147-12
123:321
to the municipal storm sewer system or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff) within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements
after construction is complete.
(2) The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses
(e.g., drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the
level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in "special protection"
streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 (collectively referred to herein as "state water quality
requirements").
(3) To control post construction stormwater impacts from regulated
earth disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can
be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff
conditions, so that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (#392-0300-002, September 28,
2002), this may be achieved by the following:
(a) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions.
(b) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants form the
stormwater runoff.
(c) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume
and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring
and erosion).
(4) DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation, and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and
redevelopment (hereinafter "development") after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete. These requirements include
the need to implement postconstruction stormwater BMPs with
assurance of long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
(5) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
conservation district must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit (or permit coverage
under the statewide general permit (PAG-2) satisfies the
requirements of Subsection N(1).
§ 147-12 PATTON CODE § 147-13
123:322
§ 147-13. Sensitive areas and development.
Sensitive areas and water quality sensitive developments have been
identified which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
§ 147-14. Performance standards.
A. Sensitive areas are defined as those areas that, if developed, have the
potential to cause contamination of groundwater reservoirs of a water
authority, Penn State University or regulated water association
wellfield. These areas consist of the delineated one-year zone of
contribution and direct upslope areas tributary to the wells (see
Appendix B, Exhibits 1 and 2133). Municipalities may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as
required.
B. Water quality sensitive (WQS) development is defined as a land
development project that has a high potential to cause catastrophic loss
to local water quality and could potentially threaten groundwater
reservoirs. The following is a provisional list of water quality sensitive
developments.
(1) Vehicle fuel stations.
(2) Industrial manufacturing sites.*
(3) Salvage yards.
(4) Recycling centers.
(5) Hazardous material storage areas.*
(6) Interstate highways.
*The Municipal Engineer will make the determination relative
to what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case basis.
The Pennsylvania DEP wellhead protection contaminant source
list shall be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes.
A. General. Postdevelopment rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified.
B. Sensitive area district (SAD) boundaries. The location of sensitive areas
or sensitive area districts within the watershed are illustrated on a map,
which is available for inspection at the municipal office. A reduced scale
copy of this map is included as Exhibit 1 in Appendix B of this
chapter.134 The exact location of the boundaries of sensitive areas are
133. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-13 (RESERVED) § 147-14
123:323
set by drainage areas tributary to each of the points of interest as
illustrated in Appendix B135. The exact location of these boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined using
mapping at a scale which accurately defines the limits of the sensitive
area. If the project site is within the sensitive area (in whole or in part),
two-foot contour interval mapping shall be provided to define the limits
of the sensitive area. If the project site is not immediately adjacent to
but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive area, a five-foot contour
interval map defining the limits of the sensitive area shall be included
in the stormwater management plan to document the site's location
relative to the sensitive area.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
which is traversed by a SAD boundary, the design criteria for sensitive
areas must be applied if postdevelopment runoff is directed towards the
sensitive area.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain from sensitive areas through a
proposed development site that is located entirely in a nonsensitive
area are not required to use or apply the sensitive area criteria.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area.
F. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream or off-site
hydraulic capacity analysis conducted in accordance with these
standards shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the postdevelopment runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall
be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the postdevelopment twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at a minimum, pass the posdevelopment twenty-five-year return
period runoff.
(4) It must be demonstrated that the downstream conveyance channel,
other stormwater facilities, roadways, or overland areas must be
134. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-14 PATTON CODE § 147-14
123:324
§ 147-15. Calculation methodologies.
Design criteria and calculation methodologies have been classified by
functional group for presentation as follows: A. peak runoff rate discharge
requirements; B. stormwater pond capture volumes; C. recharge volumes;
D. storm drain design including conveyance, channel protection and
stability; and E. water quality standards. These criteria and calculation
methodologies have been developed to simplify stormwater management
designs, unify methods, remove model parameter subjectivity, remove
improperly used methods, and to ensure stormwater management decisions
are based more realistically on hydrologic processes. In addition, common
sense should always be used as a controlling criteria. Prior to stormwater
management and water quality design, applicants should consult with the
Municipal Engineer to verify stormwater quality criteria and present
proposed features and concepts for the treatment of stormwater runoff.
Following this meeting, the Municipal Engineer shall define any needed
support studies or documentation. These standards provide consistent and
process-oriented design procedures for application by land development
professionals. It is recognized that in an attempt to generalize the
computational procedures, assumptions have been made which on some
occasions may be violated. If such a violation is identified, alternate
standards and procedures may be applied. Both the violation and the
alternate procedures to be applied must be documented by a hydrologist
or hydrogeologist. Any request for use of exemptions, alternate standards
or procedures under this chapter must be agreed to in wiring by the
Municipal Engineer prior to formal submission of plans for consideration
by the municipality. A flow chart documenting the stormwater management
design process is provided as Exhibit 4 in Appendix B136 of this chapter.
capable of safely conveying the one-hundred-year design storm
without causing damage to buildings or other infrastructure.
(5) Where the downstream conveyance channel or other facility is
located within a floodway, it must be demonstrated that the limits
of said flood hazard area are not increased by the proposed activity.
(6) Stormwater management ponds that fall under the DEP Chapter
105 criteria of a "dam" must meet the criteria within Chapter 105.
A. Peak runoff rate control.
(1) Exemptions.
(a) Any site where the increase in postdevelopment peak runoff
rates is determined to be negligible by the Municipal Engineer
is exempt from the requirement to provide stormwater
detention.
136. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-14 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:325
[1] In support of this exemption, it must be shown that the
downstream conveyance systems have adequate capacity
to convey the additional discharge without adversely
affecting downstream properties. This does not exempt the
requirement for implementation of designs for water
quality, stormwater conveyance, and/or recharge as
required. A stormwater management plan and report
documenting these design elements is also required. The
Municipal Engineer shall use a five-percent increase as a
general benchmark for defining "negligible." The final
definition of "negligible" shall be at the Municipal
Engineer's discretion.
[2] Prior to using this exemption (and prior to any land
development plan submission), the design engineer must
provide written documentation and computations as to
why no peak runoff control should be required. The
Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any plan which
uses this assumption without prior approval of the
Municipal Engineer. The intent of this exemption is to
eliminate the need for multiple or "piggyback" detention
facilities as a result of minor changes in imperviousness or
land use upstream of existing stormwater control facilities.
(b) Small sites (less than one acre) located directly adjacent to the
main stem of creeks or within the floodplain are not required to
provide stormwater detention unless directed to do so by the
Municipal Engineer as a result of a documented drainage
problem. All other stormwater management standards must be
implemented, including water quality, adequate stormwater
conveyance, and/or recharge as required.
(2) Stormwater management analysis must be performed using the
following models. The size criteria are based on drainage area size
including site are and all off-site area draining across the
development.
Up to 100 acres in size NRCS's TR-55 or TR-20
Over 100 acres in size NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-1 (HECHMS)
(a) The modified rational method using the Gert Aron Curves may
be used for any site less than or equal to two acres in size
without prior authorization from the Municipal Engineer. The
modified rational method may also be used for sites between
two and five acres in size where the Municipal Engineer has
approved the method's use. In this case the design engineer
must make a written request to the Municipal Engineer
explaining why the use of the modified rational method is more
appropriate than the NRCS's methods for the site in question.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:326
The design engineer should keep in mind that the modified
rational methodology was not calibrated to account for the
karst nature of the Spring Creek Drainage Basin, and,
therefore, its use should be limited to the special cases
identified above. In addition, since the minimum discharge
criteria are based on a calibration of the NRCS runoff mode,
their use is not appropriate if the modified rational method is
used for runoff computations.
(b) The Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any SWM
design that uses hydrograph combinations with the modified
rational method where the designer has not validated that the
effects of the timing differences are negligible. In addition, the
Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any SWM design
that improperly uses the method for determining runoff
volumes or does not properly apply the method.
(c) More intensive physically based models may be used at the
discretion of the Municipal Engineer, but only for sites greater
than 100 acres in size.
(d) Commercial software packages that use the basic
computational methods of TR-55 or TR-20 are permitted.
(e) The NRCS models and methods recommended above are based
on data collected from actual watersheds. In contrast to this,
stormwater management analysis for land development
activities is often conducted using property lines to define
drainage boundaries. Drainage areas based on property
boundaries are not true watersheds and are referred to here as
"hypothetical" drainage areas. It is known that these
hypothetical drainage areas do not respond like natural
watersheds. Peak runoff rates from hypothetical drainage
areas are much smaller than comparable runoff rates from
natural watersheds of the same size. Therefore, wherever
possible, pre- and post-development stormwater analysis
should be conducted for watersheds that are as nearly natural
as possible. Also, conducting stormwater analysis for a lot-bylot
comparison, as such as within residential developments, is
not permitted. Partitioning drainage areas into different
subwatersheds for the postdevelopment scenarios is
acceptable.
(f) It is noted that natural watershed boundaries should not be
used where the relative size of the watershed compared to the
site size would inappropriately distort the pre-to postdevelopment
runoff comparison. In these cases, a hypothetical
drainage area defined by the property boundary should be
used because it will allow for a better estimate of runoff
changes directly downstream of the site. In addition, the
designer should recognize that, within the Spring Creek
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:327
Watershed, typical hypothetical drainage areas, in their
predevelopment or natural condition, do not produce surface
runoff during minor to moderate rainfall events. Available
hydrologic models do not accurately reflect this condition. This
often results in postdevelopment nuisance flooding since the
models overestimate the predevelopment runoff magnitude.
(3) Natural drainage divides may not be altered without the prior
consent of the Municipal Engineer.
(4) Pre- and post-development stormwater management analysis shall
be conducted using the following design storms: one-year; twoyear;
ten-year; one-hundred-year.
(5) The twenty-four-hour precipitation depths as obtained from NOAA
Atlas 14 shall be used for stormwater management analysis.
(6) The NRCS's Type II precipitation distribution is required for all
stormwater management analyses.
(7) The NRCS' dimensionless unit hydrograph "k" factor shall be 484
for both pre- and post-development stormwater analyses.
(8) All undeveloped areas are to be modeled as meadow or woods in
good hydrologic condition. Existing impervious areas may be
modeled as being impervious for predevelopment conditions. The
municipality may require a percentage of the existing impervious
(up to a 20% maximum) be modeled as meadow in areas where
there are known existing stormwater concerns downstream of the
project area or where the site being developed has either deficient
or non-existing stormwater management facilities. Developers of
sites with existing impervious are highly encouraged to set up a
meeting with the municipality prior to design so that any additional
requirements are identified prior to plan submission.
(9) The NRCS's curve number (CN) shall be used as the rainfall to
runoff transformation parameter for all stormwater management
analyses.
(10) Curve numbers should be rounded to tenths for use in prepackaged
hydrologic models. It should be recognized that the CN is only a
design tool with a large degree of statistical variability. For large
sites, CNs should be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(11) The NRCS's method to determine unconnected impervious area
adjustments for CN can be used for distinctly defined impervious
land areas that flow onto pervious areas in a dispersed manner. The
method may only be used to calculate runoff from site impervious
areas that actually flow across pervious areas. The method cannot
be applied to the entire site using average weighted CN values.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:328
(12) Soils underlain by carbonate geology (limestone or dolomite) shall
have a hydrologic soil group (HSG) B used for both pre- and postdevelopment
conditions regardless of the NRCS or soil survey's
description, except for the following two conditions:
(a) Compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of HSG C
for post development conditions regardless of the NRCS or soil
survey's description. For most developments, compacted
structural fill areas are under impervious surfaces, but may
include islands within parking areas, fringe land, etc. A HSG C
shall also be applied to large projects that clear and compact
building pad areas for later phases of development under an
initial phase. The Municipal Engineer shall make the final
determination as to what areas of a land development site
constitute compacted structural fill. The intent is to account for
large compacted areas and not minor grading within lawn
areas.
(b) Soils identified as "on floodplains" or "on terraces above
floodplains" in the Centre County Soil Survey will use the HSG
as designated in the soil survey. Refer to Appendix A, Table A-8,
for a list of the soils.137
(13) Soils not underlain by carbonate geology shall use the HSG as
specified by the NRCS or soil survey's description, except for the
following two conditions:
(a) Wooded areas on HSG C and D soils shall be treated as HSG B
for predevelopment conditions. Disturbed postdevelopment
wooded areas shall carry the NRCS or soil survey's defined
HSG with a minimum HSG of B.
(b) Highly compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of
HSG C for postdevelopment conditions regardless of the NRCS
or soil survey's description. For most developments these areas
are normally covered with impervious surfaces, but may
include islands within parking areas, fringe lands, etc. A HSG
of C shall also be used for large projects that clear and grade
land for later phases of development. The Municipal Engineer
shall make the final determination as to what areas of a land
development site constitute compacted structural fill. The
intent is to account for large compacted areas and not minor
grading within lawn areas or small areas around buildings, etc.
(14) Areas draining to closed depressions must be modeled by removing
the storage volume from the predevelopment condition. The
designer may assume that infiltration in the closed depression does
not occur during a design runoff event. Areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to adjust peak runoff rates to
137. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:329
stormwater management ponds for the postdevelopment analysis.
This allowance has been developed to entice designers to
intentionally design or leave in place small closed depressions
that can reduce the total volume required from a stormwater
management pond. The site designer is responsible to document
downstream impacts if the closed depression were removed.
(15) Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes shall be excluded from the
modeled point-of-interest drainage areas defining predevelopment
peak flows. Assumptions that sinkholes spill over during some
storm events must be supported by acceptable documentation (as
determined by the Municipal Engineer). In addition, the design
professional must be aware that bypassing or sealing sinkholes will
frequently result in downstream flooding and should not be done if
existing downstream flooding already occurs. The site designer is
responsible to document downstream impacts if the sinkhole were
to stop taking stormwater runoff.
(16) Ponds or other permanent pools of water are to be modeled by the
methods established in the NRCS's TR-55 manual (1986). However,
more rigorous documented methods are acceptable (with approval
of the Municipal Engineer).
(17) The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II (ARC II, previously AMC
II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes. In addition, prior to any
continuous simulation model being used in the spring Creek Basin
for any other purposes, the model unit hydrograph must be
modified for common events in additional to extreme events based
on in-depth analysis of historical data from the basin.
(18) The following time of concentration (Tc) computational
methodologies shall be used unless another method is preapproved
by the Municipal Engineer.
(a) Predevelopment: NRCS's Lag Equation.
(b) Postdevelopment; commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas: (greater than 20% impervious area):
NRCS's Segmental Method.
(c) Postdevelopment; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NCRS's Lag
Equation.
The time of concentration is to represent the average condition
that best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. For
example, large impervious areas bordered by small pervious
areas may not consider the effect of the pervious areas in the
Tc computation. If the designer wants to consider the effect
of the pervious area, runoff from the pervious and impervious
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:330
areas must be computed separately with the hydrographs
being combined to determine the total runoff from the area.
Under no circumstance will the postdevelopment Tc be greater
than the predevelopment Tc for any watershed or
subwatershed modeling purposes. This includes when the
designer has specifically used swales to reduce flow velocities.
In the event that the designer believes that the postdeveloment
Tc is greater, it will still be set by default equal to the
predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
Refer to § 147-15A(28) regarding impervious area flashing
(IAF).
(19) The following postdevelopment minimum discharges are permitted
for use with the NRCS (CN) runoff model:
1-year return period Qpmin = 0.018 (DA) + 0.2
2-year return period Qpmin = 0.03 (DA) + 0.4
10-year return period Qpmin = 0.09 (DA) + 1.0
Where: DA = the drainage area in acres
Qpmin = minimum allowable peak
runoff rate in cfs
(a) For return periods greater than 10 years, the minimum
discharge shall be equal to the computed predevelopment peak
runoff rate.
(b) The minimum discharge criteria above are not appropriate for
use with the rational method. This is because these values
were developed based on NRCS model corrections and do not
actually represent a true physical process or discharge.
However, common sense should be used by both the designer
and reviewer in the evaluation of acceptable minimum
discharges for use with the rational method.
(c) The intent of the minimum discharge is to allow reasonable
runoff release from a site when a hydrologic model has
produced a predevelopment runoff rate close to zero. The
method is NOT permitted for areas that previously drained
completely into sinkholes in order to bypass the sinkhole after
development.
(d) These minimum discharge values include the total of all
stormwater management facilities discharges and undetained
area discharges. Peak runoff rates for undetained fringe areas
(where the designer has made a realistic effort to control all
new impervious areas) will be computed using the
predevelopment time of concentration for the drainage areas
tributary to them. Undetained areas are those portions of the
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:331
site that cannot be routed to a stormwater management facility
due to topography and typically include lower pond berms or
small areas around entrance drives. The site drainage areas
used shall represent the predevelopment condition, even if
drainage areas are altered following development.
(20) All lined stormwater management ponds in carbonate and
noncarbonated areas must be considered impervious and may not
be used as pervious areas for stormwater management
computations. "Lined" here means lined with synthetic liners or
bentonite. All other compacted soil liners will be considered to be
HSG D for hydrologic computations.
(21) Stormwater management ponds that have a capture depth for the
purposes of water quality or volume capture shall assume a
negligible discharge from these structures during design event
routing. Only discharges from the primary principal spillway or
emergency spillway need to be considered. Discharges from
subsurface drains that tie into a principal spillway should not be
considered during design event routing. All subsurface drains may
be required to be equipped with a restrictor plate with a one-inch
opening in order to prevent the subsurface drain from functioning
as a primary orifice. Consultation between the Township Engineer
and Design Engineer shall take place to determine the feasibility of
the application.
(22) Stormwater management ponds that have a capture depth for the
purposes of water quality or volume capture shall assume that the
pond water quality or capture volume is full at the beginning of
design event routing.
(23) Stormwater management ponds must provide safe passage of the
one-hundred-year return period peak runoff rate assuming that all
of the principal spillway orifices are fully clogged and the principal
spillway overflow is 50% clogged. A minimum of a six-inch
freeboard must also be maintained above the resulting maximum
water surface elevations. Any embankment emergency spillway can
be assumed to be unclogged. SWM ponds with embankments
completely made up of natural undisturbed soils (fully in "cut") or
where roadways act as the emergency spillway are permitted.
However, the design engineer must verify downstream stability and
control.
(24) All pre- and post-development comparisons of peak flows shall be
rounded to tenths of a cfs. The intent here is to recognize the
accuracy and precision limitations of hydrologic modeling
procedures. Again, small differences between pre- and postdevelopment
discharge rates should be permitted when no
negative downstream impacts will result.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:332
(25) The full Modified Puls routing method must be used for stormwater
management pond analyses. Simplified methods of determining
pond size requirements such as those in TR-55 (1986) can only be
used for preliminary pond size estimates.
(26) Prepackaged hydraulic programs are not approved for the analysis
of underground stormwater management facilities unless it can be
verified that the program rounding subroutines used for the stage/
storage data do not affect the results. This is because, for very
small storage volumes, the program may round off the volume to a
significant percentage.
(27) Full supporting documentation must be provided for all stormwater
management designs.
(28) Designs must be checked for impervious area flash (IAF). This
check is used to determine if flooding may occur due to poor
modeling choices specifically related to the time-of-concentration.
This analysis requires that the watershed impervious area be
modeled without the pervious areas. The time-of-concentration
should also be determined from the impervious areas only. If the
IAF analysis results in a higher peak runoff rate at a culvert or
discharge from a pond, this higher rate must be used for the final
design/comparison. The check will frequently yield higher values if
a watershed's impervious area is located primarily near the
watershed outlet or point of interest.
B. Pond capture volumes (Cv). Intent: To minimize nuisance flooding from
small precipitation events, a runoff capture volume is required for all
stormwater management ponds that do not discharge directly to
natural, well-defined (with bed and banks) perennial streams. In
general, natural well-defined streams in the Spring Creek Basin are
limited to those delineated as USGS perennial streams. This should be
treated as a guideline and not a steadfast rule. The final determination
is at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer. The pond capture volume
is a volume of runoff that will be retained in a pond below the elevation
of any free surface principal spillway orifice. No principal spillway
orifice (except those connected to subsurface drains), regardless of how
small, shall be below the pond elevation equivalent to this volume. The
Centre County Conservation District (CCCD) receives numerous
complaints regarding ponds that are located at the downslope edge of a
property that result in discharging runoff onto downstream properties
in an uncontrolled manner or where no existing defined outlet channel
exists. This is a very common problem in areas underlain by carbonate
rock. These discharges can cause erosion and flooding downstream.
While the pond capture volume is intended to minimize some of these
negative effects, it cannot deter or reduce the impacts form poor design
practices. Therefore, whenever possible, the CCCD recommends that
the designer consider the downstream morphological changes that may
occur and, when possible, consider constructing conveyance systems to
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:333
a stable natural channel. In some chases this may require cooperation
between landowners.
(1) The capture of volume is defined as a runoff depth of 0.25 inches
from all impervious areas tributary to the stormwater management
facility. This volume will be allowed to infiltrate, evaporate, or
dewater from a subsurface drain system connected directly to the
facility's principal spillway. Supporting computations that show
that 90% of the capture volume can dewater in a maximum of 72
hours must be provided. For surface ponds, the maximum depth of
ponding for the capture volume shall be three feet (a health and
safety precaution). However, in areas under karst influence, a
limiting maximum ponding depth of 18 inches is recommended.
Designers may always increase the capture volume to a value
greater than the minimum required as long as the maximum
ponding depth criteria is met.
(2) To simplify computational requirements for design event analysis,
designers do not need to calculate discharges from subsurface
drains related to the capture volumes if the filter media is sand, or
smaller than AASHTO 57 stone. The capture volume is to control
runoff rates from impervious areas and is not related to water
quality. However, pond designs that include a water quality volume
that is greater than the required capture volume are assumed to
have also met the required capture volume as long as it dewaters as
required.
(3) Designs that rely on the natural infiltration of in-situ soils must
provide documentation supporting the infiltration rates used for
analysis. Infiltration rates reported in the Soil Survey of Centre
County or other published rates may be used at the discretion of
the Municipal Engineer.
(4) The pond capture volume shall always be used when upslope areas
are developed where the pond's design creates a point discharge
that did not previously existing.
(5) Stormwater management detention facilities that connect directly
to storm drain pipe networks that discharge to natural well-defined
channels do not require a capture volume.
C. Recharge volumes (Rv). Intent: The purpose of the recharge portion of
the chapter is two-fold. First, the recharge requirement is to mitigate
the loss of groundwater recharge associated with the creation of
impervious surfaces. In addition, the recharge criteria is to mitigate the
increase in runoff volume associated with the creation of impervious
surfaces. This increase in runoff volume has significant impacts on
downstream landowners. These impacts are most often exhibited in the
form of increased nuisance flooding and channel or drainageway
erosion and instability. According to local municipal engineers and
representatives of the Centre County Conservation District, these
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:334
problems are of significant local concern. The magnitude of these
problems increases with the percentage of impervious coverage
created on a site.
(1) Recharge mitigation shall be provided for runoff from all proposed
impervious areas. The required recharge volume shall be computed
as 0.5 inches of runoff from all proposed impervious areas. It is
noted that lined detention ponds and compacted fill areas are
considered to be impervious when calculating site impervious area
for recharge considerations. In addition, land areas covered by
paver blocks, pervious pavement, and other structural surface
treatments which permit surface infiltration can be treated as
pervious areas when calculating the site impervious area for
recharge considerations as long as the structural infiltration
practice is supported by sound design and appropriate construction
specifications. The Municipal Engineer may require submission of
supporting documentation prior to approving structural infiltration
areas as pervious areas.
(2) The following design practices can be used as credits to reduce the
recharge volume requirement:
(a) Residential roof areas (detached, duplex, and townhome
dwellings) and commercial/industrial buildings with roof areas
less than 5,000 square feet can be removed from the computed
impervious area when these roof areas are sumped to dry wells
designed in accordance with the following minimum standard.
[1] Sump design criteria: To meet the recharge criteria, sump
storage or voids volume shall be equal to 0.04 cubic feet
per square foot of room area (0.5 inch rainfall depth). If
sump stone has a voids ratio of 40%, the total sump volume
will be 0.10 cubic feet per square foot of roof area. When
designed only to meet this recharge criteria, the maximum
size for a single sump is 100 cubic feet, and the minimum
sump surface area (A) to depth (D) ratio (A/D) must be a
minimum of 4/1. The sump depth less any freeboard should
not exceed 24 inches.
[2] Additional criteria for residential roof sumps are included
in § 147-18G.
(b) All or portions of driveways, roadways, and parking areas can
be removed from the impervious area calculation when sheet
flow from these areas is directed to undisturbed natural buffer/
filter areas or constructed filter strips. This flow must be
dispersed as sheet flow as it crosses the buffer/filter area.
Sheet flow velocities should be nonerosive as they cross the
impervious area/filter interface. If erosion occurs on the buffer/
filter area, velocity control measures shall be installed at the
interface.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:335
[1] To ensure proper infiltration characteristics, the natural
soil profile within natural buffer/filter areas cannot be
disturbed during construction. Completely undisturbed
natural recharge areas serve this function best. However,
minor surface scarring and landscaping is permitted in
these areas as long as natural grades are not altered. In
special cases, when approved by the Municipal Engineer,
minor grading, combined with soil profile reconstruction
may be permitted in natural buffer/filter areas. In addition,
the following standards apply to natural filter/buffer areas:
[a] Natural filter/buffer areas must have a minimum width
of five feet or 1/2 of the impervious area drainage
length immediately tributary to the buffer area,
whichever is greater. This width is measured parallel
to the direction of sheet flow.
[b] To quality for a recharge volume credit, the surface
slope of natural filter/buffer areas must be conducive
to recharge, and not result in flow concentration or
erosion. To meet this intent, the surface slope of the
area tributary to the natural buffer/filter area, and the
surface slope of the natural buffer/filter area itself
may not exceed 5%. In special cases, steeper slopes
may be used if specifically authorized by the
Municipal Engineer.
[c] The total impervious area tributary to a natural buffer/
filter area cannot exceed twice the buffer/filter area.
[2] To qualify for a recharge volume credit, constructed filter
strips shall be designed to the following standards:
[a] The minimum filter strip width shall be five feet or 1/2
of the impervious area drainage length immediately
tributary to the constructed filter strip, whichever is
greater. This width is measured parallel to the
direction of sheet flow.
[b] The total impervious area tributary to a constructed
filter strip area cannot exceed twice the constructed
filter strip area.
[c] The surface slope of the area tributary to the
constructed filter strip area and the surface slope of
the constructed filter strip area itself may not exceed
5% and 3%, respectively. In special cases, steeper
slopes may be used if specifically authorized by the
Municipal Engineer.
[d] The filter strip surface shall consist of a minimum of
six inches of natural or reconstructed topsoil and with
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:336
a stable grass surface treatment. Reconstructed
topsoil designs must be approved by the Municipal
Engineer prior to application. Reconstructed topsoil
consists of soils augmented by tillage and the addition
of soil amendments such as compost, lime, animal
manures, crop residues, etc.
[e] To minimize erosion of the topsoil layer during
construction, it is recommended that these areas be
sodded. However, the Municipal Engineer may permit
the use of an acceptable erosion control seeding
application. In this later case, any loss of topsoil and
seed must be replaced until a permanent vegetative
stand is achieved.
(c) Sidewalks separated from roadways and/or other impervious
surfaces by a grass strip of equal or greater width than the
sidewalk itself can be removed from the impervious area
calculation when the sidewalks are graded so that sheet flow
from the walk is directed to the grass strip. Sidewalks with
steep longitudinal slopes that themselves would act as
channels during runoff events cannot take advantage of this
credit. A five-percent longitudinal sidewalk slope shall be used
as the benchmark defining steep slopes.
(d) Impervious areas tributary to natural closed depressions can
be subtracted from the total site impervious area used in the
recharge volume calculation as long as a qualified geotechnical
engineer or soil scientist certifies to the soundness of these
site-specific applications. Water quality pretreatment may be
necessary prior to the direct discharge of runoff to existing
closed depressions or sinkholes.
(e) Impervious areas tributary to man-made closed depressions
can be subtracted from the total site impervious area as long as
a qualified geotechnical engineer or soil scientist certifies to
the soundness of these site-specific applications. Man-made
closed depressions can be created through the use of low head
berms one foot or less in height.
(f) Fifty percent of the capture volume in a pond that includes a
subsurface drain may be credited towards the recharge volume
requirement. For sites less than one acre, a waiver will need to
be obtained.
(g) Additional credits may apply for undisturbed land areas that
are known to have high infiltration capacity and that are
maintained or enhanced. These areas must be defined and
quantified from actual site data.
(3) After credits, the remaining recharge volume shall be directed to a
recharge BMP such as infiltration trenches, beds, etc. These
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:337
facilities can be located in open areas or under pavement
structures. The appropriateness of the particular infiltration
practice proposed, as well as the design parameters used, shall
be supported by a geotechnical report certified by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, geotechnical
engineer).
(a) Stormwater recharge requirements or credits affect
stormwater management design requirements. For stormwater
management computations, the reduction of site CNs based
only on a weighting type analysis, as is sometimes done for
cluster-type developments, is not permitted. However, for
stormwater management purposes, the CN for recharged
areas can be computed using the NRCS method for
disconnected impervious areas. The actual hydrologic process
that occurs within the basin must be stressed in all recharge
situations.
(b) These recharge requirements must be met on all sites unless it
can be demonstrated that recharge would be inappropriate.
Any request for such a waiver from these recharge
requirements must be accompanied by a supporting report
certified by a qualified professional (soil scientist, geologist,
hydrogeologist, geotechnical engineer).
(c) Developers and site design professionals are encouraged to
use a higher standard for recharge volume on sites where local
site conditions do not restrict a higher standard.
(d) Water quality sensitive (WQS) developments must use an
acceptable pretreatment BMP prior to recharge. Acceptable
pretreated BMPs for these developments include BMPs that
are based on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes
such as chemical coagulation.
(e) Accounting for recharge within lined stormwater management
ponds is not permitted. However, if unlined, uncompacted
ponds and/or depressed lawn areas are used to satisfy water
quality or capture volume criteria, these areas and volumes
can also be used to meet recharge requirements as previously
defined. Additional recharge volume may be credited to these
areas as long as it is demonstrated by a qualified professional
that recharge processes can naturally occur in these areas.
(f) Finally, because this analysis is concerned with trying to
adequately represent real processes that occur within the
watershed, there will be areas that cannot physically recharge
stormwater. These areas include exfiltration areas that are
commonly found at the base of wooded hillsides where clay
pans exist and saturation areas near major streams or
floodplains. These areas may not accept recharge during most
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:338
runoff events. These areas are exempt from recharge
requirements when these conditions are documented and
certified by a qualified professional (soil scientist, geologist,
hydrogeologist, or geotechnical engineer). In addition,
stormwater management techniques relying on infiltration
techniques are not permitted in these areas.
(4) The Municipal Engineer may waive the recharge requirement in
the following situations:
(a) In highly developed areas or areas undergoing redevelopment
where the Municipal Engineer has determined that forced
recharge could have adverse impacts on adjacent landowner
structures, property, or municipal infrastructure. These
waivers should be limited to small land areas (generally less
than five acres in size) where the ability to place recharge beds
may be limited or may hinder redevelopment.
(b) In areas where a qualified soils scientist or geologist has
determined that none of the site soils are suitable for recharge
or that the location of the suitable soils is such that harm to
adjoining properties could occur as stated under Subsection
C(4)(a) above.
(c) In areas where recharge cannot physically occur as
documented by a qualified soil scientist, geologist, or
hydrologist. These areas include:
[1] Exfiltration areas commonly found at the base of wooded
hillsides where clay pans or fragipans exist; and
[2] Saturation areas near major streams or floodplains.
(5) As identified above, recharge analysis and/or waiver requests must
be supported by a geotechnical report sealed by a qualified
professional (nine soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, or
geotechnical engineer). The intent of this report will be to establish
the suitability of a particular parcel of land or area for recharge and
to identify areas on a development site appropriate for recharge. It
is recommended that the geotechnical/soils consultant discuss the
extent and approach to the analysis with the Municipal Engineer
prior to initiating the field investigation. At a minimum this report
shall include the following information:
(a) A description of the geotechnical site investigation performed,
including the methods and procedures used.
(b) Data presentation.
(c) Analysis results including the following information:
[1] A map identifying site areas inappropriate for recharge
along with supporting justification. In addition to
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:339
illustrating topographic features, significant geologic and
hydrologic features should be identified (rock outcrops,
sinkholes, closed depressions, etc.).
[2] Determination of the permeability coefficient for potential
recharge areas.
[3] Determination of the infiltration capacity of natural site
soils.
[4] Location, depth, and permeability coefficient for any
restrictive layers identified.
[5] Soil uniformity.
[6] Depth to bedrock in potential recharge areas, and a
statement reflecting the uniformity of the depth to bedrock
across the site.
[7] A statement relating to the site's proximity to fracture
zones within the bedrock.
[8] Additional information deemed pertinent by the
geotechnical engineer.
(d) Recommendations for any special design considerations
necessary for the design of recharge systems on the site. For
example, required soil depth over bedrock, appropriate surface
grades over recharge areas, appropriate hydraulic head over
recharge areas, etc.
(e) Justification as to why the site should be developed to a high
impervious density if the site has adverse soil and geotechnical
limitations which prohibit the ability to induce natural
recharge. Explain how these limitations will not create the
potential for undue harm to the environment and the Spring
Creek Watershed when the site is developed.
(6) Where it has been shown that recharge cannot be performed and a
waiver of the recharge requirements is being requested, the
municipality shall require that the first one inch of runoff from all
new impervious areas be treated through underdrained facilities.
These facilities may include underdrained basins, rain gardens, and
infiltration trenches. Treatment is to include use of amended
topsoil to provide filtration of the stormwater. All underdrain
outlets are to include a restrictor plate to prevent the underdrain
system from functioning as a primary outlet.
(7) The following guidelines are provided relative to the use of
subsurface exfiltration BMPs (often referred to as engineered
infiltration BMPs):
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:340
(a) Soils should have a minimum percolation rate of 50 min/cm
(0.47 in/hr) for effective operation of subsurface exfiltration
BMPs. If no site soils have percolation rates of 50 min/cm,
subsurface exfiltration BMPs should not be used.
(b) A minimum of 30 inches of soil must be maintained between
the bottom of a subsurface exfiltration BMP and the top of
bedrock or seasonally high groundwater table. The separation
requirement shall be increased if recommended by a qualified
professional.
(c) If the minimum percolation rate is not met and/or the minimum
soil depth cannot be maintained on a site, recharge should be
accommodated by directing shallow sheet flow from
impervious areas across surface filter strips and/or
undisturbed natural areas, or some other innovative surface
infiltration feature should be used. Limiting subsurface
percolation rates and/or depth to bedrock shall not by
themselves warrant a recharge waiver.
(8) In addition, since recharge is intended as a volume control,
innovative or new methods that address the significant increase in
the volume of runoff from sites having large impervious areas are
encouraged. These volume-control alternatives can be used only if
they can be shown to function with the original intent through
sound engineering and science. The final determination of "original
intent" shall always be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer.
D. Storm drain conveyance system design. Storm drainage conveyance
systems consist of storm sewer pipes, swales, and open channels.
Computational methods for design of storm drain conveyance systems
shall be as follows:
(1) Recommended computational methods (models) for storm drain
design are based on site or watershed drainage area as follows:
Up to 200 acres in size Rational Method
Between 200 acres and 1.5
square miles
HEC-1
PSRM
TR-20
Over 1.5 square miles in size PSU-IV with the carbonate
adjustment factor at the
discretion of the Municipal
Engineer
Other methods as approved by the Municipal Engineer, such as
SWMM, SWIRM-ROUTE, etc.
(2) Rational coefficients used are to be from Rawls et al. (1981), PA
DOT Design Manual 2-10 or using the Aron curves (Appendix A,138
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:341
Table A-3) to convert CNs to C. If the Aron curves are used, all CNs
must be applicable to the HSG as identified by the NRCS.
(a) The design engineer may choose to use the following Rational
C coefficients without regard to soil HSG for small sites.
However, it is recommended that they be used for storm drains
up to 24 inches in diameter. The use of these conservative
values shall fully be the choice of the design engineer.
All impervious areas: C = 0.95
All pervious areas: C = 0.30
(3) Storm drains shall be designed at a minimum using a ten-year
runoff event without surcharging inlets. Storm drains tributary to a
multiple site SWM facility within a public right-of-way across
municipal roads or crossing other properties must convey, at a
minimum, a twenty-five-year runoff event without surcharging
inlets. Runoff events in excess of the indicated design event must
be conveyed safely downstream.
(4) Inlets on grade cannot assume a sumped condition for hydraulic
modeling (i.e., top of inlet casting set below pavement surface in
parking areas).
(5) The Municipal Engineer may require the analysis of the onehundred-
year peak runoff rates for conveyance purpose in some
instances where regional SWM facilities are employed.
(6) Any storm drain within state or federal rights-of-way or that falls
under the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(7) The time of concentration (Tc) can be computed by any method
which best represents the subject watershed. However, the NRCS's
segmental method is not recommended for use with drainage areas
that are predominately undeveloped and are greater than 100
acres in size. The NRCS Lag Equation or another more appropriate
method should be used under these conditions.
(8) For any drainage area smaller than five acres in size a Tc of five
minutes may always be assumed at the discretion of the Design
Engineer (for the postdevelopment condition), without needing to
provide supporting documentation.
(9) Precipitation values applicable to the entire Spring Creek Drainage
Basin are those reflected in the PA DOT's IDF curves for Region 2,
regardless if the area was formerly considered in Region 3.
138. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:342
(10) Storm drain conveyance systems stability (swales, open channels,
and pipe discharge aprons) shall be computed using a ten-year
return period peak runoff rate.
(11) Storm sewers, where required by zoning and land use densities,
shall be placed under or immediately adjacent to the roadway site
of the curb, or as directed by the municipality, when parallel to the
street within the right-of-way. Storm sewers that cross under
roadways should be of the combined storm sewer/underdrain type
to permit drainage to the roadway subbase.
(12) When located outside a public right-of-way, they shall be placed
within a drainage easement not less than 20 feet wide as approved
by the Municipal Engineer.
(13) The use of properly designed, graded and turfed drainage swales is
encouraged in lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial
areas and, where approved by the Municipal Engineer, in
residential areas. Such swales shall be designed not only to carry
the required discharge without excessive erosion but also to
increase the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and
velocity, and permit the water to percolate into the soil, where
appropriate.
(14) Inlet types and inlet assemblies shall conform to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Standards for Roadway
Construction, Publication 408, as approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
(a) Inlets shall, at a minimum, be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it
reaches pedestrian crossings or at sag points of vertical curves
in the street alignment which provide a natural point of
ponding of surface stormwater.
(b) Curb inlets on dedicated bicycle lanes shall use only a throat
opening.
(c) Where the municipality deems it necessary because of special
land requirements, special inlets may be approved.
(d) The interval between inlets collecting stormwater runoff shall
be determined in accordance with Pa DOT Design Manual
(DM-2), Chapter 10, Section 5, "Capacity of Waterway Areas."
In curbed sections, the maximum encroachment of water on
the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a through-traffic
lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during the ten-year
design storm of five-minute duration. Inlets shall be provided
to control the encroachment of water on the pavement. When
inlets are used in a storm system within the right-of-way limits
of a street in lieu of manholes, the spacing of such inlets shall
not exceed the maximum distance of 450 feet.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:343
(15) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on a continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all points
of convergence of two or more influent storm sewer mains. The
construction locations of accessible drainage structures shall be as
indicated on the land development drainage plan or area drainage
plan approved by the municipality.
(16) When evidence availability to the municipality indicates that
existing storm sewers have sufficient capacity as determined by
hydrograph summation and are accessible, the developer may
connect their stormwater facilities to the existing storm sewers so
long as the peak rate of discharge does not exceed the amount
permitted by this chapter.
(17) Design criteria for swales and culverts.
(a) Drainage swales.
[1] The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's
equation shall not exceed the allowable velocity for
specific types of vegetative material as specified in
Appendix A,139 Table A-7. Inlets shall be provided to
control the shoulder encroachment and water velocity.
[2] The side slope for any vegetated drainage channel
requiring mowing of the vegetation shall have a maximum
grade of three horizontal to one vertical on those areas to
be mowed.
[3] Erosion prevention. All drainage swales shall be designed
to prevent the erosion of the bed and bank areas. Suitable
stabilization during vegetative cover establishment shall
be provided to prevent erosion.
[4] All storm sewers or drainage swales shall discharge to a
detention or retention basin for the control of peak runoff
discharge except as provided in the plan.
[5] A minimum grade of 1% shall be maintained for all swales.
[6] Design standard. Because of the critical nature of
vegetated drainage channels, the design of all vegetated
channels shall, as a minimum, conform to the design
procedures outlined in the Centre-Clinton County
Conservation District Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook.
(b) Culverts.
139. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:344
[1] Culvert design and construction shall be done in
accordance with PA DOT specifications, except where
more stringent requirements are noted within this chapter.
[2] Minimum grade and size. All storm drain culvert pipes
shall be designed to maintain a minimum grade of 1/2%.
All storm pipes shall have a minimum inside diameter of 15
inches or a cross-sectional area of 176 square inches,
except that pipes under a twenty-five-foot or greater fill
shall not be less than 24 inches or a cross-sectional area of
453 square inches and shall consist of reinforced concrete.
[3] Corrugated metal pipe shall be at least sixteen-gauge
thickness. Smooth plastic pipe used for storm sewers shall
be SDR-35 or stronger. Corrugated plastic pipe must meet
PA DOT strength specifications.
[4] Where storm sewers discharge into existing drainage
channels at an angle greater than 30° from parallel with
the downstream channel flow, the far side bank shall be
stabilized by the use of rip-rap or masonry and/or concrete
walls. The stabilization shall be designed to prevent
erosion and frost heave under and behind the stabilizing
media.
(18) Computational procedures other than those indicated here should
follow the methods of the Federal Highway Administration's Urban
Drainage Design Manual [Hydraulic Engineering circular No. 22
(HEC-22)].
(19) The minimum diameter for pipe under driveways is 15 inches.
E. Water quality standards.
(1) Water quality performance standards. To minimize adverse impacts
to stream health resulting from stormwater nonpoint source (NPS)
pollution, standards are provided for the implementation of water
quality best management practices (BMPs) to reduce nonpoint
source pollutant loadings resulting from land development
activities. The following performance standards and guidelines
shall be addressed at all sites where stormwater management is
required.
(a) Site designs shall minimize the generation of stormwater
runoff through the use of low-impact design techniques.
(b) Stormwater runoff from all land development activities should
be treated through the use of nonstructural and structural
BMPs to effectively treat the adverse impacts of stormwater
runoff including NPS pollutants.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:345
(c) Water quality BMPs shall be incorporated into site designs to
treat the required water quality volume as determined below.
(d) The use of nonstructural BMPs shall always take priority over
the use of structural BMPs. The use of innovative BMPs and
low-impact site planning is encouraged to reduce the
generation of stormwater runoff and effectively treat
pollutants transported in stormwater from the site.
(e) The use of multiple nonstructural water quality techniques
along with new, emerging, and innovative techniques is
encouraged to improve the quality of stormwater runoff to
receiving areas and reduce and/or eliminate the need for
structural BMPs. The Municipal Engineer should be consulted
to clarify the design concept for meeting or exceeding the
intent of this section.
(f) Where nonstructural BMPs are unable to effectively treat all of
the stormwater runoff generated from land development
activities, structural BMPs shall be designed to capture and
treat the computed water quality volume (WQv).
(g) The priority pollutant source areas to be treated with BMPs are
streets, parking lots, driveways, and roof areas.
(h) Due to the karst nature of the watershed, stormwater
discharges from water quality sensitive developments and
discharges to sensitive wellhead protection areas (identified in
Appendix B,140 Exhibit 1) will require special consideration. In
these instances, the developer shall provide water quality
pretreatment (use of a filtering BMP and/or special structural
design features) to prevent the discharge of stormwater
contaminants to groundwater resources. In addition,
hydrogeologic studies may be required to document potential
karst-related impacts.
(i) Prior to stormwater management and water quality design,
developers should consult with the Municipal Engineer to
verify stormwater quality criteria and present proposed
features and concepts for the treatment of stormwater runoff.
Following this meeting the Municipal Engineer shall define any
needed support studies or documentation.
(2) Water quality volume (WQv).
(a) The required water quality volume that must be treated for any
WQS development on sites in sensitive areas underlain by
carbonate rock, and all areas not underlain by carbonate rock
is to be computed within the municipality:
140. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:346
WQdepth = the larger of 0.5 inches or 0.25 + (0.012)
2.9[0.044(SIA)]
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious areas
SIA = percent of site impervious area (all paved areas
and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = total of all paved areas and asphalt-based roofs on
site in acres
(b) The required water quality volume that must be treated for any
non-WQS development in nonsensitive areas underlain by
carbonate rock (see exhibits in Appendix B10) within the
municipality shall be computed as:
WQdepth = 0.25 + (0.012) 2.9[0.044(SIA)]
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious areas
SIA = percent of site impervious area (all paved areas
and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = total of all paved areas and asphalt-based roofs on
site in acres
[1] For designs in which the final roof material is unknown,
the design engineer must assume an asphalt-based roof.
[2] The water quality volume must be captured and treated
through a water quality BMP over an extended period of
time as per the specific requirements of each structure.
Credits to reduce the effective impervious area are
applicable as presented below.
(3) Water quality credits. Due to the karst nature of the Spring Creek
Basin, the nonstructural water quality credits and techniques
identified below may be limited for suitability and use based on
development type and location. These limitations for use are
specified in the restrictions section for each credit. The Municipal
Engineer may require additional documentation or investigation
prior to use of each specific credit to reduce the risks of sinkhole
development or groundwater contamination for sensitive areas and
development types.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:347
Nonstructural
Technique Water Quality Credit
Drainage protection
(DWP)
Subtract drainageway protection areas
from impervious site area in WQv
computation.
Natural area
conservation (NAC)
Subtract conserved natural areas from
impervious site area in WQv
computation.
Filter/buffer area Subtract impervious areas discharged
over pervious areas from impervious
site area in WQv computation.
(a) No area may be double counted for use with credits. The
combined credits of natural area conservation and vegetated
filter strips is limited to 50% of the site's impervious area. The
drainageway protection credit is limited to 50% of the site's
impervious area. The maximum total water quality credit for
any site may, therefore, be 100% of the site's impervious area.
(b) Drainageway protection. A water quality credit is given for the
protection of natural drainageways on a development site.
Natural karst drainageways within the Spring Creek
Watershed often do not exhibit a defined channel bed and
banks. More often, these drainageways appear as wide,
shallow parabolic swales. These drainageways are an integral
part of the natural drainage system and often exhibit
significant infiltration capacity. Protection of these
drainageways is critically important to the health of the
watershed. The drainageway protection (DWP) area is defined
as an area centered on the drainageway and having a
maximum width of 300 feet. The Municipal Engineer may
modify the defined maximum width in cases where natural land
forms define an appropriate alternate width. The impervious
area used in the WQv equation for the development site may be
reduced by twice the area of the preserved drainageway (2 to 1
ratio).
[1] Restrictions on the credit:
[a] Drainageway protection areas must remain in an
undisturbed condition during and after construction
activities. There can be no construction activity within
these areas, including temporary access roads or
storage of equipment or materials. Temporary access
for the construction of utilities crossing this protection
area may be permitted, at the Municipal Engineer's
discretion. However, the alignment of any such
crossing must be perpendicular to the drainageway.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:348
[b] These areas should be placed in a conservation
easement or be permanently preserved through a
similarly enforceable agreement with the municipality.
[c] The limits of the undisturbed DWP area and
conservation easement must be shown on all
construction plans.
[d] The DWP area must be located on the development
site.
[e] The maximum total DWPA credit is 50% of the site
impervious area.
[f] Water quality credits are not permitted for water
quality sensitive (WQS) developments.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions:
[a] DWP areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across
the area as sheet flow.
[b] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development
types may not be directed to DWP areas without
pretreatment.
(c) Natural area conservation (NAC). A water quality credit is
given for natural areas that are conserved at the development
site thereby maintaining predevelopment water quality
characteristics. The impervious area used in the WQv equation
for the development site may be reduced by the natural area
conserved in the water quality volume computations. Natural
area conservation is different than vegetated filter strip/
recharge area and drainageway protection in that, in some
cases, surface runoff may never be directed over the natural
area (i.e., if upslope wooded areas are conserved).
[1] Restrictions on the credit:
[a] Natural areas must remain in an undisturbed
condition during and after construction activities.
Temporary incidental land disturbance activities
associated with utility construction may be permitted
within the conservation area.
[b] These areas should be placed in a conservation
easement or similarly enforceable agreement with the
municipality.
[c] The limits of the undisturbed area and conservation
easement must be shown on all construction plans.
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:349
[d] The area must be located on the development site.
[e] Water quality credits are not permitted for water
quality sensitive (WQS) developments.
[f] The maximum total NAC credit is 50% of the site
impervious area. However, the combination of natural
area conservation credits and filter buffer area credits
is also 50%.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions:
[a] NAC areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across
the area as sheet flow.
[b] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development
types may not be directed to natural areas without
pretreatment.
(d) Filter/buffer area. A water quality credit is given when
stormwater runoff is effectively treated via a filter/buffer area
or strip. A filter/buffer area is a vegetated boundary
characterized by uniform mild slopes. Filter strips may be
forested or vegetated with turf grass. Effective treatment is
achieved when impervious area runoff is directed as sheet flow
across vegetative filter or buffer areas (i.e., concentrated flow
discharged to a filter strip does not meet water quality
reduction criteria). The area draining via overland sheet flow
to an undisturbed, natural, vegetated filter strip (natural
unmaintained meadow or forested area) can be subtracted
from the site impervious area (IA) on a 1:1 area ratio in the
water quality volume computation. Impervious areas draining
across constructed (disturbed or regarded) pervious areas can
be subtracted from the site impervious area (IA) on a 1:1/2
area ratio in the water quality volume computation.
[1] Restrictions on the credit:
[a] The maximum impervious area that can be included in
this credit shall be computed as follows:
IAc = WIA LIA
Where:
IAc = Impervious area recharge credit (L2)
LIA = Length of impervious area measured
perpendicular to the sheet flow direction (L)
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-15
123:350
WIA = Width of impervious area (L). Maximum
width permitted for credit is the smaller of 100
feet or twice the width of the vegetated filter
strip.
[b] To qualify for a water quality credit, natural and
constructed filter areas or strips must meet the same
restrictions identified for natural or constructed
recharge areas with regard to width, length, slope,
tributary drainage length, and construction. These
restrictions are presented in § 147-15C.
[c] Runoff shall enter the filter/buffer strip as overland
sheet flow.
[d] Filter/buffer areas shall remain undisturbed/
unmanaged other than to remove accumulated trash
and debris.
[e] The maximum total water quality credit for vegetative
filter/buffer areas is 50% of the site impervious area.
However, the maximum credit for the combination of
NAC and filter/buffer areas is also 50%.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions:
[a] Water quality credits are not permitted for water
quality sensitive (WQS) developments.
[b] Untreated urban runoff from WQS developments may
not be directed to filter/buffer areas without
pretreatments.
(4) Comments related to water quality credits.
(a) Concurrence of the Municipal Engineer is required prior to the
use of all water quality credits for the reduction of the water
quality treatment volume. The Municipal Engineer may
approve the use of additional credits based upon sufficient
documentation regarding suitability for sensitive development
types and areas, pollutant removal effectiveness, and
maintenance criteria. Multiple water quality credits cannot be
claimed for the identical area of the site (i.e., a stream buffer
credit and disconnecting roof recharge area cannot both be
claimed for the same area).
(b) Additional impervious coverage reduction using low-impact
development techniques (development practices which reduce
the impact of urban runoff such as narrower residential road
sections, smaller cul-de-sacs, smaller parking stalls, smaller
building setbacks to reduce driveway lengths, etc.) will also
reduce the required water quality treatment volume. These
§ 147-15 (RESERVED) § 147-15
123:351
§ 147-16. Erosion and sedimentation requirements.
techniques require prior approval by the municipality before
implementation into land development design.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control", and in
accordance with the Centre County Conservation District and the
standards and specification of the municipality.
B. The Centre County Conservation District has been delegated the
authority by the PA DEP to administer the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program in Centre County. It shall be the
responsibility of the land developer to submit the E&SPC Plan,
application, and other necessary material to the Conservation District.
A copy of the transmittal letter, plan, narrative, and other necessary
material shall be provided to the municipality.
C. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has
regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan (E&SPC
Plan) for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more
under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
D. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for any earth disturbance of one acre or
more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the
municipality's storm sewer system or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff (hereinafter collectively referred to as "regulated
earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth disturbance on any
portion of, part of, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development.
E. No regulated activities or regulated earth disturbance activities within
the municipality shall commence until approval by the Centre County
Conservation District of an E&SPC Plan for construction activities.
F. Comments shall be received and E&SPC Plan approval obtained from
the Conservation District prior to issuance of any building permits for
construction within the area covered by the stormwater management
plan.
G. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under
the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
Subsection E.
§ 147-15 PATTON CODE § 147-16
123:352
§ 147-17. Sinkhole protection.
Intent: The use of sinkholes for stormwater management must be carefully
planned, because discharging runoff directly into existing sinkholes is not
an engineered stormwater solution. Aside from potential water quality
effects, cover collapse sinkholes that exist throughout the watershed can be
unstable, and it should be assumed that they could stop taking water at any
time. Numerous sinkholes throughout the region already flood during larger
runoff events. Nonetheless, in the watershed there are large drainage areas
that completely drain to existing sinkholes and all upslope development
tributary to them cannot be realistically stopped. Therefore, the following
sections have been developed.
H. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria must be applied where recharge or water quality BMPs are
proposed:
(1) Areas proposed for these BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) These BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the
entire contributory drainage area to the BMP has received final
stabilization.
I. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit(s), as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
A. Stormwater from roadways, parking lots, storm sewers, roof drains, or
other concentrated runoff paths shall not be discharged directly into
sinkholes without prior filtration in accordance with Subsection B,
below.
B. Sinkholes capable of absorbing substantial amounts of stormwater shall
be protected by diverting such runoff around the sinkhole (refer to
Subsection F below) or, upon approval of the Municipal Engineer, by
planting and maintaining a dense filter path of suitable vegetative
material in such a manner and location to disperse and slow the runoff
to a sheet flow condition to promote the maximum possible filtration
and sedimentation of impurities.
(1) The filter path must be at least 100 feet in length and 20 feet in
width. Ten-foot-wide filter paths are acceptable if land slope is less
than 2%.
(2) Filter paths shall be designed and installed so that they filter sheet
flow rather than concentrated flow. If concentrated flow occurs,
grading and shaping or the use of best management practices such
as grass waterways or drop structures may be required.
§ 147-16 (RESERVED) § 147-17
123:353
§ 147-18. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Sedimentation basins and proposed vegetative filter paths, in
conjunction with temporary stone filter check dams, shall be
installed prior to subdivision or land development construction
activities where sinkholes are used to accept stormwater
discharges. The sedimentation basin shall be designed to meet the
larger volume requirement of DEP Chapter 102 standards or the
permanent stormwater storage criteria.
C. If increased runoff is to be discharged into a sinkhole, even in filtered
conditions, a hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of such runoff on
the increased risk of land subsidence and adverse impacts to existing
sinkhole floodplains and groundwater quality shall be made by a
qualified professional and submitted with the stormwater management
plan. Such discharge shall be prohibited if the Municipal Engineer
determines that such poses a hazard to life, property, or groundwater
resources.
D. All sinkholes shall be posed by permanent on-site notices clearly visible
at the sinkhole prohibiting any disposal of refuse, rubbish, hazardous
wastes, organic matter of soil into the sinkhole. Rockfill may be
permitted in the sinkhole for the purpose of preventing dumping of said
materials.
E. To protect sensitive karst areas, the Municipal Engineer may require
basins to contain an impervious liner. The liner may be of the
impervious membrane type, placed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, or may be constructed by mixing
Bentonite, or an approved alternative, with existing soil available at the
site, as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
F. If it is determined that runoff from upslope developing areas should be
diverted around a sinkhole due to existing problems, the Municipal
Engineer may require additional upstream volume controls as required
to protect downstream areas.
G. If a sinkhole that is a component of an approved stormwater
management plan closes or does not accept water, all owners of the
approved stormwater management plans tributary to the closed
sinkhole shall install volume control BMPs or safe conveyance to a
suitable discharge point.
A. Materials, worksmanship, and methods: All materials, workmanship,
and methods of work shall comply at a minimum with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 specifications, as accepted and
commonly used by the municipality, and shall be considered to be
incorporated into this article as if copied in full. In the event a conflict
arises between the requirements of this article and the Form 408
Specifications, the Municipal Engineer shall resolve the difference, and
his opinion shall be binding.
§ 147-17 PATTON CODE § 147-18
123:354
B. General.
(1) Facilities in state rights-of-way. Any stormwater facility located on
state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PA DOT). Any
stormwater facility that discharges directly onto state highway
rights-of-way shall be subject to review by the PA DOT.
(2) Water obstructions. Any facilities that constitute water
obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as directed in PA DEP
Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from time to time
by PA DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and
will require a permit from PA DEP. Any other drainage conveyance
facility that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the designated design storm with a minimum
of 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the
top of the roadway.
Roadway Designation* Design Storm
Local 25-year
Collector 50-year
Arterial one-hundred-year
*(as defined by Chapter 149, Patton Township Code of
Ordinances)
Roadway crossings located with designated floodplain areas must
be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm
within a minimum of 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of roadway. Any facility that constitutes
a dam as defined in PA DEP Chapter 105 regulations may require
a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located within
a PA DOT right-of-way must meet PA DOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
(3) Conveyance facilities. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or
channel that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the return period design storm as specified in
Subsection B(2), above. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from
stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention basin) shall be
designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure.
Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must
be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm.
Any facility located within a PA DOT right-of-way must meet PA
DOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
§ 147-18 (RESERVED) § 147-18
123:355
C. Stormwater basin design considerations. Stormwater management
basins for the control of stormwater peak discharges shall meet the
following minimum requirements.
(1) The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent groundwater contamination and, where
required, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of
basins shall have moderate to low erodibility factors (i.e., "K"
factors of 0.32 or less). The design for any basin greater than four
feet in height, measured from the top of berm to the downslope toe
of the abutment, must also include:
(a) Berm soil specifications;
(b) A determination of site soils are available for the construction
of the berms or cutoff trench;
(c) An impervious cutoff trench, which extends the full length of
the downstream berm located in fill.
(2) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Generally, outlet pipes designed to carry the predevelopment, oneyear
storm flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with only
an energy dissipator. Discharges to drainage swales shall be spread
with a level spreader or piped to an acceptable point.
(3) Outlet structures:
(a) Outlet structures within detention/retention basins shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete or an approved alternate.
With the exception of those openings designed to carry
perennial stream flows, design openings shall have a
childproof, non-clogging trash racks over all openings nine
inches or larger in any dimension. Outlet aprons shall be
designed and shall extend at a minimum to the toe of the basin
slope. Where spillways will be used to control peak discharges
in excess of the ten-year storm, the control weirs shall be
constructed to withstand the pressures of impounded waters
and convey flows at computed outlet velocities without erosion.
(b) All metal risers, where approved for use, shall be suitably
coated to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar
appurtenance shall be provided to prevent debris from
entering the riser. All metal risers shall have a concrete base
attached with a watertight connection. The base shall be
sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An antivortex
device, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the basin
berm, shall be provided on the top of all metal risers.
(4) Emergency spillway:
§ 147-18 PATTON CODE § 147-18
123:356
(a) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this chapter shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to
and including the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
conditions. The height of embankment must be set as to
provide a minimum 0.5 foot of freeboard above the elevation
required to safely pass the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
inflow. Should any stormwater management facility require a
dam safety permit under PA DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall
be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the
regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may
be required to pass storms larger than a one-hundred-year
event.
[1] Any underground stormwater management facility (e.g.,
tanks and pipe storage systems) must have a method to
bypass flows higher than the required design (up to a onehundred-
year postdevelopment inflow) without structural
failure or causing downstream harm or safety risks.
[2] Any stormwater management facility that has a paved
roadway as the lower berm, and therefore cannot provide
a traditional berm emergency spillway, is not required to
provide 0.5 feet of freeboard above the elevation required
to safely pass the one-hundred-year postdeveloment
inflow, but is required to show that the design is stable and
no significant undermining, scour, or erosion will occur.
(b) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, vegetated earth, or riprap in accordance with
generally accepted engineering practices. All emergency
spillways shall be constructed so that the detention basin berm
is protected against erosion. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be the peak flow rate from the onehundred-
year design storm. The dimensions of the emergency
spillways can be determined from the Centre County Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook. Emergency spillways shall
extend along the upstream and downstream berm
embankment slopes. Protection should be provided on the
upstream embankment a minimum of three feet in elevation
below the spillway crest elevation. The downstream slope of
the spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of the berm
embankment. The emergency spillway shall not be located on
or discharge over uncompacted earthen fill and/or easily
erodible material.
(c) Rock-filled gabions may be used where combination berm and
emergency spillway structures are required to prevent
concentrated flows. The Municipal Engineer may require the
use of open concrete lattice blocks, stone riprap, or concrete
§ 147-18 (RESERVED) § 147-18
123:357
spillways when slopes would exceed four feet horizontal to one
foot vertical and spillway velocities might exceed Conservation
District standards for the particular soils involved.
(5) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. The antiseep collars and their connections
to the pipe barrel shall be watertight. The antiseep collars shall
extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal
pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14
times the minimum projection of the collar measured perpendicular
to the pipe.
(6) Slope of detention basin embankment. The top or toe of any slope
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Straight side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(a) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical and must be further reduced if
the soil has unstable characteristics.
(b) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed two feet horizontal
to one foot vertical, except with approval of the municipality.
(c) Where concrete, stone, or brick walls are used with side slopes
proposed to be steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, a fence or railing at least 42 inches high shall be
installed above the wall.
(7) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin berms
shall be 10 feet.
(8) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of the
detention basin, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for all
basins used exclusively for peak runoff control. Water quality or
recharge basins with filtration systems incorporated into them may
have a minimum grade of 1/2%.
(a) A collecting swale, low-flow channel, or underdrain shall be
provided in basin designed for use as recreational facilities.
The slope of such a basin can be reduced to 1%.
(9) The lowest floor elevation of any structure constructed within 50
feet of a detention basin or other stormwater facility shall be two
feet above the emergency spillway elevation of the detention basin.
The distance between any structure and any stormwater facility
shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
§ 147-18 PATTON CODE § 147-18
123:358
(10) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(11) Basins should be lined with impervious liners only in areas with a
high risk of sinkhole formation or potential groundwater
contamination, as determined by a geotechnical engineer.
However, where a liner is deemed necessary or appropriate, the
use of controlled, compacted natural clay liners for SWM basins
should be considered. Local available clay, when properly installed,
can provide near impervious conditions (approximately E-6 cm/s or
less).
(a) Some of the advantages of using controlled, compacted,
natural clay soil liners:
[1] Can offer better long-term solution as a basin liner versus
geosynthetics because of greater thickness and the ability
to withstand settlement;
[2] Can be constructed to allow relatively uniform leakage
rates to facilitate groundwater recharge but not to an
excessive degree that overloads karst bedrock;
[3] When properly constructed in two or more eight-to-teninch-
thick lifts, rapid movement of surface water through
the clay liner is eliminated (rapid leaks can occur in
geosynthetic-lined basins due to poor seaming, punctures,
or other factors);
[4] Cleaning/maintenance of clay-lined stormwater basins will
be easier/safer versus geosynthetic liners which could
easily be damaged during maintenance operations; and
[5] The abundance of clayey soils (derived from limestone
residuum) within the Spring Creek Watershed can provide
adequate, cost-effective, soil resources for construction of
clay liner systems at most development projects.
(b) However, the installation of any low-permeability clay liner
system needs to be carefully controlled and the designer needs
to ensure that specifications meet standards to ensure
integrity.
(12) The depth of water in the pond should not exceed five feet.
(13) Fence or screening. A fence or suitable vegetative screening may
be provided as required by the municipality, around all detention
basins. All fencing should be at least 3 1/2 feet in height as
approved by the municipality. A vegetative screening of suitable
landscaping plant material in or around a detention basin may also
be required. Vegetative screening should generally provide a
§ 147-18 (RESERVED) § 147-18
123:359
barrier to prevent entrance to and effectively naturalize the
appearance of the detention basin area.
D. Construction of basins.
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to or concurrent with any
earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and on
the plan. Basins that include water quality or recharge components
shall have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(2) Construction specifications in accordance with the minimum
criteria of the municipality must be provided for all embankments
pursuant to § 147-18C(1)(b) of this chapter.
(3) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times with copies being forwarded to the
Municipal Engineer upon request.
(4) When rock is encountered during the excavation of a pond, it shall
be removed to an elevation of at least 12 inches below the proposed
basin floor (for a manufactured liner, 24 to 30 inches). All exposed
cracks and fissures are to be structurally filled.
(5) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall
be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins within 15
days of construction.
E. Construction inspection. Inspections may be conducted by the
Municipal Engineer during the construction of the stormwater
management basin and facilities. Such inspections do not constitute
approval of construction methods or materials.
F. Special use basins.
(1) The design and construction of multiple use stormwater detention
facilities is strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including: ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Provision for parking facilities within basins and permanent
wet ponds with stormwater management capabilities may also be
appropriate. Prior approval and consultation with the municipality
are required before design. Multiple use basins should be
constructed so that potentially dangerous conditions are not
created. Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed
for a slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas are
clearly separated and secure.
(2) Multiple development basins. Stormwater management facilities
designed to serve more than one property or development in the
§ 147-18 PATTON CODE § 147-18
123:360
same watershed are encouraged. Staged construction of existing
or proposed multiple-use detention facilities by several developers
in conjunction with watershed development is encouraged. Each
developer shall be responsible for the incremental increase in
runoff generated by the respective development and incremental
construction improvements necessary for the overall detention
facility. Prior approval and consultation with the municipality is
required before design of such facilities.
(3) Alternative detention facilities. Alternative stormwater detention
facilities, including rooftop, subsurface basins or tanks and in-pipe
detention storage, or other approved alternative designs, are
permitted as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
G. Design criteria for residential roof sumps, cisterns, and rooftop storage
facilities.
(1) Design of seepage pits and seepage trenches for infiltration:
(a) Criteria.
[1] These structures shall be designed to assimilate, in 72
hours, a volume of water equal to 0.2 cubic feet per square
foot of roof coverage.
[2] The soils on which a seepage pit or trench are located shall
have a minimum infiltration rate of 0.27 inches per hour
based upon soils data obtained by direct testing methods
in accordance with procedures outlined in the Technical
Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
[3] The porosity of the gravel or rock to be used in seepage
pits must be specified in the plan. The rock or gravel shall
be covered with a ground stabilization fabric [trade
names: Mirafi 500 (Monsanto), Typer (DuPont), Bidim
(trade name) and Supac (trade name)] or equivalent.
[4] Seepage pits or seepage trenches shall not be installed on
slopes greater than 20%.
[5] Seepage pits or the drains to them must contain a
sediment trap which can be maintained regularly. All
downspouts should have leaf strains to prevent leaves
from clogging the seepage pit.
[6] Seepage pits connected to roof drains shall be located at
least 10 feet from basement walls and downhill from the
building.
[7] The bottom of a seepage pit shall be at least two feet above
seasonal high water table and bedrock or be shown to be
otherwise capable of handling required design volumes.
§ 147-18 (RESERVED) § 147-18
123:361
(b) Guidelines.
[1] Runoff control capacity may be distributed among several
seepage pits, trenches or runoff control berms so long as
total assimilative capacity of all structures equals the
required volume.
[2] Where adequate seepage pit capacity is difficult to achieve
with a rock-filled pit, a concrete (or equivalent material)
culvert pipe with a lid may be placed vertically over a
stone bed to provide storage capacity; alternatively, a
septic tank-type structure operating as a cistern with
discharge to the seepage pit may be used.
[3] The longer dimension of seepage pits or seepage trenches
should parallel the slope where slopes exceed 5%.
[4] The use of a perforated or porous pipe leading to the
seepage pit is encouraged.
[5] In all cases, an overflow system should be provided to
accommodate heavy rains in excess of the design criteria.
(2) Design of cisterns and rooftop storage facilities:
(a) Criteria.
[1] Cisterns shall be located within a building or below frost
level where they will be protected against freezing. They
shall be designed to hold two-tenths cubic feet of water
per square foot of roof coverage.
[2] Access to the structures by insect or animal vectors shall
be controlled by screens or other obstructions.
[3] Facilities to be used for water supply purposes shall
comply with plumbing code regulations for cross
connections.
[4] Rooftop storage must comply with all building code
regulations on load limitations and other related factors.
[5] All water storage facilities shall be equipped to divert
flows in excess of their holding capacity to appropriate
areas of discharge. If water stored in cisterns will not be
used for nonpotable water supply purposes, the facility
shall be designed to drain down within 72 hours through a
seepage bed.
(b) Guidelines.
[1] Facilities should have a means of access for cleanout of
accumulated debris or sediment.
§ 147-18 PATTON CODE § 147-18
123:362
§ 147-19. Easements.
Stormwater management facilities located outside of existing or proposed
rights-of-way shall be located within and accessible by easements as
follows:
[2] Septic tank-type structures are recommended for smaller
facilities.
A. Drainage easements. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream. The width of the drainage easement will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the
one-hundred-year floodplain, in accordance with computed top widths
for water surface elevations determined under § 147-15D.
B. Access easements. Where proposed stormwater management facilities
are not adjacent to proposed or existing public rights-of-way or are not
accessible due to physical constraints, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, a twenty-foot-wide passable access easement specifying
rights of entry shall be provided. Access easements shall provide for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities, when directed by the Municipal
Engineer.
C. Maintenance easements. A maintenance easement shall be provided
which encompasses the stormwater facility and appurtenances and
provides for access for maintenance purposes. The maintenance
easement must be located outside of one-hundred-year surface
elevation and the stormwater facility and appurtenances.
D. Easement shall stipulate that no trees, shrubs, structures, excavation or
fill be placed and no regarding be performed within the area of the
easement without written approval from the municipality upon review
by the Municipal Engineer. Upon approval of the Municipal Engineer,
such landscaping may be placed in maintenance easements, provided it
does not impede access.
E. Whenever practicable, easements shall be parallel with and conjunctive
to property lines of the subdivision.
F. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the relevant subdivision or land
development plan. The format and content of the easement agreement
shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
G. When stormwater conveyance pipes or channels are located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within a drainage easement not
less than 20 feet wide, as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 147-18 (RESERVED) § 147-19
123:363

ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§ 147-20. General requirements.
§ 147-21. Stormwater management plan contents.
The stormwater management plan shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the
associated computations and erosion and sediment pollution control plan
by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and
sediment pollution control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title
and date. All stormwater management plan materials shall be submitted
to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and
well organized; otherwise, the stormwater management plan shall be
A. A stormwater management plan and other information specified herein
shall be submitted to the municipality for all lands subdivided or for
which land development plans are prepared after the enactment of this
chapter. A stormwater management plan and other information
specified herein shall be submitted at the same time and together with
submission of a subdivision or land development plan, along with a
completed checklist, if available, supplied by the municipality
indicating the items contained within the submission.
B. Such plans and information shall be considered part of said zoning and
subdivision documents and shall be reviewed in accordance with
procedures established thereunder. Preliminary approval or final
approval of a subdivision or land development plan, or the issuance of a
zoning permit, shall be contingent upon submission of a stormwater
management plan and other materials specified herein, and approval of
the stormwater management plan in accordance with provisions of this
chapter.
C. All stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the
municipality for review and comment. Such review shall include a
statement by the Municipal Engineer specifying the provisions of this
chapter which have not been met by the plan as submitted.
D. Once a stormwater management plan has been approved together with
a subdivision or land development plan approval, or together with the
issuance of a zoning permit, said stormwater management plan shall be
valid only for the subdivision, land development, or zoning permit
approved. Any further development on the lot or lots required a revision
of the approved plan or other construction or activities as defined by
Municipal Subdivision and Land Development or Zoning Regulations141
shall require the submission of a new, amended, or revised stormwater
management plan and other information specified herein.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 175, Zoning,
respectively.
§ 147-20 (RESERVED) § 147-21
123:365
disapproved and returned to the applicant. Said plan shall be prepared
by a registered professional land surveyor, qualified geologist, landscape
architect, architect, or engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania, with
said preparer's seal and registration number affixed to the plan. The
following items shall be included in the stormwater management plan:
A. Stormwater management report.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and materials to
be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features including
detention facilities and other stormwater management elements.
(5) Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility for all
permanent stormwater management facilities.
(6) The stormwater management report must include a narrative
which clearly discusses the project and summary tables which, at a
minimum, provide the following information:
(a) Narrative.
[1] The overall stormwater management concept.
[2] The expected project schedule.
[3] Location map.
[4] Total site area pre and post, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[5] Total site impervious area.
[6] Total off-site areas contributing surface runoff to the
points of interest.
[7] Number of stormwater management facilities (ponds), if
applicable.
[8] Type of development.
[9] Predevelopment land use.
[10] Whether site is underlain by carbonate geology.
[11] Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
§ 147-21 PATTON CODE § 147-21
123:366
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables.
[1] Predevelopment.
[a] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[b] Computation of average slope, hydraulic length,
computed time of concentration.
[c] Computed peak rate of runoff.
[2] Postdevelopment.
[a] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[b] Land use for each subarea.
[c] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[d] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[e] Postdevelopment peak rate of runoff routed to ponds
and out.
[f] Pond maximum return period design data, including:
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation,
and emergency spillway elevation.
[g] Water quality depth and volume requirements.
[h] Recharge volume requirements.
[i] Morphology requirements.
[j] Capture volumes required.
Reports that do not clearly indicate the above
information may be rejected for review by the
municipality's Engineer or representative and will be
returned to the applicant.
B. Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals no more than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans
shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
Plans shall be submitted on the following sheet sizes: 18 inches by 24
inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, or 36 inches by 42 inches. All lettering
shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are reduced to half
size. All sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. The
§ 147-21 (RESERVED) § 147-21
123:367
following information, unless specifically exempted in writing by the
Municipal Engineer, must be shown on the plans, prepared in a form
which meets the requirements for recording in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, Pennsylvania. The contents of the
map(s) shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(2) The date of submission and revision(s).
(3) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries and other identifiable landmarks.
(4) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(5) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(6) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, closed depressions, wetlands, streams, existing drainage
courses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total
extent of the upstream area draining through the site. In addition,
any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts, where
required for proposed stormwater management facilities, must be
shown.
(7) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and waterlines on the property and within 50 feet of property lines.
(8) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries, including rock
outcrops.
(9) Total area of impervious surfaces proposed.
(10) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(11) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(12) A graphic and written scale.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project and the
§ 147-21 PATTON CODE § 147-21
123:368
extent of the watershed or subarea that drains through the project
site.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) Access easements around all stormwater management facilities
that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notices to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
(22) Complete drainage systems for the site, including details for
construction. All existing drainage features which are to be
incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the site is to be
developed in stages, a general drainage plan for the entire site
shall be presented with the first stage and appropriate
development stages for the drainage system shall be indicated.
(23) Location and species of plant material used for vegetative filter
paths to sinkholes, and the location of all notices to be posted.
(24) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system, is to be maintained in accordance
with the approved ownership and maintenance program and
remain a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only
after approval of a revised plan by the municipality.
(25) A note indicating that as-built drawings and certificate of
completion will be provided by the developer for all stormwater
facilities prior to occupancy or the release of the surety bond.
(26) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, ________________; hereby certify that the stormwater
management plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Patton Township stormwater management regulations, Chapter
147, of the Patton Township Code of Ordinances."
(27) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(28) A statement clearly indicating the property owner in the case of a
site plan or the homeowners' association in the case of a
subdivision plan has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
§ 147-21 (RESERVED) § 147-21
123:369
the stormwater control facilities and conveyance systems not
within the public right-of-way.
C. Supplemental supporting information to be submitted where
applicable:
(1) A soil erosion and sediment pollution control plan, where
applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as required by PA
DEP.
(2) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(3) Karst features identification and analysis reports and a
hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PA DOT District Office when utilization of a PA DOT storm drainage
system is proposed.
(6) All permits required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
other regulatory agencies.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
(a) A sketch of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment side
slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel dimensions
and dimensions and spacing of antiseep collars.
(b) Design computations for the pipe barrel and riser.
(c) A plot or table of the stage-storage (acre-feet vs. elevation) and
all supporting computations.
(d) Flood routing computations.
§ 147-21 PATTON CODE § 147-21
123:370
§ 147-22. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a PA DEP joint permit
application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PA DEP's Rules
and Regulations, require a PA DOT highway occupancy permit, or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 147-23. Stormwater management plan review.
(e) A detail plan of the trash rack and antivortex device.
(4) Record set (as-built) plans. At the completion of the project, and as
a prerequisite for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an
occupancy permit, the owner or his representative shall:
(a) Provide certification of completion from a registered
professional verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto; and
(b) Provide a set of approved stormwater management plan
drawings, showing all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
A. The stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the developer
as part of the subdivision plan or land development plan submission for
the regulated activity.
B. The submission for any regulated activity that is not subject to
municipal review under Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, or Chapter 175, Zoning, of the Patton Township Code of
Ordinances shall be accepted and reviewed in accordance with the
policies and procedures established for review of subdivision and land
development plans.
C. Three copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted
and distributed as follows:
(1) One copy to the Public Works Department.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Centre Regional Planning Agency.
Additional copies may be required by the municipality for
distribution to downstream municipalities, other municipal
reviewers, or affected agencies.
§ 147-21 (RESERVED) § 147-23
123:371
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for consistency with this chapter. The municipality shall require receipt
of a complete plan.
(1) A stormwater management plan submitted in conjunction with the
initial submission, resubmission, or submission for minor
modification of a subdivision or land development plan shall be
reviewed and approved or disapproved in accordance with the
procedures and policies established for the consideration of
subdivision and land development plans. Municipal approval of a
subdivision or land development plan shall constitute approval of
the supporting stormwater management plan.
(2) A stormwater management plan submitted for a regulated activity
not requiring the submission of a subdivision or land development
plan shall be reviewed as follows:
(a) Zoning permit required. For a regulated activity requiring a
zoning permit, but not requiring a subdivision or land
development plan, the stormwater management plan shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Engineer in accordance with the
procedures and policies established for review of subdivision
and land development plans, except there shall be no deemed
approval provision as defined by the Municipalities Planning
Code. The zoning permit application shall not be considered
complete until the Municipal Engineer informs the Zoning
Officer that the stormwater management plan is consistent
with the requirements of this chapter. Issuance of a zoning
permit shall constitute approval of the supporting stormwater
management plan.
(b) Zoning permit not required. For regulated activity not
requiring a zoning permit or a subdivision or land development
plan, the stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by
the Municipal Engineer in accordance with the procedures and
policies established for review of subdivision and land
development plans, except there shall be no deemed approval
provision as defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
When the Municipal Engineer finds that the stormwater
management plan is consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, an approval letter will be provided to the developer.
B. The municipal approval of a stormwater management plan approved in
conjunction with the initial submission, resubmission, or submission for
minor modification of a subdivision or land development plan shall be
valid concurrently with the approved subdivision or land development
plan. The municipal approval of a stormwater management plan for a
regulated activity not requiring the approval of a subdivision or land
development plan shall be valid for a period of five years from the date
of issuance of a zoning permit or approval letter from the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 147-23 PATTON CODE § 147-23
123:372
C. The review of plan modifications and resubmissions shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedure established for the initial submission
of a stormwater management plan.
D. For regulated activities requiring a PA DEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify PA DEP whether the stormwater
management plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of
the review letter to the developer. PA DEP may consider the Municipal
Engineer's review comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
§ 147-23 (RESERVED) § 147-23
123:373

ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 147-24. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his designee may inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan, the Municipal Engineer shall inform the developer and contractor
of the deviation from the stormwater management plan.
C. Certification of completeness and record set (as-built) plans. At the
completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of the
guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit, the owner or his
representative shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from a registered professional
verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed
according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions
thereto.
(2) Provide a set of approved stormwater management plan drawings
showing all approved revisions, and elevations and inverts to all
manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control facilities.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the governing body or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
§ 147-24 (RESERVED) § 147-24
123:375

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 147-25. Stormwater management plan review fee.
A. Stormwater management plan review fee may be established by
resolution of the municipality to defray review costs incurred by the
municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be paid by the
developer or owner.
B. The review fee may be based on the size of the regulated activity and
hourly charges for administration, review, and inspection by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee.
C. No additional application fee shall be required for stormwater
management plans submitted as part of a subdivision or land
development plan.
D. The following municipal expenses may be included in the review fee.
Overhead expenses for municipal employees shall be established in the
Municipal Fee Schedule:
(1) Administrative costs.
(2) The review of the stormwater management plan by the
municipality, the Municipal Engineer, and/or reviewing consulting
engineer.
(3) The site inspections.
(4) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
(5) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities and drainage improvements presented in
the drainage plan.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure property
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 147-25 (RESERVED) § 147-25
123:377

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 147-26. Stormwater management controls and facilities.
Stormwater management controls and facilities as defined here include
all structural and nonstructural stormwater conveyance and management
controls including water quantity and quality, best management practices.
§ 147-27. Performance guarantee.
The developer shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved stormwater management plan and this
chapter equal to 110% of the construction cost of the required controls.
§ 147-28. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The stormwater management plan for the development shall contain an
operation and maintenance plan. The operation and maintenance plan
shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules
necessary to ensure proper operation and function of the facility(ies).
B. The responsible party or entity responsible for the maintenance must
also be identified. The stormwater management plan for the
development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities
and permanent erosion control facilities, consistent with the following
principles.
(1) Facilities may be incorporated within individual lots so that the
respective lot owners will own and be responsible for maintenance
in accordance with recorded deed restriction, with specific
notation made on the approved subdivision plan for such ownership
and maintenance responsibility. A description of the facility or
system and the terms of the required maintenance shall be
incorporated as part of the deed to the property.
(2) Ownership and maintenance may be the responsibility of a
property owners' association. The stated responsibilities of the
association in terms of owning and maintaining the stormwater
management facilities shall be submitted with final plans for
determination of their adequacy and, upon their approval, shall be
recorded with the approved subdivision plan. In addition, the
approved subdivision plan and any deed written from said plan for
a lot or lots shown therein shall contain a condition that it shall be
mandatory for the owner of said lot to be members of said property
owners' association. For stormwater management facilities that are
proposed as part of a site development plan, a note shall be added
to the plan stating that the developer is responsible for
§ 147-26 (RESERVED) § 147-28
123:379
maintenance of the facilities and that access for inspection by the
municipality of all such facilities shall be provided.
(3) In the event that the developer conclusively shows that none of the
above ownership/maintenance arrangements are achievable, the
facilities may be dedicated to the municipality. If stormwater
facilities are accepted by the municipality for dedication, persons
installing stormwater facilities shall be required to pay a specified
amount to the municipality to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit
shall be determined as follows:
(a) If the stormwater facility is to be owned and maintained by the
municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Municipal
Engineer will establish the estimated costs utilizing
information submitted by the developer.
(b) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Municipal
Engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents, which
shall be subject to the approval of the municipal governing
body.
(c) If a stormwater facility is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the municipality may
reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit
based upon the value of the land for public recreation purpose.
(d) If at some future time a dedicated stormwater facility is
eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
facilities, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and
connection to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any
amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
C. Stormwater facilities should be inspected by the landowner/developer
or responsible entity (including the Municipal Engineer for dedicated
facilities) on the following basis:
(1) Annually.
(2) During or immediately after every ten-year or greater storm event.
D. The entity conducting the inspection may be required to submit a report
to the municipality regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
E. Maintenance inspections may be performed by the municipality to
ensure proper functioning of all stormwater facilities. These inspections
§ 147-28 PATTON CODE § 147-28
123:380
may, at a minimum, be performed annually and/or following major
storm events.
§ 147-28 (RESERVED) § 147-28
123:381

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 147-29. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, representatives of the
municipality may enter, at reasonable times, upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 147-30. Enforcement.
The Municipal Engineer or his designee is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding
compliance with the stormwater management plan shall be the
responsibility of the Municipal Engineer or other qualified persons
designated by the municipality or Municipal Engineer.
§ 147-31. Notification.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be a violation of the Patton
Township Code of Ordinances for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity under § 147-4 on any property except
as provided for in the approved stormwater management plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be a violation of
the Patton Township Code of Ordinances to alter or remove any control
structure or improperly maintain any facility required by this chapter or
to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform
to the approved stormwater management plan.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer of the real
property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is
occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
B. In the event that a person violates a prohibition, fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of
any permit or approval issued hereunder, the municipality shall provide
written notification of the violation. The notice will direct the
responsible party to comply with all the terms of this chapter within
seven days, or such additional period not to exceed 30 days as the
municipality shall deem reasonable. Such notification shall set forth the
nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of
these violation(s). In addition, the municipality shall give notice to the
owner, applicant, developer, property manager or other person
responsible for the property or the violation that, if the violation is not
§ 147-29 (RESERVED) § 147-31
123:383
§ 147-31.1. Remedies.
corrected, the municipality may correct the same and charge the
landowner or other person responsible the cost thereof plus penalties
as specified herein for failure to comply. The notification may also
require, without limitation, the following:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
(2) The elimination of prohibited discharges.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
C. Such notice may be delivered by the United States mail, first class,
postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail; or by personal
service; or if the property is occupied, by posting the notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalty provision of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from pursuing any
and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer of the real
property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is
occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
B. In the event that a person violates a prohibition, fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of
any permit or approval issued hereunder, the municipality shall provide
written notification of the violation which may require, without
limitation, the following remedies:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
(2) The elimination of prohibited discharges.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
§ 147-31 PATTON CODE § 147-31.1
123:384
§ 147-32. Public nuisance.
§ 147-33. Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with this chapter within the period stated
in the notification of violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a penalty of not more than
$600 for each violation plus costs of prosecution and, in default of said fine
and costs, to imprisonment for no more than 30 days, or both. Each and
every day of continued violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 147-34. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
Any building, land development, or other permit or approval for a regulated
activity issued by the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the
municipality for:
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant, property
manager or other person responsible fails to comply with the terms of
this chapter within the time specified by the municipal representative,
the municipality may take any actions necessary to remove the public
nuisance. The costs of removal of the violation shall be in addition to
any penalties for violations for failure to comply.
B. In addition to the fines for violations, costs, and penalties provided for
by this chapter, the municipality may, through its Solicitor, institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceedings
at law or in equity to require owners and/or occupants of real estate to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
C. The cost of removal, fine, and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the municipality as a lien against such property, or
properties of individual members of a property owners' association, in
accordance with the existing provisions of the law.
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
B. A violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 147-31.1 (RESERVED) § 147-34
123:385
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of others.
§ 147-34 PATTON CODE § 147-34
123:386
Chapter 149
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 147-34 (RESERVED) § 147-34
123:387

ARTICLE I
Construction, Opening and Dedication of Streets
§ 149-1. Conditions for construction, opening and dedication.
No person, partnership, association or corporation shall construct, open or
dedicate any road, street, lane or alley, or any sewer or drainage facilities
in connection therewith, for public use or travel in the Township of Patton,
without first submitting plans therefor to the Township Supervisors for their
approval, and no road, street, lane or alley, nor sewer or drainage facilities
in connection therewith shall be opened, laid or constructed except in strict
accordance with plans approved by the Township Supervisors.
§ 149-2. Plans, design standards.
§ 149-3. Submission of plans; public hearing.
All such plans shall be filed with the Township Secretary at least 30 days
prior to regular meetings of the Township Supervisors, at which it is desired
to seek approval thereof. Before acting upon any such plans, the Township
Supervisors may, in their discretion, arrange for a public hearing, after
giving such notice as they may deem desirable in each case.
A. Street plans shall be submitted, in triplicate, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter or rules and regulations that may be
adopted by the Township Supervisors and shall show the profiles of
road, streets and alleys; the course, structure and capacity of any
drainage facilities and shall be complete as to lines, grades, rights-ofway,
drainage, curbs, plot ownership, public utilities, water sewer and
gas lines, fire hydrants, street lights, street development of the area as
a residential, business or industrial area, and such further details as
may be required from time to time by rules and regulations adopted by
the Township Supervisors. Hydraulic calculations for sizing stormwater
facilities shall be provided with the plans.
B. All roads and streets where possible shall connect with existing roads
and streets or proposed roads and streets, so as to form as near as
possible through roads and streets, and a harmonious and systematic
development of the Township. The names of the roads and streets shall
be designated by the names of existing roads and street with which they
connect as extensions thereof.
C. No work shall be started until one set of plans bearing the written
approval of the Board of Supervisors as hereinafter provided is
returned to the applicant.
D. The right-of-way for all roads and streets shall conform to the Township
Road and Street Construction Standards, to be adopted by the Board
from time to time.142
142. Editor's Note: See Article II, Street Design Standards and Construction Specifications.
§ 149-1 (RESERVED) § 149-4
123:389
§ 149-4. Modification of plans; conditional approval.
The Township Supervisors reserve the right to alter such plans, and to
specify any changes or modifications of any kind which they may deem
necessary with respect thereto, and to make their approval of such plans
subject to any such alterations, changes or modifications.
§ 149-5. Signing of plans; filing of duplicate.
Any and all plans when so approved shall be signed by the Board Chairman
and Township Secretary, and the duplicate copy shall be filed in the office
of the Township Engineer, where the same shall be available to public
inspection.
§ 149-6. Recording of approved plans.
All approved plans shall be recorded at the Centre County Recorder of
Deeds Office within 90 days of approval by the person applying for such
approval.
§ 149-7. Improvements to conform to Township specifications.
All roads and streets shown on said plan shall be improved in accordance
with the plans and specifications prescribed by the Township Supervisors.
§ 149-8. Utility installations prior to paving.
All underground utilities to be placed under the cartway shall be installed
prior to the construction of the paved cartway and shoulders.
§ 149-9. Construction pursuant to plan approval.
Construction of all improvements is to be completed within one year of
the date the plan is approved by the Township Supervisors unless a time
extension is granted by the Board. The developer performing the work shall
provide a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount to be
determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 149-10. Maintenance guaranty.
The applicant shall provide the Township with a maintenance bond
guaranteeing the materials and workmanship of all aspects of the newly
constructed street for a period of 18 months from the date the street is
accepted by the Township. The Township will not accept any responsibility
for maintenance of the street or related drainage facilities until it has
officially been accepted by resolution.
§ 149-11. Inspection.
A. Applicants shall pay all costs for inspection of work done within the
roadway. These costs will be based on a fee schedule established by
§ 149-4 PATTON CODE § 149-11
123:390
§ 149-12. Final street acceptance.
Streets will be accepted for public ownership by the Supervisors by passage
of a resolution at a public meeting. Acceptance will not occur until the
following items are satisfactorily met:
Township resolution.143 All inspection costs must be paid prior to the
Township accepting the street.
B. All construction shall be inspected by the Engineer or his approved
substitute. The Township shall be notified between 24 to 48 hours prior
to commencement of each of the following stages of work:
(1) Excavation for and placement of any utilities within the proposed
Township right-of-way (r/w).
(2) Rough grading of street.
(3) Fine grading of street.
(4) Placement of subbase.
(5) Construction of curb and sidewalk.
(6) Placement of B.C.B.C.
(7) Placement of ID-2 binder course.
(8) Placement of ID-2 wearing course.
C. The contractor should not proceed with subsequent stages of
construction until the inspector's approval is received. If an authorized
Township representative has not inspected the construction after
adequate notification was, provided that the construction may proceed.
However, the Township reserves the right to test the subgrade, subbase
or to core any construction, and if construction is faulty, coring costs
will be borne by the contractor/developer and the roadway will be
rejected.
D. Inspections and subsequent authorizations to proceed given by the
Township Engineer, or his substitute, do not relieve the contractor of
meeting all requirements of this chapter or other contracts concerning
performance guarantees.
E. Final inspection of the street shall occur just prior to acceptance by the
Township to assure it meets the herein standards and specifications.
A. A final inspection report is prepared by the Township Engineer.
B. All inspection fees are paid.
C. A maintenance bond is posted.
143. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 149-11 (RESERVED) § 149-12
123:391
D. A deed of dedication is provided.
E. All other matters relating to the construction are resolved.
§ 149-12 PATTON CODE § 149-12
123:392
ARTICLE II
Street Design Standards and Construction Specifications
§ 149-13. General.
The street design standards and construction specifications herein are
regarded as minimum standards and specifications. They are developed
giving high priority to the safety and durability of the future Township
streets. The Township reserves the right to require designs in excess of
these standards when conditions warrant, and also to approve alternate
designs when proven to the Township Engineer they are equal or better
than a design based on these standards.
§ 149-14. Design standards.
A. Table 1 presents the Township's design standards and Figures 1, 2 and
3 illustrate various design details.144 These design standards have been
developed from the following references:
(1) Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation Pub. 70, April 1983
Edition.
(2) A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 1984.
(3) Highway Design Manual - Part 2, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, August 1981, as revised through 1985.
(4) Publication 408 Roadway Specifications, Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, 1987 Edition, as revised through 1989.
(5) Performance Streets, A Concept and Model Standards for
Residential Streets, Bucks County Planning Commission, April
1980.
B. When conditions warrant designs not covered by the herein standards,
the design shall conform to the standards set forth in the references. If
differing standards exist, the most stringent will apply, as determined
by the Township Engineer.
C. Streets shall be designed for a twenty-year service life. If a street is to
be utilized prior to complete construction, the utilized portion must be
structurally designed to support all anticipated loading without
significant loss of the designed service life of the street.
D. Special consideration for future bus and truck routes must be taken into
account in design of streets for pavement thickness and width, sight
distances and curb radii.
144. Editor's Note: The Tables and Figures are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 149-13 (RESERVED) § 149-14
123:393
§ 149-15. Construction specifications.
All construction materials, equipment, procedures and methods shall
conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, unless specifically stated
otherwise herein. Table 2145 summarizes the specifications for the
components that will typically be encountered in street construction within
the Township. If structural components are encountered which are not
enumerated in the table, the appropriate section of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408 will govern.
E. Intersection designs will be reviewed on a case by case basis for
inclusion of turning lanes, medians, acceleration and deceleration lanes
and traffic control devices. Intersections shall be designed to be at right
angles, or as close to right angles as possible, given topographic and
other constraints. The minimum spacing between centerlines of offset
intersections shall be 150 feet.
F. Requirements for traffic signal preemption systems. [Added
2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-363]
(1) All traffic signals installed following the enactment of this
requirement shall be equipped with traffic signal preemption
systems.
(2) The traffic signal preemption systems shall be compatible with
transmitting devices installed in apparatus of the Alpha Fire
Company and shall permit approaching fire-protection apparatus to
have a green light at any intersection equipped with the necessary
receiving equipment.
(3) Acquisition, installation and testing costs for a preemption system
installed as part of a subdivision or land development plan shall be
the responsibility of the developer.
(4) For traffic signals installed by a public entity, the acquisition,
installation and testing costs of the required preemption system
shall be the responsibility of the appropriate public entity.
(5) The specifications of the traffic signal preemption device shall be
determined by the Centre Region Council of Governments, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the Township
Engineer. For the purposes of this requirement, the point of contact
shall be the Fire Administrator. All proposed traffic light designs
shall be provided to the Fire Administrator for review and comment
at least 15 business days before the related subdivision or land
development plan is presented to the Township Planning
Commission for action.
145. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 149-14 PATTON CODE § 149-15
123:394
ARTICLE III
Dropping or Depositing of Materials on Street or Alley
§ 149-16. Unlawful to drop or deposit material on street or alley.
No person shall drop or deposit or permit to be dropped or deposited any
earth, stones, mud, rubbish or other material on any of the streets or alleys
of the Township of Patton.
§ 149-17. Responsibility of operator of vehicle.
The operator of any vehicle from which vehicle any such mud, earth, stone
or other material falls or is dropped shall be deemed to have dropped or
deposited the same within the meaning of this chapter, and it shall therefore
be the duty of any such operator to avoid such dropping or depositing,
regardless of whether done intentionally or unintentionally.
§ 149-18. Registered owner of vehicle presumed to be operator.
In the event of the dropping or depositing of such prohibited materials
occurring from any vehicle, the registered owner of such vehicle shall be
presumed to be the driver, in the event that the actual driver cannot be
determined, and shall be responsible for any violations as provided in this
chapter.
§ 149-19. Registered owner relieved of responsibility under certain
conditions.
However, should any registered owner be charged with an offense under
this section, and if he shall not be the operator of such vehicle, such
registered owner may appear before any District Justice before whom such
charge is filed and state under oath before such District Justice that he was
not the operator and whom the actual operator was at the time and place
of such offense. If such owner shall also appear and testify at any hearing
against any person so identified by such registered owner, and if there is no
further proof that such registered owner was the driver of said vehicle, such
registered owner shall be relieved of responsibility under the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 149-20. Time limit for removal of material.
If any such earth, stone, mud or other material is inadvertently or
accidentally dropped or deposited, said person so dropping or depositing
the same shall remove such prohibited material within four hours of the
time of receiving notice of such dropping or depositing from the Township
police and, in such event, shall not be guilty of an offense under this chapter.
§ 149-21. Removal by Township.
If any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation should violate
the provisions of this chapter, the Township of Patton shall have the right to
§ 149-16 (RESERVED) § 149-21
123:395
remove such earth, stone, mud or other material from the streets or alleys of
the Township of Patton, and to collect the cost of such removal, plus 10%.146
146. Editor's Note: Former Section 67, Penalty for violation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 149-21 PATTON CODE § 149-21
123:396
ARTICLE IV
Limited Access Highways
§ 149-22. Ingress and egress to, from or across Valley Vista Drive.
In accordance with § 2391.1 et seq. of the Highway Law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, no person, firm, or corporation, in
particular, owners or occupants of abutting property, shall have the right
of ingress or egress to, from or across such highway known as Valley Vista
Drive east and west, except as may be provided by the Supervisors of Patton
Township.
§ 149-23. Permit required to construct access onto Valley Vista
Drive.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct an access onto Valley
Vista Drive shall first make application for a permit to the Board of
Supervisors of Patton Township. The Township of Patton reserves the right
in its discretion to grant or deny said permit.
§ 149-24. Conditions of permit.
Upon the issuing of a permit by the Township of Patton, the applicant
may construct such access or accesses in accordance with the conditions,
restrictions and regulations prescribed by the Township and in accordance
with the Township ordinances and the Second Class Township Code.147
147. Editor's Note: Former Section 84, Penalties and remedies, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330. See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq. for the
Second Class Township Code.
§ 149-22 (RESERVED) § 149-24
123:397

ARTICLE V
Occupancy
§ 149-25. Permit required.
An occupancy permit shall be required for any activity within the public
right-of-way that potentially affects the structural integrity of the paved
cartway or curbing, that may affect the drainage characteristics of the
roadway or that may impact upon underground utilities. The fee for such
permits shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.148
§ 149-26. Application for permit.
Application for such permit shall be made by the owner or occupier or by
his contractor or agent, in writing, on forms provided by the Township and
in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be established by the
Township. There shall be appended to each application a drawing or plan
showing the outline of the property affected with existing improvements
thereon, existing drains, pipes, culverts, utilities, footwalks, drives and
driveways, with the proposed drain, pipe, culvert, footwalk, drive or
driveway to be added and the relationship of the foregoing to the Township
road, particularly with relationship to the effect on the drainage of said
road.
§ 149-27. Costs and fees.
The cost of filing such application and permit to be issued thereon, and
the cost of any inspection deemed necessary by the Supervisors, shall be
determined according to a schedule of fees which will be adopted by the
supervisors by resolution149 and all such fees and costs shall be paid into
the Township Treasury.
§ 149-28. Modifications.
The Supervisors may alter plans filed with application, and specify any
changes or modifications of any kind which they may deem necessary, and
make its approval of the granting of any permit subject to any alternatives,
changes, or modifications.
§ 149-29. Compliance with plans.
All grading, construction, installation, and erection shall be in strict
compliance with the plans and specifications on the basis of which the
permit is granted.
148. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
149. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 149-25 (RESERVED) § 149-30
123:399
§ 149-30. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 149-31. Notice of completion of work.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township.
§ 149-32. Inspection of work.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall
inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where
any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to
rectify any such settlement or other defect, within 60 days after written
notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall
impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%
of such cost.150
§ 149-33. Standards.
Design standards of occupancy shall be in conformance with PA Code, Title
67, Chapter 441, Access to and occupancy of Highways and Driveways and
Local Roads and PA Code, Title 67, Chapter 459, Occupancy of Highways by
Utilities.
150. Editor's Note: Former Section 109, Penalty for violation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 149-30 PATTON CODE § 149-33
123:400
ARTICLE VI
Construction of Sidewalks and Curbs
§ 149-34. Authority of Township Supervisors to construct.
The Township Supervisors may construct sidewalks or curbs or suitable
material along the roads or highways in the Township of Patton pursuant to
this chapter authorizing said construction.
§ 149-35. Construction without petition.
Except in such instances when petitions are presented to the Board of
Supervisors, signed by owners of property, representing a majority in
number of feet the front of the properties abutting on roads or highways,
all such sidewalks and sidewalks and curbs are to be constructed in
accordance with Section 1402, Article XIV, of the Second Class Township
Code.
§ 149-36. Payment of cost by property owners; maximum liability.
The cost of said sidewalks or curbs, or sidewalks and curbs shall be paid
by the abutting property owners in proportion to their frontage, but in no
instance shall any abutting property owner be liable for the construction of
such sidewalks in an amount greater than 10%, nor for the construction of
such curbing in an amount greater than 10% of the assessed valuation of
the abutting property owned by him, in accordance with the Act of 1933,
May 1, P.L. 103, Article XIV, Section 1402, as amended. Any expense above
such maximum liability of the abutting property owners shall be paid by the
Township of Patton.
§ 149-37. Unpaid assessment constitutes lien.
If any owner or owners of property against which an assessment shall have
been made shall refuse or neglect to pay such an assessment within 60
days after service of the assessment bill has been made, the Supervisors
of Patton Township, within the time permitted by law, shall file a municipal
claim or lien therefor, together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum
for the date of completion of the improvement contemplated. All unpaid
assessments shall be certified to the Solicitor and said Solicitor shall file
municipal claims or liens therefor in the proper office of Centre County,
Pennsylvania, as provided by law against the property or shall have been
charged. Such Solicitor thereupon shall proceed to collect all assessments
under general laws relating to the collection of municipal liens in
accordance with the Act of 1947, July 10, P.L. 1481, Section 17, as amended.
§ 149-38. Design and construction standards.
A. General.
(1) It is the general policy of the Township to require sidewalks along
both sides of public streets to provide for the safe movement of
§ 149-34 (RESERVED) § 149-38
123:401
pedestrians. Thus, sidewalks are to be constructed in all zoning
districts in the Township, except the following: [Amended
5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
R-1 Rural Residential NR-1 Natural Resources
FP-1 Floodplain UD University District
A-1 Rural
(2) These areas are viewed as not typically generating enough
pedestrian movement to warrant sidewalks. However, if
circumstances arise which, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, will generate pedestrian traffic in these areas, the
Board can require sidewalks to be constructed therein.
(3) Any rezoning of an area to a more intensive development zone will
require sidewalks to be constructed along public streets in that
zone. The cost of the sidewalks will be borne by the initiator of,the
rezoning request unless an alternative arrangement is deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Materials and methods.
(1) Unless otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors, all
sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Section 676 of
PennDOT Publication 408, 1987 Edition, with the exception that a
four-inch stone base can be provided instead of a six-inch stone
base. The construction material shall be air-entrained cement
concrete, the width of the sidewalk shall be five feet, and the
thickness of concrete no less than four inches. A cross-slope of oneeighth
(1/8) inch per foot shall be provided to direct runoff toward
the street.
(2) Bituminous sidewalks may be approved by the Board of
Supervisors only after presentation of substantial noneconomic
based information supporting their use instead of cement concrete.
If permitted, bituminous sidewalks shall be constructed of four
inches of compacted ID-2 material on a four-inch stone base, and
shall be five feet wide.
§ 149-38 PATTON CODE § 149-38
123:402
ARTICLE VII
Removal of Snow, Ice and Other Obstructions
§ 149-39. Responsibility of owner or occupier of property.
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupiers of properties as hereinafter
provided, and the owners of unoccupied lots along whose premises
sidewalks have been laid or may hereafter be laid under the authority of the
Township, to cause said paved sidewalks along their respective properties
to be cleared to the width of said sidewalk of snow, ice and other obstruction
within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow,
or shall have occurred, in the case of ice or other obstruction; provided,
that the owner shall be responsible for conforming to the provisions of this
section in the case of unoccupied property, or property occupied by him or a
property containing more than one dwelling or business unit; the occupant
shall be responsible therefor in the case of property containing a single
dwelling or business unit.
§ 149-40. Responsibility of owners of multiple-family dwellings and
apartments.
§ 149-41. Removal by Township. [Amended 12-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-449]
Whenever any owner or occupier of any property shall refuse or neglect to
clear said streets and sidewalks as provided in this chapter, the Township
Supervisors or their agents or employees may clear or cause the same
to be cleared and the costs of clearing them, with 10% additional, shall
be collected to the Township from said owner or occupier of the property
involved, and such amount may be charged in addition to any fine or penalty
imposed under § 149-41.1.
A. It shall be the duty of all owners of multiple-family dwellings or
apartments to cause sidewalks leading from said buildings to the
streets, parking lots or other sidewalks located along the respective
property to be clear of snow, ice and other obstructions within 24 hours
after the same shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow, or shall
have occurred, in the case of ice or other obstructions.
B. It shall be the duty of all owners of properties containing apartments or
multiple-family dwellings to cause dedicated paved streets along the
respective properties to be clear of snow, ice and other obstruction,
which duty shall continue until said streets shall have been accepted as
a public right-of-way of the Township.151
151. Editor's Note: Former Section 174, Penalty for violation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 149-39 (RESERVED) § 149-41.1
123:403
§ 149-41.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-449]
Any person, firm or association who shall violate any provisions of Article
VII shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $35 or more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 90
days, provided it shall be the duty of the Township’s authorized agent to
report to the Board of Supervisors all violations of any provisions of this
article, indicating in each case the section thereof violated, the location
where such violation took place, the time of such violation, and any other
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the
circumstances attending such violation. The Township’s authorized agent
making such report shall also attach to every such residence/structure/
property a notice that such property was in violation of this article, or, in
lieu of this, provide notice to the occupant/owner via regular mail, which
notice shall contain instructions to the owner or occupant of such property
that, if he shall report to the Township Treasurer and pay the sum of
$15 within 72 hours after the time of such notice, the same shall save
such violator from prosecution before a magisterial district judge and from
payment of the fine and costs hereinabove prescribed, provided each day’s
continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 149-41.1 PATTON CODE § 149-41.1
123:404
ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance, Repair and Reconstruction of Sidewalks
§ 149-42. Duty of property owners.
It shall be the duty of owners of property abutting any public street,
lane, repair, and keep free from obstruction any sidewalks along such
property which are regularly available for the use of the public, whether
such sidewalks are located on the owner's property or within the boundaries
of the streets abutting such property.
§ 149-43. Notice to property owners to repair or maintain or to
remove obstructions from sidewalks.
In the event that the condition of any such sidewalk or walkway requires
maintenance, repair or the removal of obstructions therefrom, the
Supervisors shall cause a notice to be sent, in writing, to the owners of
the property requiring said owners to effect such repairs, maintenance or
removal of the obstruction from the sidewalks.
§ 149-44. Time limit for property owners to do work after notice.
If the notice required under § 149-43 of this chapter is sent out by August 1,
the owner shall make all repairs by November 30 of that year. If the repair
notice is sent out after August 1, then all repairs shall be made by May 31
of the following calendar year. Defects which are substantial safety hazards
shall be fixed within the time frame listed in the repair notice.
§ 149-45. Effect of permitting dangerous conditions to exist.
The property owner shall be guilty of a separate violation of this chapter
for every five-day period beyond the repair due date that the defects go
uncorrected. The owner may be subject to separate prosecutions and
separate fines for each violation.
§ 149-46. Authority for Township to do certain work and collect cost
from property owner.
Upon failure of any property owner to make necessary repairs required by
the notice provided for hereinabove within the time fixed by this chapter,
the Township is hereby authorized and empowered through its duly
authorized agents, servants or employees to enter upon the premises and
make the necessary repairs or remove the offending obstructions, and the
expense thereof shall be levied against the property and collected from the
owners in the manner provided for the collection of municipal liens. Any
claims entered against the owners shall be a lien upon the premises dating
from the time of the commencement of work.152
152. Editor's Note: Former Section 187, Penalties, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 8-14-196 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 149-42 (RESERVED) § 149-46.1
123:405
§ 149-46.1. Criteria for replacement or repair of sidewalks. [Added
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
The Township Engineer or designated representative may perform sidewalk
inspections periodically to determine what sidewalks are in need of
replacement or repair. Sidewalks shall be replaced/repaired when one or
more of the following conditions exist:
A. Vertical alignment. When a sidewalk square has risen or sunk one inch
or more in relation to the remainder of the square or to an adjacent
square.
B. Horizontal alignment. When a crack within a square or a joint between
two adjacent squares has separated to a distance of one inch or greater
and is three inches or longer in length. If a crack exists that does not
meet the above criteria but in the opinion of the Township Engineer
creates a tripping hazard, the square shall be replaced or repaired.
C. Surface deterioration. When 25% or more of the exposed horizontal
surface has chipped or crumbled, exposing aggregate and creating
peaks and valleys, to a depth at any point of 1/2 inch or more below the
original surface. Also in any area of at least 16 square inches that has
surface deterioration or developed a hole of at least one-half-inch deep
in the surface.
D. Slope. If a situation occurs that causes a sidewalk square to settle or
buckle in any way that produces a slope of 8% or more.
E. Ponding. If the concrete has settled, allowing water to pond to a depth
of one inch or more.
§ 149-46.1 PATTON CODE § 149-46.1
123:406
ARTICLE IX
Construction of Driveways and Parking Lots
§ 149-47. Driveways.
The construction of driveways within any zoning district in the Township
shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 441 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation's Rules and Regulations entitled "Access to
and Occupancy of Highways By Driveways and Local Road," January 1982,
(or as amended) with the following exceptions:
§ 149-48. Parking lots.
A. Driveways serving from three to 12 dwelling units in the R-3 Zone shall
have, as a minimum thickness, of four inches of stone base and three
inches of pavement.
B. Driveways serving more than 12 dwelling units in the R-3 Zone shall
have, as a minimum thickness, six inches of stone base and four inches
of pavement.
C. Driveways serving commercial or industrial areas shall have, as a
minimum thickness, six inches of stone base and four inches of
pavement. In situations where five-axle trucks will be used for
deliveries, the portions of the driveway and aisleways to be used by
such vehicles should have six inches of stone base and six inches of
pavement.
D. Driveways shall be paved with either bituminous or cement concrete
meeting the specifications in Sections 400 and 500 of PennDOT
Publication 408, 1987 Edition.
E. Driveways in the A-1, R-2, R-M and R-MHP Zoning Districts must be
kept in a mud-free, dust-free condition.
F. Driveways in the Planned Community (PC) or Planned Airport District
(PAD) must be constructed to the appropriate standard in Subsections A
through E above for the applicable type and density of development.
G. Shared driveways. [Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-336;
amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(1) Shared driveways are only permitted in rural preservation
developments and shall only provide direct access to interior roads
created as a part of the development.
(2) Shared driveways shall serve no more than four separate lots and
shall not exceed a length of 1,000 feet. Turnouts are to be provided
at intervals not exceeding 500 feet to enable opposing vehicles to
pass each other.
§ 149-47 (RESERVED) § 149-48
123:407
A. Parking lot pavement thicknesses are to conform to the minimum
requirements for driveways contained in § 149-47 for the respective
types of development.
B. The perimeter of all parking lots and entrance driveways shall have at
least four inches high, Class A, air entrained cement concrete curbing
conforming to Section 704 of PennDOT Publication 408.
§ 149-48 PATTON CODE § 149-48
123:408
ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
[Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
§ 149-49. General provisions. [Amended 12-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-449]
Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, any violation of any provision
of this chapter by any person, firm, or association may be punishable by a
fine of not more than $600 plus court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
§ 149-49 (RESERVED) § 149-49
123:409
Chapter 153
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 10.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Open space and recreation areas — See Ch.
110.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 149.
Trees — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 149-49 PATTON CODE § 149-49
123:410
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 153-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Regulations of the Township of Patton."
§ 153-2. Purpose.
This chapter is established for the purpose of regulating the development
of human habitation; to provide for the harmonious development of the
Township, for adequate open spaces, for proper traffic flows, recreation,
light and air and for proper distribution of population, thereby creating
conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens.
§ 153-3. Applicability.
Anyone owning a tract of land of any size or shape who plans to divide it
into two or more different parcels and/or uses must file a subdivision plan
with the Township.
§ 153-4. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, be interpreted as follows:
§ 153-5. Definitions.
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
BLOCK153 — An area bounded by three or more streets.
A. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include
the singular.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The words "person" or "subdivider," and "owner" include a corporation,
unincorporated association and a partnership or other legal entity, as
well as an individual.
D. The word "building" includes structure and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
E. The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run spring,
stream and river.
F. The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
§ 153-1 (RESERVED) § 153-5
123:411
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — Front yard line, the line within a property
defining the minimum required distance between any building to be erected
and an adjacent right-of-way, or front lot line.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or
unpaved, intended for vehicular use.
CENTRE REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning
Commission of the Centre Region of the County of Centre.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — Any public or private water system that
serves more than 15 homes or 25 residents and/or is regulated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.[Added
12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Centre Region Comprehensive Policy Plan,
as adopted by the Patton Township Board of Supervisors and/or Official
Map or such other plans, or portions thereof, as may be adopted pursuant
to statute, for the area of the municipality in which the subdivision is
located.[Added 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Centre.
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-ofway
for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block
to another street.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed to be occupied
as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use or
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the
right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the
rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD — A road that provides fire apparatus
access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This
is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as "fire lane," "public
street," "private street," "parking lot lane" and "access roadway."[Added
12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Alpha Fire Company or a duly authorized
representative.[Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
153. Editor's Note: The former definition of "alley," which immediately preceded this definition,
was deleted 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-275.
§ 153-5 PATTON CODE § 153-5
123:412
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION — Any hose connection utilized by the
Fire Department to supply water to a built-in fire protection system.[Added
12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
FIRE FLOW — The flow rate in gallons per minute of a water supply,
measured at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) residual pressure, that is
available for fire fighting.[Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
LAND DEVELOPMENT[Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330] — Any of
the following activities:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot (as shown
on the plan), excluding space within all streets and within all permanent
drainage easements, but including the areas of all other easements.
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 1/2 inch diameter (preferred 3/
4 inch or 7/8 inch) and at least twenty-four inches in length (preferred 30
inches to 36 inches).
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches in diameter or square, containing a copper or brass dowel (plug)
and at least 24 inches in length (preferred 30 inches to 36 inches). It is
recommended that the bottom sides or radius be at least two inches greater
than the top, to minimize movements caused by frost.
NFPA — National Fire Protection Association. A national association
established for the purpose of proposing standards that reduce the
opportunity for injury or death from fire.[Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-419]
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan (and including all
required supplementary data), prepared for official recording as required
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) [53 § 10503(1.1)] of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."
C.
§ 153-5 (RESERVED) § 153-5
123:413
by statute, to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
PLAN, MAJOR STREET — That element of the Centre Regional and/or
Township Comprehensive Plan, hereafter adopted, which shall show the
general location, alignment and dimensions, and the identification and
classification of existing and proposed streets, highways and other
thoroughfares.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Development Policy Plan (Master
Plan) and/or Ultimate Right-of-way Plan and/or Official Map or such other
plans, or portions thereof, as may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the
area of the municipality in which the subdivision is located.
PLAN, OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES — A plan for sewage facilities in
Patton Township and the Centre Region prepared and adopted by Patton
Township and the other Centre Region Municipalities under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as amended,154 and
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.[Added 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan (and including all
required supplementary data), in lesser detail than a final plan, showing
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration
prior to preparation of a final plan.
PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of the municipality and is intended to be recorded with
the Centre County Recorder of Deeds.[Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No.
97-339]
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision.
PLANNING COMMISSION or TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION —
The Planning Commission of Patton Township.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate (sometimes public)
ownership separating a street from other adjacent properties or from
another street.
RESUBDIVISION — Any replotting or resubdivision of land, limited to
changes in lot lines on approved final plan or recorded plan as specified
in § 153-17 of this chapter. Other replattings shall be considered as
constituting a new subdivision of land. See also "subdivision."
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on two generally parallel streets (excluding service streets) with vehicular
access solely from one street.155
154. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7501. et seq.
155. Editor's Note: The former definition of "review," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339.
§ 153-5 PATTON CODE § 153-5
123:414
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, crosswalk or for any other public purpose.
ROADWAY — See "cartway."
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COMMUNITY — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a
system of pipes to a temporary central treatment and disposal plant,
generally serving a neighborhood area.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to
biochemically treat sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual
lot or a tract of lots.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant.
SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which raw sewage
is biochemically changed into solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate
further treatment and final disposal.
SHARED ACCESS EASEMENT — An easement for the common use of two
adjacent parcels to provide vehicular access from separate driveways to an
arterial or collector street.[Added 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurement shall be made from a
point 4.5 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point zero and
five-tenths (0.5) foot above the center line of road surface.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by
measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. Streets
are further classified according to the functions they perform:[Amended
8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-275; 8-14-1996
by Ord. No. 96-330]
ARTERIAL — A high volume street with significant intra-urban traffic,
primarily intersected by collectors. Adjacent land use are primarily
commercial and industrial.
A.
COLLECTOR — A street which serves to gather traffic from all, types of
local streets and distribute vehicles between arterial and local streets.
Adjacent land use are commercial and residential.
B.
LOCAL — A street which serves primarily residential land uses and
connects residential driveways to provide access to collectors.
C.
§ 153-5 (RESERVED) § 153-5
123:415
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation (or agent
authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision of land, as defined by
this chapter, as the owner or equitable owner (or agent authorized thereby)
of the land being subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street
or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. The
term "subdivision" includes land development and resubdivision and, as
appropriate in these regulations, shall refer to the process of subdividing
land or to the land subdivided.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TILE DISPOSAL FIELD — A system of open jointed or perforated pipes laid
in the upper strata of the soil to distribute sewage effluent into the soil for
absorption and vaporization.
TOWNSHIP COORDINATOR — A person appointed by the Township
Supervisors to check submitted plans for sufficiency of information as
required by this chapter, and if all information required is present to be
responsible for distributing the submitted plans to the various Authorities,
Boards, Commissions and/or other directly concerned parties.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, COMMUNITY — A system for supplying
and distributing water from a common source to two or more dwellings and/
or other buildings within a single neighborhood.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system for supplying and
distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A system for supplying and
distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other buildings,
but generally not confined to one neighborhood.
MINOR — A local street which will remain in private ownership and
serve no more than five single-family residences.
D.
§ 153-5 PATTON CODE § 153-5
123:416
ARTICLE II
Submission Procedures
§ 153-6. General provisions.
Hereafter, tentative subdivision plans shall be reviewed by the Township
Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning Commission and
shall be approved or disapproved by the Township Supervisors in
accordance with the procedure specified in this article and in other sections
of this chapter. Any approval not processed as required hereafter shall be
null and void unless it was made prior to the adoption of these regulations.
Any and all plans are to be submitted to Patton Township Board of
Supervisors' Secretary only.
§ 153-7. Submission of sketch plan. [Amended 6-28-1977 by Ord.
No. 149; 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-496]
The voluntary submission of sketch plans by the developer is strongly
encouraged for discussion and informational purposes. The review of the
sketch plan will allow the developer and the Township Planning Commission
and Supervisors to begin a dialogue on options for designing a particular
development and will allow the Township to provide input to the developer
which may be helpful in the design process. No formal action shall be taken
by the Township on sketch plans. Since the submission of a sketch plan is
not mandatory, the developer cannot claim a vested right to development
under provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.156 Sketch plans
should be submitted both in a digital format usable by the Township and on
paper in enough copies so that the Board of Supervisors and the Planning
Commission may review them.
§ 153-8. Submission of preliminary plan.
A. Copies of the preliminary plan and all required supplementary data
shall be initially and officially submitted to the Secretary of the
Township. After the required fees have been properly paid, the
Township Secretary shall transmit such plans to the Township
Coordinator who shall, after checking the plans to see if all information
required by these regulations is present, transmit such plans to the
various authorities, boards, commissions and the Township Engineer.
Plans will be returned to the submittor, if in the opinion of the Township
Coordinator, all information as required by the land subdivision
regulations is not present. All applications for approval of a preliminary
plan shall be acted upon by the Township Board of Supervisors which
shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later
than 90 days after official submission by the applicant, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time. [Amended
6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149]
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-6 (RESERVED) § 153-8
123:417
§ 153-9. Review of preliminary plan.
At the next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the preliminary
plan, the Planning Commission shall review the Plan to determine its
conformance to the standards contained in these regulations or if advisable
in the public interest. No official action shall be taken by the Planning
Commission with respect to a preliminary plan until the Commission has
received the written recommendations of the Centre Regional Planning
Commission, provided, however, that if the Centre Regional Planning
Commission shall fail to report thereon by the next regularly scheduled
meeting, then the Township Planning Commission shall officially act without
having received and considered such a report.157
§ 153-10. Review by Centre Regional Planning Commission.
[Amended 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
The Centre Regional Planning Commission will review the preliminary plan
to determine its conformance to the standards contained in these
regulations and will recommend such changes and modifications as may
seem necessary or advisable in the public interest. The Township
Supervisors shall take no official action on the preliminary plan application
until the planning agency report is received or until expiration of 70 days
from the date the preliminary plan was forwarded to the planning agency,
whichever comes first.
§ 153-10.1. Fire protection plan review procedures. [Added
12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
B. Official submission of a preliminary plan to the Township Secretary
shall comprise:
(1) Submission of two completed copies of the application for review of
preliminary subdivision plan.
(2) Submission of seven full sets and five partial sets of the preliminary
plan, which shall fully comply with § 153-18 and Article IV of these
regulations. In addition, extra prints of the preliminary plan shall
be submitted if necessary or required for other public officials.
[Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(3) Submission (if soil percolation tests are required) of three fully
completed copies of the Subdivision Sewage Disposal Report.
(4) Submission of two copies of any other required information and
plans.
157. Editor's Note: Former Section 2.412, providing for the Township Planning Commission to
notify the Township Secretary, the Centre Regional Planning Commission and the
subdivider, was deleted during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 153-8 PATTON CODE § 153-10.1
123:418
§ 153-11. Review by Township Supervisors.
A. The municipality shall provide all subdivision and land development
plans, whether preliminary or final, to the Fire Chief at the time they
are provided to the Centre Regional Planning Agency (CRPA) for review.
The Fire Chief shall review the plans for the following fire protection
features:
(1) Fire flow and/or water supply available for fire fighting.
(2) The location and available flow of fire hydrants.
(3) The location, design and capacity of water storage facilities.
(4) Fire apparatus access.
(5) The location of fire lanes if needed.
(6) The location of any Fire Department connections provided.
(7) The presence of any built-in fire suppression systems.
B. The Fire Chief shall provide written comments on the plan to the
applicant and the municipality within 10 business days.
C. If any revisions are made to the plan in response to the Fire Chief's
initial review, the plan will be provided to the Fire Chief three business
days prior to the meeting at which the plan will be considered for
approval by the municipal governing body.
D. The Fire Chief shall provide written comments on the revised plan to
the applicant and the municipality.
E. If the plan is not recommended by the Fire Chief, the Board of
Supervisors may deny or conditionally approve the plan based on the
conditions listed in the Fire Chief's comments, or determine that the
applicant has adequately addressed water supply and/or fire apparatus
access.
A. When a preliminary plan has been officially submitted to the
Supervisors by the Township Planning Commission, such plan shall be
placed on the agendum of the Supervisors for review at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
B. At a regularly scheduled meeting, the Supervisors shall review the
preliminary plan and the written reports thereon of the Township
Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning Commission
and shall require or recommend such changes and modifications as it
shall deem necessary or advisable in the public interest.
C. The decision of the Township Supervisors shall be in writing and shall
be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
§ 153-10.1 (RESERVED) § 153-11
123:419
§ 153-12. Submission of final plan.
[Amended 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
D. The action of the Supervisors shall be noted, together with the date of
action. If approved, the signature of the Chairman shall occur on six
sets of plans. These plans then shall be distributed by the Secretary as
follows: two sets to the subdivider, one set to the Township Planning
Commission, two sets to the Centre Regional Planning Commission and
one set retained in the Township files.
E. Approval of a preliminary plot plan shall not constitute approval of final
plans. Approval of a preliminary plan constitute approval for making
improvements or commitments which depend upon the design of the
layout. The developer shall complete installation of all roads and public
utilities prior to submission of the final plan. In lieu thereof, he may
provide a corporate bond in amount sufficient to cover the cost of
improvements. The Board of Supervisors may alter these requirements
if deemed to be in the best interest of the Township. [Amended
6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149]
A. Within 12 months after Township approval of the preliminary plan, a
final plan and all necessary supplementary data shall be officially
submitted to the Township Secretary. However, during this time period,
an extension of time may be granted by the Township Supervisors upon
written request by the owner, developer or an appointed
representative. Otherwise, the plan submitted may be considered as a
new preliminary plan. All applications for approval of a final plan shall
be acted upon by the Township Board of Supervisors which shall render
its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days
after submission by the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time. [Amended 6-28-1977 by Ord. No.
149]
B. The final plan shall conform in all important respects to the preliminary
plan as previously reviewed by the Township Planning Commission and
the Centre Regional Planning Commission, but shall incorporate all
modifications required by the Township Supervisors at the time of
preliminary approval.
C. The Township Supervisors may permit submission of the final plan in
sections, each covering a reasonable portion of the entire proposed
subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plan.
D. Official submission of the final plan to the Township Secretary shall
consist of:
(1) Three copies of the completed application for review of final
subdivision plan; seven full sets and five partial sets of the final
plan, which shall comply with all requirements of § 153-19 of these
§ 153-11 PATTON CODE § 153-12
123:420
§ 153-13. Review of final plan.
regulations, with an attached copy of the approved preliminary
plan of which the final plan is a part thereof; three prints of the
required street cross-section drawings including street profiles;
and three completed copies of the subdivision sewage disposal
report whenever soil percolation tests are required by § 153-20,
if such report has been revised since approval of the preliminary
plan. One additional full set of the final plan and the preliminary
plan shall also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the
Township, as well as 28 eleven-inch by seventeen-inch reduced-size
paper copies of the final plan. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
(2) The subdivider shall supply such performance bonds as required by
the Patton Township Supervisors in, the amount of 100% of the cost
of all the improvements required by this chapter, in a form and with
a surety approved by the Township Solicitor, guaranteeing the
construction and installation of all such improvements within a
stated period which shall not be longer than three years from the
date of final subdivision approval. Upon written application signed
by both the obligor and surety of the performance guarantee in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor, the Supervisors may at
their discretion extend said period by not more than three
additional years or, when the improvements have been partially
completed, reduce proportionally the amount of the performance
guarantee by a formal resolution. In the event of default under a
performance guarantee the proceeds of the performance guarantee
received by the Township shall be used to construct and install the
improvements.
(3) The subdivider shall deliver a maintenance guarantee in an amount
of not fewer than 5% of the estimate of the cost of all improvements
required by this chapter, guaranteeing that the subdivider shall
maintain all such improvements in good condition for a period of
one year after completion of construction and installation of all
such improvements.
E. Distribution of final plan. The Township Secretary shall first verify that
all fees have been paid and the necessary performance guarantees have
been received. The Township Secretary shall then forward all final plan
documentation to the Township Coordinator, except one copy of the
application and one print of the final plan, for distribution to the various
authorities, boards, commissions and the Township Engineer of Patton
Township.
A. The review of the final plan shall be conducted by the Township
Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning Commission in
the same manner as prescribed for review of the preliminary plan
outlined in §§ 153-9 and 153-10. [Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No.
97-339]
§ 153-12 (RESERVED) § 153-13
123:421
§ 153-14. Review by Township Supervisors.
§ 153-15. Recording of final plan.
B. If all the requirements of this chapter are met and review is favorable,
the Township Planning Commission shall authorize its Chairman, with
the Secretary so attesting, to endorse the plan reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission, together with the date of such action and
forward it to the Township Supervisors. If the final plan is
recommended to be disapproved, reasons for such action shall be
explicitly stated, in writing, copies of which shall be distributed by the
Secretary of the Planning Commission to the subdivider, the Centre
Regional Planning Commission and the Township Supervisors.
A. When a final plan has been officially returned to the Township
Supervisors by the Planning Commission, such plan shall be placed on
the agendum of the Supervisors for review at its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
B. At a regularly scheduled meeting, Township Supervisors shall review
the final plan and the written reports thereon of the Planning
Commission and the Centre Regional Planning Commission. Before
acting on a final plan, the Supervisors may arrange for a public hearing,
giving such notice as it may deem desirable in each case. [Amended
6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149]
C. Action by the Supervisors may be favorable, finally approving the Plan
or disapproving the application of which the plan forms a part. The
findings and reasons upon which the Supervisors action is based shall
be given, in writing, to the subdivider with appropriate notification also
to the Township and the Centre Regional Planning Commissions.
D. The action of the Supervisors shall be noted, together with the date of
action and signature of the Chairman and Secretary on the final plan.
Planning module approval must be received from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection before a final subdivision plan
is signed by the Chairman. Copies of the final plan, with the appropriate
endorsement of the Township Supervisors and the Planning
Commission, shall be distributed as follows: [Amended 4-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-320; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(1) Two prints together with the original tracing to the subdivider.
(2) One print to the Planning Commission.
(3) One print to the Centre Regional Planning Commission.
(4) One print to be filed with the Township Engineer or Township
Secretary.
A. After completion of the procedures required by these regulations and
after approval action by the Township Supervisors and the Township
§ 153-13 PATTON CODE § 153-15
123:422
§ 153-16. Plans exempted from standard procedures. [Amended
6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149]
In the case of any new proposed subdivision which does not involve the
provision of new streets or easements for access (i.e. one in which all
proposed lots will have frontage on an existing public street or road), the
following procedure may be followed:
§ 153-17. Resubdivision procedure.
These regulations shall not be construed to require the subdivider to comply
with resubdivision procedures in each and every case for minor shifts in
lot lines because of excessive topography or similar types of development
problems. For purposes of review, however, the Township shall be solely
responsible for review and approval of resubmissions involving lot line
changes. If major street changes or other modifications to easements or
rights-of-way are involved, the Centre Regional Planning Commission shall
be notified and its recommendations required.
Planning Commission and review action by the Centre Regional
Planning Commission, all endorsements shall be so indicated on the
record plan in appropriate boxes provided. No subdivision plan may be
legally recorded unless it bears the seal of the municipality.
B. The record plan shall be a clear and legible print.
C. After endorsement by the Township Supervisors, the subdivider shall
file the record plan with the County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of
the date of final approval by the Township Supervisors. If the subdivider
fails to record the final plan within such period, the action of the
Township Supervisors shall be null and void. [Amended 8-12-1975 by
Ord. No. 138; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
A. The subdivider shall follow the procedure for approval of a preliminary
plan, outlined in §§ 153-8 and 153-9.
B. Following preliminary plan approval the subdivider may prepare a final
plan in full accordance with § 153-19 of these regulations, and such
final plan shall be submitted in accordance with § 153-12 of these
regulations.
A. Lot lines may be changed from those shown on a recorded plan,
provided that in making such changes:
(1) No smaller lot shall be created.
(2) No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller than
the minimum dimensions required by Chapter 175, Zoning.
(3) Easements reserved for public use and/or drainage shall not be
changed.
(4) No lot shall be created which does not abut a street.
§ 153-15 (RESERVED) § 153-17
123:423
(5) The character of the area shall be maintained.
B. In every case wherein lot lines are changed as permitted above, the
subdivider shall: prepare a record plan and submit said plan for the
endorsements of the Township Planning Commission and the Township
Supervisors (which shall specifically identify the previous record plan
thus superseded) and then record the plan.
C. If street changes are also necessary, the above procedures shall be
followed after comments are received from the Centre Regional
Planning Commission.
§ 153-17 PATTON CODE § 153-17
123:424
ARTICLE III
Plan Requirements
§ 153-18. Preliminary plan. [Amended 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 149]
A. The preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision shall be clearly and
legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, except that larger
scales may be used for subdivisions in excess of 20 acres.
B. Plans to be filed by Patton Township which are the record copies
supplied to the Township after all approval signatures have been affixed
shall be photographically reduced to standard drawing sheet sizes of
multiples of 8 1/2 x 11 inches (e.g., 8 1/2 x 11 inches, 11 x 17 inches, 17
x 22 inches and 22 x 34 inches). All reproductions shall be clearly
readable and shall not be larger than 22 x 34 inches or smaller than 8 1/
2 x 11 inches. In the event that the signed original is in conformance
with the aforementioned sizes, photographic reduction will not be
necessary and blue or black line copies will be accepted by the
Township Supervisors.
C. The preliminary plan shall show:
(1) The name of the proposed subdivision.
(2) The North point, graphic scale, written scale and date, including
the month, day and year that the original drawing was completed
and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised,
for each revision if any.
(3) The name of record owner (and subdivider).
(4) The name and address of registered engineer, surveyor or land
planner responsible for the subdivision plan.
(5) The names of all abutting property owners, if any, with the book
and page numbers where recorded.
(6) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, showing the relationship to adjoining property and to
all streets, roads, municipal boundaries and recorded subdivision
plans existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property.
(7) The total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided,
showing bearings and distances and a statement of total acreage of
the property, and additionally: [Amended 1-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-552]
(a) Geodetic reference points. The plan shall have a minimum of
four geodetic GPS locations for reference purposes, with X and
Y coordinates provided in decimal degrees, accurate to the
thousandth decimal, or degrees, minutes, seconds, and in
accordance with the following:
§ 153-18 (RESERVED) § 153-18
123:425
[1] Coordinates shall be provided for a minimum of four
property corners.
(8) Zoning data, including any changes in the existing zoning to be
requested by the subdivider (if a zoning district change is being
considered or is pending, which might affect the proposed
subdivision, the Township shall now notify the subdivider).
(9) Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average
natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of five feet for land with
average natural slopes exceeding 4%.
(10) Location and elevation of the datum of contour elevations shall
refer to United States Geological Survey datum.
(11) All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, watercourses and
other significant man-made or natural features within the proposed
subdivision and within 50 feet from the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision.
(12) All existing buildings or other structures and the approximate
location of all existing tree masses within the proposed subdivision.
(13) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed) on or abutting the tract, including names, rights-ofway
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(14) The full plan of proposed development, including:
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names and utility easement locations.
(Names must be cleared by Centre Regional Planning
Commission.)
(c) Proposed building setback lines along each street.
(d) Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(f) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and
parcels, and proposed house numbers to be furnished by the
Township.
(g) Sanitary and/or storm sewers (and other drainage facilities)
with the size and material of each indicated and any proposed
connections with existing facilities.
§ 153-18 PATTON CODE § 153-18
123:426
(h) Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for
public use with any conditions governing such use as required
in § 153-34A(3).
(15) Location of soil percolation test holes as may be required by
§ 153-20.
(16) Plans shall contain the following information required for fire
protection review. Questions relating to fire protection issues and
meetings with the Fire Chief shall be coordinated through the
Centre Region Fire Administrator. [Added 12-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-419]
(a) The developer shall contact the applicable community water
system to obtain fire flow rates for the water system serving
the proposed subdivision or land development. These flow
rates shall be provided as a note on the plan submitted to the
municipality.
(b) All plans shall provide the size of all existing and proposed
waterlines within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision or
land development.
(c) The location, construction detail and ownership information of
any water storage system shall be provided in the plan detail
sheets. (Approved design specifications for underground
storage tanks may be obtained from the Centre Region Fire
Administrator.)
(d) Setbacks and/or building separations shall be noted on all
plans.
(e) Details for all existing and proposed fire apparatus access
routes.
(f) Details for all existing and proposed Fire Department
connections.
(g) The plan shall provide a note indicating if any structure within
the proposed development will have a built-in fire suppression
system, including but not limited to automatic fire sprinkler
systems.
(17) Any preexisting trees that are intended to be preserved though the
development process, as well as tree protection zones delineated as
required by § 153-34.4 of the Patton Township Code. [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
D. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data as applicable:
§ 153-18 (RESERVED) § 153-18
123:427
§ 153-19. Final plans.
(1) Typical street cross-section drawings for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary
plan or on the profile sheets.
(2) Tentative profiles along top of cartway (pavement) edges or along
the top of curb for both sides of each proposed street shown on the
preliminary plan. Such profiles shall show natural and finished
grades at the following scale, or a ratio thereof: one inch equals 10
feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot vertical.
(3) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of
the Water and Power Resources Board and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
138]
(4) Three completed copies of the Subdivision Sewage Disposal
Report, whenever soil percolation tests are required by § 153-20.
E. All conditions of approval imposed by the Board of Supervisors must be
addressed within 180 days of the meeting at which the Board granted
conditional approval. Failure to do so results in nullification of the
conditional approval. [Added 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
A. All final plans shall be prepared using the requirements of § 153-18D in
addition to the requirements listed below.
B. The final plan shall show:
(1) The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided with
accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to one
minute. These boundaries shall be determined by an accurate
survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed with an
error of closure not to exceed one foot in 2,000 feet; provided,
however, that the boundary(s) adjoining additional unplatted land
of the subdivider (for example, between separately submitted final
plan sections) are not required to be based upon field surveys and
may be calculated. The location and elevation of all boundary line
(perimeter) monuments shall be indicated along with a statement
of the total area of the property being subdivided. In addition, the
engineer or surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of the survey, the
drawn plan and the placement of the monuments.
(2) All final dimensions and bearings of street and lot lines including
radii of curves and arcs and delta angles of all curves.
(3) All final lot numbers and house numbers to be furnished by the
Township.
(4) All final easements and rights-of-way.
§ 153-18 PATTON CODE § 153-19
123:428
(5) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and/or storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts (this data to
be submitted as a separate plan), where required.
(6) If the subdivision proposes a new street intersection with a state
legislative route, the intersection permit number(s) shall have been
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and
permit number shown. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138]
(7) A certification of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plan, and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property before an
officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. Signatures on
tracing only.
(8) A blank space measuring three inches square shall be left along the
lower edge of the sheet, in order that the Recorder of Deeds may
acknowledge receipt and recording of the plan when it is
presented. [Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
(9) An executed Fire Chief signature block (is to be provided). [Added
4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
(10) Any preexisting trees that are intended to be preserved though the
development process, as well as tree protection zones delineated as
required by § 153-34.4 of the Patton Township Code. [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
C. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary
data, in addition to that required in § 153-18D:
(1) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(2) Such private deed restrictions or reservations, including anti-lot
reduction clauses and building setback agreements, as may be
imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together with a
statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect
the title to the land being subdivided.
(3) Whenever a subdivider proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to public use, the Township Planning
Commission may require the subdivider to submit, and also to
record with the plan, a copy of an agreement made with the
Township Supervisors on behalf of his heirs and assigns, signed by
the Township Solicitor and which shall establish the conditions
under which the Street may later be offered for dedication, and
shall stipulate, among other things:
§ 153-19 (RESERVED) § 153-19
123:429
§ 153-20. Soil percolation test requirements.
(a) That the street shall conform to the municipal specifications or
that the owners of the abutting lots shall include with the offer
of dedication sufficient money, as estimated by a competent
engineer, to restore the street to conformance with the
municipal specifications, in effect on the date of dedication.
(b) That any offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
(c) That the method of assessing repair costs be as stipulated.
(d) That agreement by the owners of 60% of the front footage
thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
(e) The private street, unless or until built to municipal standards,
shall be paved with material sufficient to insure a mud-free or
otherwise permanently passable condition. [Added 5-8-1984
by Ord. No. 84-188]
D. All conditions of approval imposed by the Board of Supervisors must be
addressed within 180 days of the meeting at which the Board granted
conditional approval. Failure to do so results in nullification of the
conditional approval. [Added 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
A. Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all subdivisions where:
buildings at the time of construction will not be connected to an active
public sewage disposal system, and/or where the net density of
proposed dwelling units will exceed two dwelling units per acre.
B. Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the procedure
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and soil survey by Soil Conservation Service to be used to determine
number of percolation tests required. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 138]
C. The engineer shall enter the results of the tests and all other
information shall be entered on three copies of a Subdivision Sewage
Disposal Report and shall submit these with the preliminary plan;
provided, however, that, where the approval of the proposed sanitary
sewage disposal facilities by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection is otherwise required, two copies of its report
of investigation and approval may be submitted in lieu of the
Subdivision Sewage Disposal Report. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 138]
D. Where possible, soil percolation tests shall be performed at or near the
site of the proposed on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities and
spaced evenly throughout the property.
§ 153-19 PATTON CODE § 153-20
123:430
E. The results of the soil percolation tests shall be reviewed by the
Township Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning
Commission in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in relation to the physical characteristics of
the tract being subdivided and of the general area surrounding the
tract being subdivided and the final plan lot layout shall be based on
this review. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138]
F. If the analysis of the soil percolation test results reveal that the soil is
unsuitable for the intended use at the lot size proposed, the Township
Planning Commission may require that the lot size(s) be increased in
accordance with the test results or that additional tests be made on
each proposed lot at the location of the contemplated disposal facilities
and the data submitted for review.
§ 153-20 (RESERVED) § 153-20
123:431

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 153-21. Application and general standards.
§ 153-22. Streets. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138; 5-8-1984
by Ord. No. 84-188; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-275; 9-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-331]
A. The standards and requirements contained in Articles IV and V are
intended as the minimum standards for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare and shall be applied and used as
guidance by the Township Planning Commission in reviewing all
subdivision plans.
B. Whenever other Township regulations impose more restrictive
standards and requirements than those contained herein, such other
regulations shall be observed and utilized at the discretion of the
Township Planning Commission.
A. Street construction is to conform to the requirements of Chapter 149
(Streets and Sidewalks).
B. Private streets are permitted only when:
(1) They are located in an area zoned A-1 (Rural). [Admended
5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
(2) They provide access to not more than five lots of a minimum size of
10 acres per lot or three lots of a minimum size of five acres per
lot.
(3) They conform to the construction standards contained in Chapter
149 (Streets and Sidewalks) of the Code of Patton Township.
(4) No more than one private street is created from any tract of land
existing at the date of enactment of this chapter.
C. Single access developments must be provided with a boulevard type
entrance. [Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
(1) The boulevard entrance shall:
(a) Extend to the interior loop street(s) of the subdivision;
(b) Have distinct travel lanes with a minimum width of 12 feet
each and separated by a median which is a minimum of 10 feet
wide; and
(c) Be no longer than 500 feet.
(2) No point along the center line of any roadway measured along the
roadway center line within a single access development shall be
more than 1,500 feet from the entrance to the development.
§ 153-21 (RESERVED) § 153-22
123:433
§ 153-23. Street names and house numbers.
§ 153-24. Design originality.
Imaginative original and aesthetically appropriate designs shall be
encouraged by allowing the subdivider to submit original subdivision
designs not in strict conformity with the standards hereinbefore set forth.
Such designs shall be prepared for review by the Planning Commission in
the form of a detailed site plan, and/or architectural landscape rendering,
including proposed location of structures, trees, etc. Such designs may
comprise industrial or commercial subdivisions or residential subdivisions
of five or more lots. They shall be prepared by registered architects,
landscape architects or engineers. Nothing in this section is intended to
relieve the subdivider from conformity with this chapter unless he can show
D. Cul-de-sac length and fire protection requirements. In the A-1 and R-1
Districts cul-de-sac streets longer than 750 feet are permitted only
when: [Added 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-420]
(1) The subdivision or land development plan includes a note requiring
that all dwellings and occupied structures accessing the cul-de-sac
are provided with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system
installed in accordance with the applicable NFPA standard. The
extended maximum permitted length of culs-de-sac is established
in Chapter 149, Streets and Sidewalks; or
(2) The cul-de-sac is part of a phased development with an approved
Master Plan, provided that additional phases correct the deficiency.
A. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
B. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Township and in the Centre Region. The subdivider
shall submit a proposed street name to the Centre Regional Planning
Commission Office prior to acceptance of a final plan.
C. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Supervisors.158
D. All lots shall have a number assigned as the address for the property.
Address numbers are assigned at twenty-foot intervals. For large lots
with frontage greater than 300 feet, a range of address numbers will be
assigned and the final number will be determined when the driveway is
installed. For lots with smaller than 300 feet of road frontage, a range of
address numbers will be assigned and the final number will be
determined by the number closest to the center line of the lot. [Added
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
158. Editor's Note: Former Section 4.31, Service Streets (Alleys), which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-275.
§ 153-22 PATTON CODE § 153-24
123:434
that his originality will improve the spirit, character and aesthetics of the
Township and this chapter.
§ 153-25. Layout.
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed, zoning
requirements and topography.
§ 153-26. Length.
§ 153-27. Crosswalks.
§ 153-28. Depth.
Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of
lots, except;
§ 153-29. Commercial and industrial blocks.
Blocks in commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of
design detailed above if required by the nature of the use. In all cases,
however, adequate provision shall be made for off street parking and
loading areas as well as for traffic circulation and parking for employees
and customers. The regulations and controls contained in Chapter 175,
Zoning, shall be considered. All entrances are encouraged to be from
collector streets only.
A. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 300 feet.
B. In the design of blocks.(fronting on minor streets) longer than 1,000
feet, special consideration shall be given to the requirements of
satisfactory fire protection.
C. Where practicable, blocks along major and collector streets shall not be
less than 1,000 feet long. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384]
A. Crosswalks may be required between streets wherever necessary to
facilitate pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation and to give access to
community facilities such as parks or playgrounds. [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
B. Such crosswalks shall have a width of not fewer than 10 feet.
A. Where reverse frontage lots are required along a major traffic street.
B. Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of property, in which case the Township Planning
Commission may approve a single tier of lots.
§ 153-24 (RESERVED) § 153-30
123:435
§ 153-30. Lots and parcels.
The original design provisions of § 153-24 shall also be applicable here.
A. General standards.
(1) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
type of development and use contemplated.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(3) Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather
than cross them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
(4) Generally, the depth of residential lots shall be not less than one
nor more than 2 1/2 times their width.
(5) Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall
be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and unloading,
setbacks, landscaping, etc.
(6) If after subdividing there exist remnants of land they shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots or legally dedicated to
public use, if acceptable to the municipality.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots shall have direct access to a public street (or to a private
street if it meets the requirements of these regulations), with the
following exception: up to four lots can be served by a shared
driveway in a rural preservation development. [Amended
12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-335]
(2) Reverse frontage lots shall be allowed or may be required to
provide separation of residential uses from major streets or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation.
C. Driveways and off-street parking. The paving of driveways and off-street
parking areas shall be done in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 149, Streets and Sidewalk. [Amended 9-11-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-275]
(1) Shared access. A shared access easement may be required for
adjacent parcels with frontage and access onto arterial or collector
roadways. Driveway entrances shall be located within a
share$TKSLLDIR/images/XX0000/d access easement if provided.
The shared access easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide
and a maximum of 50 feet long. [Added 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384]
D. Lot size. Lot dimensions and areas shall be not less than specified by
the provisions of Chapter 175, Zoning, or as determined by § 153-20.
§ 153-30 PATTON CODE § 153-31
123:436
§ 153-31. Sanitary sewage disposal.
§ 153-32. Water supply.
§ 153-33. Storm drainage. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Storm drainage, culverts and related installations shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 147, Stormwater Management.
§ 153-34. Public use and service areas.
A. Each property shall connect with an approved public sewer system, if
accessible. Where the sewer is not yet accessible but is planned by the
Sewer Authority for extension to the subdivision within five years, the
subdivider shall install the sewer mains, including lateral connections
and manholes as may be necessary to provide adequate service to each
lot when connection with the sanitary system is made. The sewer mains
shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision and the laterals
shall be capped at the street right-of-way line. When capped sewers are
provided, on-site disposal facilities shall also be provided.
B. Sanitary sewers installed by the developer shall conform to all
requirements of any local, state or municipal authorities having
jurisdiction over sanitary sewers in the subdivision area, including but
not limited to University Area Joint Authority regulations.159 [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
C. Sanitary sewers shall not be leased to carry stormwater.
A. Each property shall connect with an approved public water system if
available.
B. If the water distribution system cannot be connected with an approved
public system, the individual well or springs must be installed and
tested and conform in complete compliance with the latest
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Public Water
Supply specifications covering such facilities. A statement from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection indicating such
requirements have been met shall be submitted to the Township
Secretary by the developer. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138]
A. Public open spaces.
(1) In reviewing subdivision plans, the Township Planning Commission
shall consider whether community facilities, especially schools, in
the area are adequate to serve the needs of the additional dwellings
proposed by the subdivision and shall make such report thereon as
it deems necessary in the public interest to the State College Area
School Board.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Authorities.
§ 153-31 (RESERVED) § 153-34
123:437
(2) Subdividers shall plan for providing or reserving areas for facilities
normally required in residential neighborhoods, including
churches, libraries, schools and other public buildings, parks,
playgrounds and playfields, shopping and local business centers.
Areas provided for reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed. Prior to the
preparation of plans, subdividers of large tracts should review with
the staff of the Centre Regional Planning Commission the minimum
standards for various community facilities applicable to the tract
being subdivided. Areas provided for the aforementioned parks
playgrounds, playfields, etc., shall not lie within any natural
watercourses, drainageways, channels or streams as referenced in
§ 147-18H but shall be considered as separate and desirable
topography blending itself to the aesthetics of the community
facilities that may be considered.
(3) The developer shall provide, and so indicate on the plan, suitable
areas for public parkland using the following acreage standards:
[Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-399; 1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-384]
Number of Dwelling
Units Acreage Required
0 to 9 None required except for connecting
links and easements to nearby parks
or trails
10 to 25 1.0
26 to 40 1.5
41 to 60 2.5
61 to 80 3.0
81 to 100 3.5
101 to 150 4.5
Each additional 50 1.0
B. Utility easements.
(1) Utility easements shall be provided for all poles, wires, conduits,
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, steam and/or other utility
lines intended to service the abutting lots. They shall be a minimum
width of 20 feet. No structures shall be placed within their
boundaries. Trees may be placed within easements as permitted by
utility owner but in no case shall be placed closer than eight feet,
horizontally, to the actual utility location. [Amended 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-384]
(2) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines, but at the recommendation of the
§ 153-34 PATTON CODE § 153-34
123:438
Planning Commission may be located within any Township street
rights-of-way.
(3) There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the
shortest distance, between any proposed dwelling unit and any
petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line
which traverses the subdivision.
(4) Subdividers are urged to avail themselves of the facilities provided
by the various public utility companies in determining the proper
locations for utility line easements.
C. Community space. [Added 11-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-359]
(1) All commercial properties that are 20 acres or larger in size shall
provide a community space in proportion to the size of the
development. For the purposes of this regulation, a community
space shall be defined as a parklet, pedestrian plaza or other
community gathering area.
(2) The community space may be divided into more than one area on
the property. There shall be at least one area of community space of
15,000 square feet or more.
(3) The community space shall be centrally located on the site unless
an alternate location which meets the intent of this section and is
acceptable to the Township is proposed. The community space shall
have pedestrian connections to a transit facility and to the front of
the largest commercial structure on the property and shall be
designed to serve the needs of visitors and employees of the
commercial property. The amount of the required community space
is set forth in the following chart:
Size of Commercial Property
(acres)
Required Community Space
(acres)
Less than 20 0
21 to 30 1/2
31 to 40 3/4
41 to 50 1
51 to 60 1 1/4
61 to 70 1 1/2
71 to 80 1 3/4
81 to 90 2
§ 153-34 (RESERVED) § 153-34.1
123:439
§ 153-34.1. Rural preservation. [Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-335]
In addition to the use and area/bulk regulations contained in Chapter
175 (Zoning), the following design standards apply to rural preservation
developments:
A. The total number of dwelling units permitted to be developed within a
rural preservation development will be established by using the
following methodology: [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(1) An informal plan must be submitted to the Township illustrating
salient existing features of the subject tract, its surroundings and
the general layout of a subdivision using lots of one acre or greater.
This informal plan must provide a road network to serve this
development.
(2) The sewage disposal capacity of the tract shall be determined by
identifying one acceptable soil profile excavation for an individual
on-lot septic system for each lot in this informal plan.
(3) The informal plan shall illustrate the extent and location of
environmentally sensitive areas such as steep slopes, wetlands and
floodplains. The layout of the informal plan shall be completed to
minimize impacts on these areas.
The applicant will be given credit for each lot of one acre or
greater contained on the informal plan that contains one
acceptable soil profile excavation for an individual on-lot septic
system. The total number of lots containing an acceptable soil
profile will determine the number of dwelling units permitted for
this tract using rural preservation development standards.
B. Roads and driveways shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
149 (Streets and Sidewalks) of the Code of Patton Township.
C. Public sewer service may be provided to an RPD development only if it
is located within the Future Sewer Service Area identified in the Centre
Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan. Public water may be provided
with approval of the Board of Supervisors and the State College
Borough Water Authority. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384]
D. At least 50% of a tract must remain as open land as defined in Chapter
175 (Zoning). The allowable uses of the open land are as follows:
(1) Agricultural uses on a minimum ten-acre area.
(2) The conservation of water, soil, forest and wildlife resources, areas
for potable water well use and areas for treatment/disposal for
wastewater discharges. Protection easements with required
separation distances as required by the PADEP shall be provided
for water wells and wastewater discharge areas.
§ 153-34.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.1
123:440
(3) An estate lot for one single-family dwelling. The estate lot shall be
restricted from further subdivision by permanent deed restriction.
An estate lot of 10 acres or more is entitled to accessory uses and
additional uses by right as described in § 175-26B. [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(4) Park and recreational uses.
(5) Stormwater management areas.
E. Floodplains, wetlands and steep slopes are not to be impacted by
clearing, grading, filling and construction except for essential
infrastructure that cannot be located elsewhere.
F. Woodlands, healthy trees, fields and orchards should be preserved to
create buffer areas to minimize conflicts between agriculture and
residences.
G. Development on open fields should be located near any existing
woodlands or hedgerows and, where feasible, on the least prime
agricultural soils.
H. An upland buffer of natural vegetation a minimum of 100 feet from any
stream, wetland or surface waters shall be preserved or created if not
already in existence. (See §153-34.1P [rural preservation alternative
design standards] for subdivision or land development designs not in
strict conformity with the standard of 100 feet.) [Amended 3-10-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-518]
I. Disturbance to existing hedgerows, woodlands and tree lines shall be
minimized.
J. Wildlife habitat areas as identified in the Centre County Natural
Heritage Inventory shall be protected.
K. Historic, archaeological and cultural sites identified in the Historic
Resources of the Centre Region Report and by the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission shall be respected in the site design.
L. Lots created as part of a RPD development are prohibited from directly
accessing existing roadways. Lots shall only take direct access from
interior roads or shared driveways connected thereto. Each RPD
development shall include at least one new roadway that complies with
Chapter 149 (Streets and Sidewalks). [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-384]
M. Common areas and streetscapes shall be landscaped with native
vegetation.
N. Pedestrian circulation in the form of developed trails or informal paths
shall be provided throughout the tract. These trails shall have the
ability to establish a system so that the future linkages can be made. If
the trails are designated for public use, they may be applied toward the
§ 153-34.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.1
123:441
parkland requirement and must be noted on the recorded plan
accordingly.
O. Required open land shall be designed to be contiguous with adjacent
agricultural, open land and other natural areas in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, Township objectives for Rural Preservation
developments, including applicable park and recreation plans, and in
order to maintain natural corridors for the movement and migration of
wildlife through the development.
P. As per § 153.34.1H, an upland buffer of natural vegetation a minimum
of 100 feet from any stream, wetland or surface waters shall be
preserved or created if not already in existence. This requirement shall
also be deemed satisfied when the following alternative design is
implemented. (See § 153-34.6B for related definitions.) [Added
3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-518]
(1) Streams. The required minimum buffer width may be reduced to no
less than 50 feet when a vegetated riparian buffer is installed as
follows.
(a) Buffer establishment. The width of the riparian buffer shall be
measured on a perpendicular line extending outward from the
defined top of bank of a stream.
[1] Site preparation. Prior to planting, the buffer area shall be
prepared as follows:
[a] Invasive species as identified in Appendix 2160 shall be
removed.
[b] Soil may be tilled in narrow strips to a depth of 12
inches for rows of trees or shrubs.
[c] To the extent possible, the area shall be graded to
ensure that any runoff entering the buffer area shall
enter as sheet flow and not concentrated flow.
[d] Plantings shall not be installed any closer than five
feet to the top of bank of any stream.
[2] Required vegetation. As part of any subdivision or land
development of a property that touches or is at least
partially located within the riparian buffer, a vegetated
buffer shall be installed as follows:
[a] Type.
[i] Required: trees and/or shrubs. Required plantings
shall be installed within the riparian buffer.
160. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.1
123:442
[ii] Recommended: grasses, sedges and perennials.
Though not required to be installed, the planting
of grasses, sedges, and perennials outside the
first 35 feet of the riparian buffer is
recommended. If planted, they should be spaced
approximately one to three feet apart or per
nursery instructions. See Appendix 3.161
[b] Density.
[i] The required quantity of plantings shall be
derived based on the following formula:
Length of Buffera x 50b x 150c / 43,560d = Total
Required Plantings
a = length of stream frontage located
within the riparian buffer
b = width of riparian buffer
c = required number of trees per acre
d = square feet per acre
[ii] The survival rate after three years shall meet or
exceed 70% of the required density. If, after three
years, less than 70% of the trees have survived,
additional trees shall be planted to meet the
seventy-percent standard.
[c] Size.
[i] Required: balled and burlapped, and/or large
container stock equal to or greater than 1.5
inches in caliper.
[d] Species. A minimum of six and a maximum of 12
recommended species shall be planted. For
recommended species, see Appendix 1.162
[e] Spacing. Recommended random spacing between
trees is based on plant size at installation as follows.
[i] Tree or shrub greater than or equal to 1.5 inches
in caliper: 16 to 18 feet.
[ii] Grasses, perennials and sedges: one to three feet
apart or per nursery instructions. See Appendix
3.163
161. Editor's Note: Appendix 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: Appendix 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.1
123:443
[f] Protection.
[i] Trees. For any trees less than three feet in height,
a tree shelter shall be required.
[A] The tree shelter shall be a minimum of three
feet tall.
[B] The tree shelter shall be installed with a
hardwood or bamboo stake a minimum of 42
inches or 3.5 feet tall.
[g] Maintenance. Maintenance of the riparian buffer shall
remain the sole responsibility of each individual
property owner and shall be performed according to
the following.
[i] In selecting the required tree shelters,
landowners should only use shelters with a high
likelihood of allowing trees to burst out with no
damage.
[ii] Tree shelters shall be maintained and replaced as
needed.
[iii] The landowner shall hire a qualified professional
to apply herbicide with the initial planting and
once yearly for three years after planting.
[A] First application: one year after planting.
[B] Second application: two years after planting.
[C] Third application: three years after planting.
[iv] Where possible, the landowner shall mow nonherbicide
alleyways between rows of trees where
rodents are a problem. This mowing shall be done
each fall for the first three years following
planting. Mowing may not be beneficial if a large
number of trees are destroyed in the process.
Mowing should be site specific.
[v] In addition to mowing, maintenance should
include mulching and the replacement of mulch
as needed, the removal of invasive species (See
Appendix 2.164) and the removal of dead trees.
[vi] If, after three years, less than 70% of the trees
have survived, additional trees shall be planted to
meet the seventy-percent standard.
164. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.1
123:444
[vii] Details for the above are related to the
Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program
(CREP) and clarified in "Establishment and
Maintenance Guidance for CREP Participants and
Contractors" and "CREP CP 22 Herbicide
Recommendations for Weed Management."
(2) Wetlands.
(a) Minimum buffer width. The required minimum buffer width
may be reduced to no less than 50 feet when stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) are utilized for all required
stormwater facilities. Examples of such BMPs include, but may
not be limited to, bioretention areas, rain gardens/bioretention
beds, infiltration trenches and wet ponds when constructed per
the standards of Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, or the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual
when standards do not exist within Chapter 147.
(3) Exemptions.
(a) Man-made stormwater management ponds, basins and related
facilities shall be exempt from the buffer requirements
prescribed herein but are subject to any buffer, setback,
easement or other pertinent requirements set forth in Chapter
147, Stormwater Management.
(b) Wetlands. The installation of a vegetated buffer around
wetlands is not required; however, existing vegetation shall be
preserved.
(c) Limited land area in riparian buffer.
[1] Required plantings shall be installed within the riparian
buffer if possible. In the event that it can be demonstrated
that it is not possible to plant all required vegetation
within the riparian buffer, the following shall apply.
[a] The remaining trees or shrubs shall be planted in the
next available location closest to the riparian buffer. If
it can be demonstrated that the next available location
does not lie within the riparian buffer, no further
vegetation shall be required beyond that which can be
installed in accordance with the spacing
recommendations herein.
[b] If it can be demonstrated that only 50% or less of the
total required vegetation can be installed in the
riparian buffer:
[i] The remaining vegetation may be reduced by 50%
and installed as per above; or
§ 153-34.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.1
123:445
[ii] The remaining vegetation may be installed as
grasses and sedges as per § 153-34.6D(2)(b) and
Appendix 3.165
[2] Examples of situations that might prevent replacement of
vegetation include, but may not be limited to, the presence
of existing vegetation immediately adjacent to and
surrounding the site, or existing sensitive areas that could
be negatively impacted by the installation of vegetation.
(4) Development regulations.
(a) Within the riparian buffer. The construction of new structures
and the improvement or modification to existing structures is
prohibited within the riparian buffer unless otherwise stated
herein.
(b) Outside the riparian buffer. New construction on lands located
outside the riparian buffer is permitted in accordance with all
other existing local, state and federal land use laws. However,
when those lands are part of a parcel which touches or is at
least partially located within the riparian buffer, and a
subdivision or land development plan must be submitted for
approval by the Board of Supervisors prior to construction, a
vegetated buffer shall be installed within the riparian buffer in
accordance with § 153-34.1H.
(c) Stream access paths. As part of a new buffer installation, or
where stream access is restricted by an existing buffer, stream
access paths may be created for the purpose of passage to the
stream from outlying areas as per the standards of
§ 153-34.6E(1)(c).
(d) Stream crossings. Any and all local, state and federal
regulations pertaining to stream crossings must be strictly
adhered to. In addition, such crossings shall be constructed per
the minimum standards of § 153-34.6F.
(5) Plan requirements. In addition to all other plan requirements of the
Township, a planting plan showing the following information shall
be part of any plans submitted to the Township for approval.
(a) Planting plan details:
[1] Location of all proposed and existing vegetation qualified
to be included in the calculation of the vegetation
requirement.
[2] Tabular notation of the quantity, size and species of
existing and proposed vegetation.
165. Editor's Note: Appendix 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.1
123:446
§ 153-34.1.1. Developments within Regional Growth Boundary/
Sewer Service Area using public sewer and water. [Added
10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-486]
In addition to the use and area/bulk regulations contained in Chapter 175,
Zoning, the following design shall apply:
[3] Proposed spacing for any proposed vegetation.
[4] Identification of the riparian buffer.
[5] Required stream or wetland setbacks.
[6] Location of any proposed stream crossings.
(b) Maintenance plan details:
[1] A note stating the requirements of to
§ 153-34.1P(1)(a)[2][g] above shall be placed on the plan.
A. At least 30% of a tract must remain as open land as defined in Chapter
175, Zoning. The allowable uses of the open land are as follows:
(1) The conservation of water, soil, forest and wildlife resources.
(2) Park and recreational uses.
(3) Stormwater management areas.
B. Required open land shall be designed, to the extent practicable, to be
contiguous with adjacent open land and other natural areas, including
parks, recreation areas and game lands.
C. Ownership and maintenance of open land. Ownership and maintenance
of open land shall be determined according to the following provisions
or other acceptable provision that creates a permanent easement. All
open land shall be permanently restricted from future development.
(1) Establishment of a corporate ownership of the open land by the
homeowners (homeowners' association or condominium
association) of the developed portion of the tract, incorporating
into the deeds of the homeowners any interest in such open land.
(2) Dedication to the Township of improved parkland for active
recreational uses. Improvements may include facilities such as, but
not limited to, playing fields, playground equipment, hard-surfaced
courts, walkways, bikeways, and drinking fountains. The plan for
the parkland improvements shall be included on the subdivision
plan.
D. Floodplains, wetlands and steep slopes are not to be impacted by
clearing, grading, filling and construction except for essential
infrastructure that cannot be located elsewhere.
§ 153-34.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.1.1
123:447
E. An upland buffer of natural vegetation a minimum of 65 feet from any
stream, wetland or surface waters shall be preserved or created if not
already in existence.
F. Disturbance to existing hedgerows, woodlands and tree lines shall be
minimized.
G. Historic, archaeological and cultural sites identified in the Historic
Resources of the Centre Region Report and by the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission shall be respected in the site design.
H. Lots created as part of an A-1 development within the Regional Growth
Boundary/Sewer Service Area using public sewer and water are
prohibited from directly accessing existing roadways. Lots shall only
take direct access from interior public roads. Each development shall
include at least one new roadway that complies with Chapter 149,
Streets and Sidewalks.
I. Roads and driveways shall comply with the requirements for the PC
Zoning District of Chapter 149, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Code of
Patton Township.
J. Pedestrian circulation shall be provided to include:
(1) Sidewalks along both sides of all interior streets and along adjacent
streets. Sidewalk construction shall conform to Chapter 149,
Streets and Sidewalks, of the Code of Patton Township.
(2) Trails, walkways, or additional sidewalks, to be available for public
use, shall be established on open lands to connect interior
sidewalks to existing trails, walkways, or sidewalks on adjacent
properties or to foster future linkages on adjacent undeveloped
properties.
(a) These trails, walkways, or additional sidewalks shall be
improved to the level of improvement of the existing trail,
walkway, or sidewalk on the adjacent property and shall be
contained within an easement providing for public access.
(b) Where trails are established for future linkages, these trails
shall be contained within an easement providing for public
access and shall be improved in accordance with the following:
[1] In forested areas, a minimum five-foot-wide trail location
shall be identifiable by lining the trail with fallen limbs/
branches or surfacing with wood chips.
[2] In nonforested areas, a minimum five-foot-wide trail
location shall be identifiable by surfacing with asphalt,
gravel, or wood chips. Mowed grass trails are not
acceptable.
§ 153-34.1.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.1.1
123:448
§ 153-34.2. I-99 Interchange Overlay District design standards.
[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
In addition to the I-99 Interchange Overlay District requirements in Chapter
175 (Zoning), the following design standards apply to developments within
the District:
(3) Alternative pedestrian circulation plans may be offered for
consideration, but alternatives proposing pedestrian circulation on
roadways, roadway shoulders, or walkways along rear yards should
be avoided. Alternative plans must provide a pedestrian circulation
network that connects all residential lots and provides pedestrian
access along adjacent streets and pedestrian access to adjacent
properties. Alternative plans must also provide for equitable
maintenance obligations for all residences in the development.
A. Building exteriors. All proposed nonresidential development to be
located within the interstate highway and interchange access road
corridors shall meet the following requirements and shall be noted on
the development plans.
(1) Buildings shall use the same materials, or ones that are
architecturally harmonious, on all building walls and other building
components visible from public rights-of-way. Unpainted plain
concrete block shall not be used on building exteriors. Tinted or
textured concrete block is acceptable.
(2) Glazed areas shall not exceed 60% of the exterior surface of any
single building. All glazing materials shall have a maximum of 15%
outside visible light reflectivity value.
(3) Facades greater than 45 feet in length facing rights-of-way shall
employ one or more of the following architectural design
strategies:
(a) Use of varying materials, textures or colors.
(b) Use of architectural detailing or elements, such as windows,
colonnades, porches, porticos, columns, pilasters, cornices, or
canopies.
(c) Varying horizontal elevations, bump outs, and recesses.
(4) Facades of retail buildings which face a public right-of-way or
parking area shall have a minimum of 30% of the ground floor
exterior area devoted to windows or display windows.
B. Building placement and site design.
(1) Developers are encouraged to avoid construction of buildings on
high points of hills or ridges. Any building near a hilltop should not
protrude above the natural ridgeline as seen from a site's frontage
on the I-99 corridor. Rooftop equipment (including but not limited
§ 153-34.1.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.2
123:449
to satellite dishes and air conditioning units), deck support
structures and trash receptacles shall be adequately screened so
they are not visible from major public rights-of-way or viewing
places. Architectural perspectives or drawings shall be submitted
that document compliance with this requirement.
(2) Trash receptacles, mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, loading
docks, and other accessory uses shall be located or screened in
such a manner as to be hidden from all off-property views,
including the interstate highway and interchange access road.
C. Slope restrictions.
(1) For the purpose of this section, the slope(s) of a site shall be
determined by utilizing topographic surveys following written
guidelines prepared by the Township Engineer and approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) In areas of steep slopes within the Interchange Overlay District, the
following standards shall apply to all grading and development:
(a) For slopes averaging 15% to 25%, no more than 40% of
naturally occurring slopes shall be developed, graded,
deforested, and/or stripped of vegetation. An additional 30% of
such naturally occurring slope may be developed upon
submission of a report by a qualified professional engineer
certifying that the sloped areas may be safely developed and
inclusion of two of the following mitigation measures when the
disturbed area exceeds 55% of such naturally occurring slope:
[1] Preserve other undisturbed land with less than 15% slope
equal to 1.0 times the additional area disturbed.
[2] Provide for the recharge of stormwater for an amount of
impervious area equal to 1.2 times the additional area
disturbed. The minimum required recharge volume is
equal to 1.5 inches of runoff for the area defined.
[3] Provide additional landscaping equivalent to a twenty-footwide
Buffer Yard D for an area equal to 1.2 times the
additional area disturbed. The "Required Plant Units/100"
are required for each 2,000 square feet required to be
landscaped. The landscaping may be provided on nonwooded,
undisturbed ground or in developed areas.
Substitutions between types of plantings may be made at
the exchange ratios established for setback landscaping.
[4] Provide a developer-proposed mitigation of equal
environmental value and acceptable to the Township.
(b) For slopes averaging greater than 25%, no development shall
be allowed, except upon submission of a report by a
§ 153-34.2 PATTON CODE § 153-34.2
123:450
§ 153-34.3. Grading. [Added 3-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-417]
professional engineer certifying that the steep slope may be
safely developed. Furthermore, the owner and/or developer
shall agree, as a condition to approval of the development
plan, to hold the municipality harmless from and against any
and all claims or damages due to approval of such plan. If
development is allowed to occur under this subsection, no
more than 15% of such naturally occurring slopes shall be
developed, graded, deforested, and/or stripped of vegetation.
(c) On Lots 4, 6, and 7 of Oakwood Planned Community, no
allowed use may be denied solely because a particular lot or
lots do not meet the slope restriction regulations of this section
as long as the intent of the I-99 Interchange Overlay District is
maintained. [Added 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-390]
D. Stream and wetland buffers.
(1) All improvements or land disturbances within the Interchange
Overlay District shall be set back at least 100 feet from the top of
any stream bank or edge of any wetland in a rural area and 65 feet
from the top of any stream bank or edge of any wetland in an urban
area. The urban or rural location shall be determined by the
location of the Regional Growth Boundary in the Centre Region
Comprehensive Plan. This setback shall apply to all streams
delineated on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for the
Township and all streams depicted on the Township's Official
Zoning Map with drainage areas greater than 100 acres. Where no
well-defined top-of-bank exists for an intermittent stream, the
setback shall be measured from the line defined by the water
surface elevation for the two-year storm.
(2) All existing vegetation within the setback established in Subsection
D(1) above shall be preserved.
(3) Where stream crossings are approved pursuant to applicable
federal and state stream encroachment regulations, the setback
established in Subsection D(1) above shall be waived as to the
approved crossing; provided, however, the natural channel shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
A. Cuts. No excavation should be made with a cut face steeper than two
feet horizontal to one foot vertical, unless it is shown the excavation is
made sufficiently stable to sustain a steeper slope. Retaining walls will
be required if a stable slope cannot be maintained. Any retaining wall
design must be approved by the Municipal Engineer. The top of the
slope of any cut must be located a minimum of 10 feet from property
lines.
§ 153-34.2 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3
123:451
§ 153-34.3.1. Excavations possibly including pyritic rock. [Added
9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-532]
B. Fills. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in
slope than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except where the fill
is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not result in
property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets or
buildings. For an exposed surface steeper than 2:1 to be permitted, the
applicant must provide documentation that the steeper slope is not a
safety concern. A retaining wall will be required to support the face of
the fill where the above-specified requirements cannot be met.
A. Intent.
(1) When construction activities result in the disturbance and exposure
of sulfur-bearing minerals (hereafter referred to as "pyritic rock"
because pyrite is the most common of the base metal sulfides), the
unexpected consequences may be physical (expansion as the
sulfides oxidize) and chemical as the soluble alteration products
become mobile in runoff and groundwater. A common effect of the
latter, known as "acid rock drainage" (ARD), is the most
widespread. Expansion in situ or from the use of pyritic rock as fill
material in construction projects can lead to serious foundation and
structural damage.
(2) Construction of Interstate Highway 99 in the Skytop area of the
Township resulted in the exposure of pyritic veins and the
formation of ARD, causing public health concerns and requiring a
very costly mitigation effort. The extent and concentration of the
"pyrite" veins encountered during that excavation was unexpected.
Hence, in the interest of public health and safety, it is the intent of
these regulations to regulate certain excavation activities in an
effort to avoid hazards associated with the disturbance of pyritic
rock.
B. Applicability; background.
(1) Applicability. These regulations shall apply to the following
activities when such activities will result in one or more acres of
earth disturbance involving the following soil types: Hazleton,
Laidig, Buchanan, Andover, Murrill, and Clarksburg:
(a) All nonresidential and all multifamily residential excavation
activities, including but not limited to excavations associated
with the construction of related buildings, roads, access drives
and accessory structures.
(b) Excavation activities associated with, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, roads, access drives and accessory
structures for residential development when more than one
single-family detached dwelling and/or related accessory
§ 153-34.3 PATTON CODE § 153-34.3.1
123:452
structures, driveways and other uses accessory to a singlefamily
detached dwelling are proposed to be constructed and
served by a common access road, drive or driveway, public
or private, whether such construction is to occur initially or
cumulatively over time and when such construction is to occur
on a lot or lots created under the same subdivision or land
development plan.
(c) The regulations shall not apply to residential projects limited to
the construction of one single-family detached dwelling and/or
related accessory structures, driveways and other uses
accessory to an existing single primary residential structure,
unless such a project requires that an NPDES permit be issued
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PA DEP). If an NPDES permit is required, these regulations
shall apply. Please see Appendix 7, A Residential Guide to
Excavations and Pyritic Rock.166 This guide provides a
recommended step-by-step approach for proceeding with
residential excavations when such activities are exempt from
these regulations.
(d) Further exemptions listed in § 153-34.3.1F.
(2) Background.
(a) The process in determining the appropriate course of action in
assessing the potential for ARD is based upon the extent of the
planned excavation. The topographic settings and subsurface
conditions of the project site are integral to this determination.
(b) The term "topographic setting" relates to the characteristics of
the ground surface of a project site, while the term "subsurface
conditions" refers to the geologies that are likely to be found in
each topographic setting. The following information is
provided to help the on-site personnel understand the
probability for ARD in relationship to the settings and
conditions.
(c) The three general settings in Patton Township can be referred
to as Ridge Crest, Slopes, and Valley Floor. The two general
subsurface conditions are Soils and Bedrock. (The top layer of
bedrock is referred to as "cap rock.") The following categories
combine settings with the typical subsurface condition for that
setting in order to provide a general probability for the
existence of ARD-producing conditions:
[1] Setting A: Ridge Crest, with Hazleton soils. Probability for
ARD:
[a] Low, if thin soil and thick oxidized cap rock.
166. Editor's Note: Appendix 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.3.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3.1
123:453
[b] Moderate to high, if oxidized cap rock is penetrated.
[2] Setting B: Slopes, with Laidig, Buchanan or Andover soils.
Probability for ARD:
[a] Low, if thick colluvial soils and thick oxidized cap rock.
[b] Moderate, if thick colluvial soils and thin oxidized cap
rock.
[c] High, if thin colluvial soils and thin oxidized cap rock.
[3] Setting C: Valley Floor, with Murrill or Clarksburg soils.
Probability for ARD:
[a] Low, if thick soils and thick oxidized cap rock.
[b] Moderate to high, if thin soils and thin oxidized cap
rock.
[4] The regulations contained herein focus on surface
inspections and subsurface conditions only. Prior to
beginning any excavation, on-site personnel should review
the above information for further assistance in assessing
the potential for ARD. See also the flow chart in Appendix
5 and Appendix 4, Subsurface Conditions in Three
Topographic Settings.167 Those appendixes provide a
visual depiction of the process and requirements
contained within these regulations.
C. Definitions. The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to this
section.
ACID ROCK — As used herein, it refers to any rock, soil, regolith or fill
in which an accumulation of sulfur-bearing minerals produces sulfuric
acid, during weathering. Sulfur may be present as native sulfur (S),
sulfide (-S2), or sulfate (-SO4), the last two of which combine with iron
or other elements to form minerals.
ACID ROCK DRAINAGE (ARD) — Acid toxic surface water and
groundwater draining from an oxidizing and hydrating sulfur source.
(See photo below.)
167. Editor's Note: Appendixes 4 and 5 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.3.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.3.1
123:454
ACID SULFATE SOILS — Soils in which sulfate minerals have
precipitated from lateral and upward migrating ARD leachate. The
process of migration and deposition is known as sulfuricization. Acid
sulfate soils generally occur in flat, low-lying areas down hydraulic
gradient from oxidizing sulfide mineral deposits. The secondary sulfate
minerals that form near the surface from evaporation are called
efflorescent minerals.
COLLUVIUM — Unconsolidated sediments on a hill or mountainside,
ranging in size from large boulders down to sand and clay, which were
moved downhill due to gravity and deposited lower on the slope. The
rate of sediment movement is usually slow, but rapid advancement can
happen by landslides or mudslides. Many colluvial soils contain one
or more brittle, clay-rich subsoil layers known as "fragipans." Colluvial
deposits may continue to move downhill, normally at a slow rate.
Transported soils (colluvium), particularly on ridge slopes, may overlie
and cover any of the in situ conditions (fresh bedrock, weathered
bedrock, residual soils).
EFFLORESCENT MINERALS — Secondary minerals that precipitate at
or near the earth's surface from migration leachate and reflect in their
composition the composition of the source materials. Although we are
interested in those that formed from the oxidation and weathering of
pyrite and other base metal sulfides, we need to be aware of other
alumina-bearing efflorescent minerals (such as alunite and alunogen)
formed from reactions with shale in treated fill site. At Skytop, hydrated
iron sulfate minerals, such as copiapite and melanterite, precipitated
as fine-grained, powdery, white to yellow to orange encrustations on
rocks and construction materials at the surface or in the near-surface
environment. Efflorescent minerals are highly soluble in water and
typically grow or disappear rapidly depending on local moisture
conditions. (See photos below.)
EXCAVATION — Other than customary activities related to landscaping,
any disruption of the earth's surface for activities including, but not
limited to, clearing and grubbing, the construction of buildings, roads,
access drives, driveways and accessory structures which results in one
or more acres of earth disturbance when any of the following soil
§ 153-34.3.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3.1
123:455
types are present: Hazleton, Laidig, Buchanan, Andover, Murrill, or
Clarksburg.
GOSSAN — Typically a hard rock or encrustation on the surface of
another rock, composed of iron oxide/hydroxide minerals (and quartz)
colored brown, red, orange, and yellow (any or all combinations). They
represent the oxidized and leached remnants of sulfide deposits on the
weathered surface. Gossans form from oxidation and decomposition
of pyrite-bearing rocks and others that host sulfide minerals. The
presence of gossan suggests that pyrite and/or other sulfide minerals
occur within nearby soil or bedrock. (See photo below.)
OXIDIZED CAP ROCK — Bedrock weathering in the near-surface
environment produces an oxidized and hydrated zone on which soil
may be developed. In general it mimics the surface topography. In
the Skytop excavation the oxidized cap rock extended to depths of
approximately 40 feet near the crest and thinned toward the slopes.
This zone of alteration includes the conversion of potentially toxic
sulfide minerals to benign oxides and hydroxides and is referred to as
the "oxidized cap rock." The depth of the alteration interface varies
with rock type, bedding attitude, fracture density, slope angle, climate,
and erosion rate and in chemical terms represents a redox (reductionoxidation)
front between oxidizing and reducing conditions. There is a
complex relationship between the fluctuating groundwater table and
the redox front. Oxidized cap rock may be stripped off by rapid erosion
or mass wasting (e.g., landslides) to directly expose fresh bedrock.
Gossans are developed in oxidized cap rock over sulfide deposits. In
the Skytop excavation, the oxidized cap rock extended to depths of
approximately 40 feet near the crest and thinned toward the slopes.
PYRITE — An iron sulfide mineral characterized by a brassy/pale yellow
color and metallic luster that superficially resembles gold. If the
crystals are large enough to be visible, pyrite is typically seen as
small cubes. Finer-grained pyrite occurs as dispersed, isolated crystals
(nearly invisible) in a rock matrix or as aggregates of very small crystals
that may coat fracture openings in rock or construction materials.
Massive deposits of pyrite include small to large (greater than one
centimeter) cubic crystals, or rarely very small "whisker" crystals, that
comprise veins in bedrock. These veins form in fractures, long after
the bedrock itself is consolidated. Such pyrite (and related sulfide
minerals such as galena and sphalerite) is referred to as "epigenetic."
Pyrite associated with coal deposits is considered to be "syngenetic";
it formed contemporaneously with the coal and normally occurs in
layered (bedded) form. (See photos below.)
§ 153-34.3.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.3.1
123:456
PYRITIC ROCK — The term shall be deemed to include pyrite, pyritebearing
rock and sulfur-bearing rock or minerals.
D. Inspection and testing. No excavation shall be performed except upon
submission of a report by an individual licensed, trained and
experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering certifying that
the site has been investigated and tested for the potential presence of
pyritic rock and, thus, the potential for acid rock drainage in
accordance with the following. Any prescribed testing shall be
performed in accordance with methods of common practice unless
otherwise stated. See also the flow chart in Appendix 5,168 which
provides a visual depiction of the process and requirements contained
within these regulations.
(1) Preexcavation. The following procedure shall be required prior to
any excavation of the site:
(a) Soils identification. Prior to proceeding with excavation, the
soil types of the project lands must be identified and mapped.
See also the flow chart in Appendix 5 and Map 1 in Appendix
6,169 which provides an illustration of the general location of
the relevant soil types as per the Centre County Soil Survey.
[1] Soil types shall be illustrated on any required subdivision
or land development plan and/or shall be documented as
part of any applicable Patton Township permit application.
[2] If any of the following noted soil types are present, these
regulations shall apply: Hazleton, Laidig, Buchanan,
Andover, Murrill, Clarksburg.
[3] If none of the above soil types are present, proceed with
the excavation in accordance with customary procedure
and applicable Patton Township Code. The regulations of
this section shall not apply.
(b) Review geologic literature and maps associated with the site
and contact local expertise, including the PA DEP, the geology
department of Pennsylvania State University, and local
consultants.
(c) Visual inspection. Visually inspect ground surface areas of the
site for the following identifiers of the potential for ARD:
168. Editor's Note: Appendix 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Appendixes 5 and 6 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.3.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3.1
123:457
gossans and/or oxidized cap rock, drainage seeps and/or
surface waters, distressed vegetation, efflorescent
mineralization.
[1] Note the results of the visual inspection.
[2] If seeps and/or surface waters are present on any portion
of a tract of land affected by the excavation, any such
seeps and/or surface waters must be tested in accordance
with § 153-34.3.1D(1)(d), Testing of seeps and surface
waters, below.
[3] Depending on the presence or absence of one or more of
the above identifiers, further evaluation will be
determined in accordance with § 153-34.3.1D(1)(d),
Testing of seeps and surface waters, and
§ 153-34.3.1D(1)(e), Analysis and procedure.
(d) Testing of seeps and surface waters. All seeps and surface
waters located on the project site must be tested in accordance
with the following analytical indicators of the potential for
ARD:
[1] pH. Customary pH testing shall be performed at multiple
points on any seeps and/or surface waters located within
100 feet from any edge of a proposed excavation. The
testing shall be conducted at least two times prior to
proposed excavation and at three-month intervals between
samplings. The number of testing samples and locations
shall correspond to methods of common practice.
[a] If the pH of any sample is less than 4, this shall be
considered a positive indicator for the potential of
ARD.
[b] If the pH of any sample source is less than 4 and the
source exists in close proximity to distressed
vegetation and/or the presence of efflorescent
mineralization, proceed immediately to § 153-34.3.1E,
Positive identification: potential acid rock drainage.
[2] Specific conductance (EC25). Elevated conductivity shall
be considered a positive indicator for the potential of ARD.
(e) Analysis and procedure.
[1] If any one of the visual indicators is present, it shall not
alone be deemed sufficient to require the additional
testing of § 153-34.3.1D(2)(c), Additional testing
requirements.
[2] If the pH result of any water sample is less than 4 and one
or more visual indicators are present anywhere on site,
§ 153-34.3.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.3.1
123:458
proceed to § 153-34.3.1D(2)(c), Additional testing
requirements.
[3] If results do not indicate a potential for pyritic rock and/or
ARD, proceed to § 153-34.3.1D(1)(a), Soils identification.
(2) During excavation. If pre-excavation inspection and testing yields
negative results, the next process in determining the appropriate
course of action is based upon the extent of the planned excavation.
Topographic settings and subsurface conditions are integral to this
determination. See § 153-34.3.1B(2), Background, for additional
information.
(a) Excavation of soil only.
[1] If the deepest extent of excavation will not disturb earth
materials beyond the soils, the type(s) of soils present will
determine whether or not further evaluation is necessary
as noted herein.
[2] If any of the following soil types are present, proceed with
the excavation in accordance with these regulations:
Hazleton, Laidig, Buchanan, Andover, Murrill, Clarksburg.
(b) Excavation to or beneath bedrock. If the deepest extent of
excavation will disturb earth materials to the point of exposing
or disturbing the bedrock, proceed in accordance with the
following. During excavation, continue to visually inspect the
excavated materials for the presence of gossan and/or oxidized
cap rock.
[1] Positive results. If gossan or oxidized cap rock is present in
the excavated materials, proceed immediately to
§ 153-34.3.1E, Positive identification: potential acid rock
drainage.
[2] Negative results. If gossan or oxidized cap rock is not
present, analyze the excavated soils for total sulfur in
accordance with § 153-34.3.1D(2)(c), Additional testing
requirements.
[a] If total sulfur is detected, proceed to § 153-34.3.1E,
Positive identification: potential acid rock drainage.
[b] If the bedrock has been disturbed and no sulfides are
present, proceed with excavation.
[c] If the bedrock is fresh, has not yet been disturbed, but
will be disturbed by further excavation:
[i] Analyze excavated materials located beyond the
bedrock for total sulfur in accordance with
§ 153-34.3.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3.1
123:459
§ 153-34.3.1D(2)(c), Additional testing
requirements.
[ii] If total sulfur is detected, proceed to
§ 153-34.3.1E, Positive identification: potential
acid rock drainage.
(c) Additional testing requirements. When required herein, these
tests shall be performed by a person or persons trained and
experienced in such testing and analysis. Furthermore, all
excavation activities must cease during the testing and
analysis prescribed below. The person or persons performing
the testing shall first contact the Patton Township Manager
and the PA DEP within 24 hours following discovery or in a
good faith effort to do so as soon as possible following
discovery that these testing requirements shall apply. A report
of the findings shall be provided to applicable federal, state
and/or local agencies upon completion of the testing. For
additional reference, see also Coal Mine Drainage Prediction
and Pollution Prevention in Pennsylvania, published by the PA
DEP in October 1998, and "The Need for Interdisciplinary
Interaction in Route Planning and Site Characterization to
Avoid Acid Rock Drainage and Road Bed Heave," by Gold,
Doden and Scheetz, 2008. Much of the information contained
in those documents is relevant to acid rock drainage in
general.
[1] Total sulfur. For validity purposes relevant to acid-base
accounting, analyze for total sulfur.
[2] Acid-base accounting and potential peroxide acidity:
proceed with assessment through static acid-base
accounting.
[a] If net neutralization potential is greater than - 5, and
PPA greater than 10, it is deemed that ARD is likely to
form in the absence of special handling procedures.
Proceed to § 153-34.3.1E, Positive identification:
potential acid rock drainage.
[b] If test results do not indicate a potential for ARD,
proceed in accordance with § 153-34.3.1D(3), Post
excavation.
(3) Post excavation.
(a) Following excavation, the site should be continuously visually
monitored for the presence of efflorescent mineralization.
When mineral blooms, yellow to white in color, appear and
dissolve with following rains, this is a clear indication of pyritic
rock being present in the excavated material.
§ 153-34.3.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.3.1
123:460
(b) If mineral blooms occur, contact the Patton Township Manager
and the PA DEP within 24 hours following discovery or in a
good faith effort to do so as soon as possible following
discovery.
E. Positive identification: potential acid rock drainage.
(1) When, at any time, the findings of inspection and testing indicate
the presence or potential for pyritic rock and/or ARD, the project
manager or other authorized project personnel shall contact the
Patton Township Manager and the PA DEP within 24 hours
following discovery or in a good faith effort to do so as soon as
possible following discovery and prior to resuming excavation
activities in order to determine any special handling procedures
that may be required.
(2) Any further action shall be undertaken only in accordance with any
requirements contained herein and any additional requirements
imposed by said federal and/or state agencies.
(3) The future status of the project shall be determined by any and all
applicable federal, state and/or local agencies. Verification of
reviews and approvals, as necessary, shall be submitted to Patton
Township for review prior to resuming excavation activities.
F. Exemptions. The following activities shall be deemed exempt from the
requirements contained herein:
(1) Lands not containing any of the following soil types: Hazleton,
Laidig, Buchanan, Andover, Murrill, Clarksburg.
(2) Residential projects limited to the construction of one single-family
detached dwelling and/or related accessory structures, driveways
and other uses accessory to an existing single primary residential
structure, whether or not one or more acres of land is disturbed,
unless such a project requires that an NPDES permit be issued by
the PA DEP. If an NPDES permit is required, these regulations shall
apply.
(3) Drinking water, geothermal or other wells drilled in accordance
with the Centre Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance
Code, 2010 Edition, as per § 127-3 of the Patton Township Code,
and as amended.
(4) Any activity that does not incorporate any excavation as defined
herein.
(5) Any oil and gas drilling and exploration, surface or subsurface
mining operation already regulated by Pennsylvania state law.
G. Indemnity. The owner and/or developer shall agree to hold the
municipality harmless from and against any and all claims, causes of
action, damages and judgments arising out of the presence or
§ 153-34.3.1 (RESERVED) § 153-34.3.1
123:461
§ 153-34.4. Presentation of existing trees during construction; tree
protection zones. [Added 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
discharge of any hazardous substances which existed on or under
the subject property prior to the date of first excavation or earth
disturbance completed in accordance with any and all local, state and/
or federal regulatory requirements.
H. Residential guide.
(1) Although residential excavation activities are exempt from these
regulations when those activities are limited to the construction of
one single-family detached dwelling and/or related accessory
structures, driveways and other uses accessory to an existing
single primary residential structure, and an NPDES permit is not
required, it is highly recommended that a landowner proceed in a
manner similar to that which is provided herein.
(2) Please see Appendix 7, A Residential Guide to Excavations and
Pyritic Rock.170 This guide is meant to assist landowners with a set
of recommended procedures when pyritic rock is known or
suspected to exist on site. The procedures set forth in the guideline
are highly advised, though not required.
A. Specific intent. Where feasible, Patton Township encourages the
preservation of preexisting, healthy, noninvasive vegetation through the
development process, especially if that vegetation is mature trees.
Already established trees and plants can reach maturity sooner and
thus improve stormwater retention and effectively shade parking lots
and buildings earlier. However, construction activity must avoid
polluting or compacting the soil around these plants if they are to
survive. Hence, the following regulations are intended to protect trees
designated by the developer for preservation from the construction
process. They are also intended to require the preservation of existing
mature, healthy trees within buffer yards, where buildings are
prohibited.
B. Any tree that exists before development but is proposed for
preservation through the development process shall be noted on
subdivision/land development plans, unless that tree is part of a group
more than 50 feet away from development activities. Tree protection
zones shall be delineated on plans and marked on the ground around
each of these designated trees during construction using a fence or
similar barrier, so as to protect the tree's canopy and root zones from
soil compaction, excavation damage, or hazardous materials.
C. Prior to the start of any site work, the fences or barriers that mark the
tree protection zones must be erected. They must remain in place until
170. Editor's Note: Appendix 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.3.1 PATTON CODE § 153-34.4
123:462
the project is completed, unless crossed as specified under Subsection
D below.
D. The tree protection zones shall be delineated no closer to the trees
designated for protection than their driplines (i.e., the area underneath
their branches and leaves). Activities inside of the tree protection zones
shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Excavation or digging shall be prohibited within a radius of the tree
designated for protection equal to one foot for each inch of the
tree's diameter measured at breast height (54 inches above grade).
(2) Temporary haul roads for construction may only pass within the
tree protection zones if a PennDOT Class IV geotextile base is
installed covered with six inches minimum of mulch, wood chips or
gravel to protect the soil from compaction. The roadbed material
shall be replenished as necessary to maintain this six-inch
minimum depth.
(3) Storage of materials is prohibited within a radius of the tree
designated for protection equal to two feet for each inch of the
tree's diameter measured at breast height (54 inches above grade).
The storage or spillage of hazardous materials, such as fuel, is
banned within this area.
(4) No vehicles shall be parked within the tree protection zones.
Vehicles may only cross these zones on temporary roads
constructed as required above.
(5) Temporary foot traffic during construction shall be kept to a
minimum within the tree protection zones. If foot traffic within
these zones is necessary, a temporary pathway shall be installed
using a PennDOT Class IV Geotextile base covered with no less
than three inches of mulch, wood chips or gravel to protect the soil
from compaction. The pathway material shall be replenished as
necessary to maintain this three-inch minimum depth.
(6) PennDOT Class IV geotextile shall be considered a viable
alternative to the required subbase where curbs and sidewalks
must be installed within tree protection zones.
(7) Erosion control devices shall be designed and installed to prevent
siltation and/or erosion from occurring within tree protection
zones.
(8) Trees that are to be removed shall be felled so as to fall away from
tree protection zones and to avoid pulling or breaking the roots or
branches of trees that are designated for preservation through the
development process.
§ 153-34.4 (RESERVED) § 153-34.4
123:463
§ 153-34.5. Protection of required trees and shrubs. [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
§ 153-34.6. Riparian buffers. [Added 2-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-517]
Under the authority of Article I, Section 27 of the Pennsylvania Constitution,
Act 247, the Municipalities Planning Code as amended,171 other
Commonwealth and federal statutes, and in recognition of the fact that
natural features contribute to the welfare of its residents, the following
riparian buffer regulations have been enacted to provide an additional set
of measures on top of existing regulations to implement reasonable controls
governing the restoration, conservation, disturbance, and management of
existing riparian corridors.
E. Within any required buffer yards or screening, all existing, mature,
healthy trees must be preserved unless a sidewalk, trail, roadway or
utility cannot reasonably avoid them.
A. Specific intent. Patton Township prefers to see the trees and shrubs
that are required by the buffering, screening, or landscaping
requirements of the Patton Township Code grow to a mature size,
normal pruning and trimming aside. At maturity, the aesthetic,
environmental, stormwater retention, shading, and cooling benefits of
these trees to both the involved development and the Township as a
whole will be maximized. But the Township understands that disease,
damage, or death may require some vegetation to be removed. This
section is intended to regulate when and how required trees and shrubs
may be removed and replaced.
B. Each tree or shrub that is required to be planted to meet the
landscaping, screening, or buffering requirements of this Code and
shown on an approved subdivision and/or land development plan shall
be maintained, unless the plant is significantly damaged, diseased, or
overtly hazardous to human life or property. Only in these
circumstances may the required vegetation be removed, and it must be
replaced with plants of the same type (shrub, understory tree, or
canopy tree), at no less than the originally installed size, within six
months.
A. Applicability.
(1) These riparian buffer regulations shall apply to all subdivisions and
land developments of existing properties for which a plan must be
submitted to the Township for approval by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with Article II and any and all other applicable
regulations.
171. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-34.4 PATTON CODE § 153-34.6
123:464
(2) Within the riparian buffer, all existing zoning, land use, and
building regulations now in place continue to apply except where
the regulations of this section are stronger or more restrictive.
(3) Any riparian buffer preservation and maintenance shall remain the
sole responsibility of each individual property owner.
(4) No action shall be required of landowners of property containing
existing structures when no subdivision or land development of
that property is proposed.
(5) Adoption of these regulations does not grant public access to
private property. Any grant of public access remains the
prerogative of each individual property owner.
B. Definitions. The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to this
section.
AGRICULTURAL USE — An enterprise that is actively engaged in the
commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aqua cultural crops and commodities. The term
includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices
and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or
commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry. The term also includes
agricultural activities and/or Penn State University research intended
to demonstrate or implement technological changes in the agricultural
industry.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural or nonstructural
stormwater facilities and techniques to maintain or improve the water
quality of surface runoff or reduce the quantity of surface runoff in
order to mitigate flooding, pollution and reduce soil loss and water
quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxins,
sediments and runoff.
FLOODPLAIN — Areas adjacent to a stream or river that are subject
to flooding or inundation during severe storm events (often called a
one-hundred-year floodplain). It would include the area or flooding that
occurs, on average, once every 100 years.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling of trees
for commercial purposes, which does not involve any kind of land
development.
LEVEL SPREADER — A device used to disperse concentrated
stormwater flow uniformly over the ground surface as sheet flow.
§ 153-34.6 (RESERVED) § 153-34.6
123:465
NATURALIZED STORMWATER BASIN — Stormwater control facilities
that are planted with native vegetation rather than maintained as
hardscape or lawn.
NUTRIENT — A substance that provides food or nourishment, such
as usable proteins, vitamins, minerals or carbohydrates. Fertilizers,
particularly phosphorus and nitrogen, are the most common nutrients
that contribute to eutrophication.
PLANTING REGION — That area comprising the first 35 feet of the
riparian buffer and within which required plantings must be installed,
unless otherwise noted.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — That area which borders any body of water
on either (or all) side(s) and which extends for a distance measured
outward from and perpendicular to its defined top of bank or edge, and
within which development is restricted or prohibited.
STREAMBANKS — Physiographic features that normally contain
streams within a channel. The bank is distinct from the streambed,
which is normally wetted and provides a substrate that supports
aquatic organisms.
STREAM CROSSING — A bridge, ford or structure installed across a
stream or watercourse for temporary and/or permanent use as a means
of ingress and egress, livestock, or construction and/or agricultural
vehicles.
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — Surface water drainage channels with
definite bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water.
Stormwater management facilities and their related appurtenances
constructed as part of a site development project are not considered
streams. Constructed drainageways including water bars, swales, and
roadside ditches may be considered streams based on interpretation of
Township staff and/or expert opinion. (See also "stream, perennial.")
STREAM, PERENNIAL — Surface water drainage channels with
definite bed and banks in which there is a permanent flow of water.
Stormwater management facilities and their related appurtenances
constructed as part of a site development project are not considered
streams. Constructed drainageways including water bars, swales, and
roadside ditches may be considered streams based on interpretation of
township staff and/or expert opinion. (See also "stream, intermittent.")
STRUCTURE — For the purposes of this regulation, anything
constructed or erected on a property which requires location on the
ground or upon something fixed to the ground.
TOP OF BANK — The point along a streambank where an abrupt
change in slope is evident, and where the stream is generally able to
overflow the banks and enter the adjacent floodplain during flows at or
exceeding the average annual high water stage.
TOTAL BUFFER WIDTH — The sum of the widths of all zones or regions
comprising a riparian buffer.
§ 153-34.6 PATTON CODE § 153-34.6
123:466
WETLAND — An area that is regularly saturated by surface water or
groundwater and is characterized by a prevalence of vegetation that
is adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Such areas include, but
may not be limited to, ponds, lakes, swamps, bogs, vernal pools, fens,
marshes, and estuaries. For the purposes of this section, "wetland"
shall include any and all wetlands; both known and future discovered
wetlands.
C. Activities within the riparian buffer. The following activities, which are
primarily passive in character, may occur within the riparian buffer.
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Forestry, with Centre County Conservation District approval of an
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(3) Removal of trees only where such removal is necessary as a means
to eliminate dead, diseased or hazardous stands of trees that
jeopardize public safety.
(4) Operation of wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves, fishing areas, passive areas of public and private
parklands and native planting and reforestation.
(5) Stream bank stabilization and/or recommended native tree
reforestation.
(6) Creation and use of stream crossings for farm vehicles and/or
livestock if part of a federal, state and/or privately funded Centre
County Conservation District and/or local nonprofit riparian buffer
improvement project.
(7) Operation of research and monitoring devices such as staff gages,
water recording, water quality testing, cross vanes, weirs and
related demonstration facilities.
(8) Creation and use of stream-access routes for fishing, boating,
swimming and other similar recreational purposes.
(9) Creation and use of new stream crossings for roads, railroads,
centralized sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission
lines and/or their related appurtenances (i.e., towers, well houses,
pump and lift stations).
(10) Passive activities such as camping and picnicking. Active
recreation areas, such as sport fields, playgrounds and courts,
provided these shall be designed in a manner that will not permit
concentrated stormwater flow. The use of level spreaders or similar
devices is required.
(11) Creation and use of naturalized stormwater basins and level
spreaders or other similar structures used to disperse concentrated
§ 153-34.6 (RESERVED) § 153-34.6
123:467
stormwater in accordance with Chapter 147, Stormwater
Management.
(12) Creation and use of bicycle and pedestrian paths where necessary
to achieve connectivity.
D. Buffer establishment. The width of the riparian buffer shall be
measured on a perpendicular line extending outward from the defined
top of bank of a stream or edge of a wetland.
(1) Minimum buffer width.
(a) Streams: 65 feet or the extent of the one-hundred-year
floodplain, whichever is greater.
(b) Wetlands:
[1] Greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet: 50 feet.
[2] Greater than 2,500 square feet, but less than 5,000 square
feet: 25 feet.
(2) Required vegetation. As part of any subdivision or land
development of a property that touches or is at least partially
located within the planting region of the riparian buffer, a
vegetated buffer shall be installed as follows.
(a) Planting region: Required vegetation shall be installed within a
thirty-five-foot-wide area nearest the stream. This shall be
referred to as the planting region.
(b) Type.
[1] Required: trees and/or shrubs. Required plantings shall be
installed within the thirty-five-foot-wide planting region.
[2] Recommended: grasses, sedges and perennials. Though
not required to be installed, the planting of grasses,
sedges and perennials outside the thirty-five-foot-wide
planting region is recommended. If planted, they should be
spaced approximately one to three feet apart or per
nursery recommendations. See Appendix 3.172
(c) Density. The required quantity of plantings shall be derived
based on the following formula:
172. Editor’s Note: Appendix 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.6 PATTON CODE § 153-34.6
123:468
Length of Buffera x 35b x 700c / 43,560d = Total Required
Plantings
a = length of stream frontage located within the riparian
buffer
b = width of planting region
c = required number of seedlings per acre
d = square feet per acre
(d) Size.
[1] Required: containerized seedlings and/ or bare root
seedlings of any size.
[2] Substitutions: whether existing or newly planted as part of
these requirements, one tree or shrub of a recommended
species:
[a] Greater than 0.75 inch in caliper, but less than 1.5
inches in caliper may be substituted for three
seedlings.
[b] Greater than or equal to 1.5 inches in caliper may be
substituted for five seedlings.
(e) Species: A minimum of four and a maximum of 12
recommended species shall be planted. For recommended
species, see Appendix 1.173
(f) Spacing: Recommended random spacing between trees is
based on plant size at installation as follows.
[1] Seedlings: six to 10 feet.
[2] Tree or shrub greater than 0.75 inch in caliper, but less
than 1.5 inches in caliper: 14 to 16 feet.
[3] Tree or shrub greater than or equal to 1.5 inches in
caliper: 16 to 18 feet.
(g) Protection.
[1] Trees:
[a] Less than 1.5 inches in caliper: Tree shelters shall be
required for each tree.
[i] The tree shelter shall be a minimum of three feet
tall.
173. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.6 (RESERVED) § 153-34.6
123:469
[ii] The tree shelter shall be installed with a
hardwood or bamboo stake a minimum of 42
inches or 3.5 feet tall.
[b] Greater than or equal to 1.5 inches in caliper: No
protection is required.
(h) Maintenance. Maintenance shall remain the sole responsibility
of each individual property owner and should be performed
according to the following.
[1] In selecting the required tree shelters, landowners should
only use shelters with a high likelihood of allowing trees to
burst out with no damage.
[2] Tree shelters should be maintained and replaced as
needed.
[3] The landowner should hire a qualified professional to
apply herbicide with the initial planting and once yearly
for three years after planting.
[a] First application: one year after planting.
[b] Second application: two years after planting.
[c] Third application: three years after planting.
[4] Where possible, the landowner should mow non-herbicide
alleyways between rows of trees where rodents are a
problem. This mowing should be done each fall for the first
three years following planting. Mowing may not be
beneficial if a large number of trees are destroyed in the
process. Mowing should be site specific.
[5] In addition to mowing, maintenance should include
mulching and the replacement of mulch as needed, the
removal of invasive species (See Appendix 2.174) and the
removal of dead trees.
[6] Landowners should strive to achieve a survival rate after
three years equal to at least 70% of the number of original
plantings. If, after three years, less than 70% of the trees
have survived, additional trees should be planted to meet
the seventy-percent standard.
[7] Details for the above are related to the Conservation
Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP) and clarified in
"Establishment and Maintenance Guidance for CREP
Participants and Contractors" and "CREP CP 22 Herbicide
Recommendations for Weed Management."
174. Editor’s Note: Appendix 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.6 PATTON CODE § 153-34.6
123:470
(i) Exceptions.
[1] Limited land area in planting region:
[a] Required plantings shall be installed within the
planting region if possible. In the event that it can be
demonstrated that it is not possible to plant all
required vegetation within the planting region, the
following shall apply.
[i] The remaining trees or shrubs shall be planted in
the next available location closest to the planting
region. If it can be demonstrated that the next
available location does not lie within the sixty-fivefoot
riparian buffer, no further vegetation shall be
required beyond that which can be installed in
accordance with the spacing recommendations
herein.
[ii] If it can be demonstrated that only 50% or less of
the total required vegetation can be installed in
the planting region:
[A] The remaining vegetation may be reduced by
50% and installed as per above; or
[B] The remaining vegetation may be installed as
grasses and sedges as per § 153-34.6D(2)(b)
and Appendix 3.175
[b] Examples of situations that might prevent
replacement of vegetation include, but may not be
limited to, the presence of existing vegetation
immediately adjacent to and surrounding the site, or
existing sensitive areas that could be negatively
impacted by the installation of vegetation.
[2] Wetlands. The installation of a vegetated buffer around
wetlands is not required; however, existing vegetation
shall be preserved.
(3) Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation shall be preserved, with
the exception of identified invasive species which should be
removed and monitored on a regular basis. (See Appendix 2.176)
Existing vegetation shall be deemed as meeting the vegetation
requirements of § 153-34.6D(2) as follows.
(a) Invasive species shall not be counted towards meeting the
requirement.
175. Editor’s Note: Appendix 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
176. Editor’s Note: Appendix 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.6 (RESERVED) § 153-34.6
123:471
(b) Any existing vegetation of noninvasive species located within
the thrity-five-foot planting region shall be included in the
calculation of the vegetation requirement.
(c) Where total existing noninvasive vegetation meets the planting
density requirement of § 153-34.6D(2), whether or not
consisting of recommended species, the vegetation
requirement herein shall be deemed satisfied.
(d) Where total existing noninvasive vegetation partially meets the
planting density requirement of § 153-34.6D(2), the remaining
density shall be installed as required herein.
E. Development regulations.
(1) Within the riparian buffer.
(a) Improvements or modifications to existing structures.
[1] When an existing structure lies entirely or partly within
the riparian buffer, and improvements or modifications to
the existing structure will also lie entirely or partly within
the riparian buffer, said improvements or modifications
shall be permitted, provided that the portion that will lie
within the riparian buffer involves less than 50% of the fair
market value and less than 50% of the square footage as
existed on the date of original enactment of this section,
and whether proposed initially or cumulatively.
[2] A vegetated buffer shall be installed in accordance with
§ 153-34.6D(2).
(b) New structures. With the exception of improvements or
modifications to existing structures as permitted herein, new
structures are prohibited within the riparian buffer.
(c) Stream-access paths. As part of a new buffer installation, or
where stream access is restricted by an existing buffer, streamaccess
paths may be created for the purpose of passage to the
stream from outlying areas as follows. (For stream-crossing
standards, see § 153-34.6F below.)
[1] Quantity:
[a] Lot width at stream frontage less than or equal to 100
feet: one access per property.
[b] Lot width at stream frontage greater than 100 feet:
one access per 100 feet of stream frontage.
[2] Width: six feet maximum.
§ 153-34.6 PATTON CODE § 153-34.6
123:472
[3] Design: To the extent that it is possible, access routes
should be designed to cross the buffer at a direct right
angle to minimize disturbance.
[4] Wearing surface: may remain in its natural state or be
improved with other pervious material.
(2) Outside the riparian buffer. New construction on lands located
outside the riparian buffer is permitted in accordance with all other
existing local, state and federal land use laws. However, when
those lands are part of a parcel which touches or is at least partially
located within the riparian buffer, and a subdivision or land
development plan must be submitted for approval by the Board of
Supervisors prior to construction, a vegetated buffer shall be
installed within the riparian buffer in accordance with
§ 153-34.6D(2).
F. Stream crossings. Any and all local, state and federal regulations
pertaining to stream crossings must be strictly adhered to. In addition,
the following minimum standards are recommended.
(1) Criteria.
(a) Right-of-way. The width of any right-of-way should not be
greater than the minimum required by Patton Township, unless
additional right-of-way is offered for dedication to the
Township.
(b) Design. Stream crossings should be designed to cross at direct
right angles to minimize disturbance.
(c) Separation distance. When multiple stream crossings are
proposed on the same property, they should be separated by a
minimum of 1,000 feet.
G. Plan requirements. In addition to all other plan requirements of the
Township, a planting plan showing the following information shall be
part of any plans submitted to the Township for approval.
(1) Planting plan details.
(a) Location of all proposed and existing vegetation qualified to be
included in the calculation of the vegetation requirement.
(b) Tabular notation of the quantity, size and species of existing
and proposed vegetation.
(c) Proposed spacing for any proposed vegetation.
(d) Identification of both the riparian buffer and the planting
region.
(e) Required stream or wetland setbacks.
§ 153-34.6 (RESERVED) § 153-34.6
123:473
§ 153-34.7. Colluvial soils. [Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-544]
(f) Location of any proposed stream crossings.
A. Intent. On lands identified as having slopes of 15% or greater and
comprised of colluvial soils, severe limitations exist or may exist for
development activities, including, but not limited to, structures with or
without basements, septic tank absorption fields, and local roads and
streets. "Colluvial soils" refers to those soils having been formed on
colluvium, which consists of loosely consolidated or fragmented earth
materials typically associated with moderate to steep slopes. The
Centre County Soil Survey identifies the following soil series as being
colluvial in nature or closely associated with colluvial soils: Andover,
Buchanan, and Laidig. It is the intent of the regulations set forth herein
to regulate development activities occurring on slopes of 15% or
greater and comprised of any one or more of the above soils to:
(1) Identify the location of the most severe soil areas where
development is not appropriate;
(2) Minimize the potential for damage from erosion, sedimentation and
to minimize other degradation to lands or sensitive environmental
features;
(3) Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Patton
Township.
B. Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to any parcel of land
containing colluvial soils as defined herein and where those soils are
situated on slopes of 15% or greater in grade. Where steep slopes exist
without colluvial soils, or where colluvial soils are present in areas not
identified as steep slopes, these regulations do not apply. Please note
that, although there may be locations that contain colluvial soils that do
not fall under the scope of these regulations, any development on or
near any area that contains colluvial soils should be undertaken with
caution and through consultation with a registered professional
engineer.
C. Definitions. The definitions set below shall be applicable to this section.
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a building lot consisting of the
proposed footprint for any structure, access, on-lot disposal system,
and any required replacement area; and all land disturbances
associated with any construction activity.
COLLUVIAL SOILS — Soils having formed on colluvium consisting of
loosely consolidated or fragmented earth materials typically associated
with moderate to steep slopes. For the purposes of these regulations,
this shall include Andover, Buchanan, and Laidig.
COLLUVIUM — A deposit of soil and rock debris accumulated through
the action of gravity at the base of a slope.
§ 153-34.6 PATTON CODE § 153-34.7
123:474
DRAINAGEWAY — The natural or man-made path of surface water from
a given area.
SEEP — A type of spring. Groundwater flows gradually to the surface
at a slower rate than a spring.
SPRING — A concentrated discharge of groundwater emerging and
flowing at the ground surface, including perched water flow from the
soil.
D. Septic system approval. As part of the soils testing for the entire site,
the testing for septic systems must be accomplished. The septic
systems must be approved by the Township's Sewage Enforcement
Officer in conformity with the rules, policies, regulations and
specifications of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
E. Mapping. In order to determine the likelihood for the presence of
colluvial soils, the Centre County Soil Survey should be consulted. The
Survey illustrates all the soil series that are found throughout Patton
Township and provides an accurate basis for further soils identification
and mapping. Soils and topographic mapping shall be performed by a
qualified, licensed professional and illustrated on any required
subdivision or land development plan in accordance with the following.
See also Appendix 1,177 which provides a map illustrating the general
location of steep slopes and colluvial soils in the Township.
(1) Soils. Any Andover, Buchanan, and Laidig soils shall be mapped,
and a report of the findings shall be submitted and shall include a
list of all limitations associated with each soil type as per the
Centre County Soil Survey.
(a) In order to accomplish the soils mapping, the developer must
meet with the Township's Engineer or a designated agent to
determine, at a minimum, the location, number and type of soil
test pits that will provide a representative sample of the soils
present within the area intended to be disturbed.
(b) An on-site soils assessment and report preparation must be
completed and submitted by a qualified soil scientist or
registered professional with the appropriate experience in soil
science interpretation, subject to approval by the Township
Engineer or designated agent.
(c) The soils assessment report will provide the data necessary to
prepare a detailed soils map of the site that will allow the
applicant to determine the potential to provide roads,
driveways and/or structures in accordance with these
regulations and whether there is sufficient buildable area to do
so.
177. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-34.7 (RESERVED) § 153-34.7
123:475
(d) For those properties or sites where the above required soils
assessment report definitively indicates that the proposed land
disturbance activities will not be impacted by the location of
colluvial soils, the remainder of the requirements of these
regulations shall not be applicable.
(2) Slopes. Slopes equal to or exceeding 15% in grade shall be mapped.
In any application for subdivision and/or land development
purposes, the applicant shall, using two-foot contours, delineate all
slopes meeting or exceeding 15% in grade.
(3) Upon completion of the soils and topographic mapping, an area
shall be identified on the plan clearly illustrating the buildable area
of the parcel. The buildable area shall include the proposed
footprint of any structure, accessways, on-lot disposal system(s)
and any required replacement area, and all land disturbances
associated with any construction activity.
F. Criteria for subdivision and development. The following criteria will
determine the ability to, and establish the process for, the subdivision of
land or development of land on parcels to which these regulations
apply. The criteria are intended to address activities that may cause
instability such as cut and fill processes, runoff from development and
disturbance of natural drainage patterns. These criteria apply to land
disturbance involving the construction of habitable structures, the
installation of paved driveways and the construction of roads which are
used for access to a dwelling unit or units.
(1) Drainageways and sinkholes.
(a) No land disturbance shall occur within 100 feet of a defined
drainageway.
(b) The required separation distance may be reduced as the result
of a hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each specific
site and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal permits
associated with the proposed development activity.
(2) Floodplain.
(a) No land disturbance shall occur within 100 feet of the edge of a
floodplain or the Floodplain Conservation District as per
§ 175-28.
(b) This distance may be reduced for areas where there is a
minimum rise of 5% between the edge of the floodplain and the
area of earth disturbance. Where such reduction in distance is
desired, information shall be provided to assure that an
adequate separation has been provided.
§ 153-34.7 PATTON CODE § 153-34.7
123:476
(3) Slope. No land disturbance shall occur within 100 feet downgrade
of any area with a slope of 15% or more that is comprised of
colluvial soils.
(4) Seeps and springs.
(a) No land disturbance shall occur within 100 feet of a defined
spring.
(b) This required separation distance may be reduced as the result
of a hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each specific
site and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal permits
associated with the proposed development activity.
(5) Wetlands.
(a) No land disturbance shall occur within 50 feet of the edge of a
wetland as defined herein and/or as established by the PA DEP,
Army Corps of Engineers or other applicable agency.
(b) This distance may be reduced, if necessary, when the
appropriate permits from these state and federal agencies are
obtained. Where such reduction in separation distance is
desired, information shall be submitted that substantiates the
need to reduce the separation distance as well as the
endorsement of the permitting agencies.
(6) Excavation and fill. No excavation or fill that will cause any slope to
become unstable, impose loads that may affect the safety of
structures or slopes, interfere with adequate drainage for the site
area and the drainage area of land tributary to the site, obstruct,
damage, or adversely affect existing sewerage or drainage, cause a
stagnant pond of water to form, or cause erosion or sedimentation
shall be permitted. The following information shall be supplied for
any proposed excavation or fill:
(a) A report from a licensed professional engineer certifying that
such proposed activity will not have any adverse impact noted
above.
(b) The location and details of the proposed excavation or fill.
(c) Proposed erosion and sedimentation control which shall be in
accordance with the PA Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual.
(7) Criteria for land accessed across steep slopes with colluvial soils.
In many cases, access to an area that is developable may not be
possible without crossing colluvial soils. In such cases, the
following requirements shall apply:
§ 153-34.7 (RESERVED) § 153-34.7
123:477
(a) Low-impact driveway or roadway design, in accordance with
the associated PaDOT or other recognized standards
acceptable to the Township Engineer, shall be used.
(b) The proposed location and design of the access shall provide
the least practicable disturbance to the colluvial soils in the
area.
(c) The access is located in conformance with the setback
restrictions associated with wetlands, floodplains, springs,
drainageways, and watercourses as referenced above.
(d) Where conformance with existing setbacks and the standards
required herein reduces the buildable area for the access to
the extent that such access cannot be built in accordance with
Township regulations, the access may extend into a setback
area in accordance with the following:
[1] When the setback is a requirement of Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development, or other chapter not
being Chapter 175, Zoning, only the minimum relief
necessary to accomplish the construction of the access
shall be permitted.
[a] This relief shall be granted either in the form of a
waiver or modification of requirements.
[b] Evidence that the location and design of the access is
not adversely impacted by its proximity to any
features to which the setback/s apply shall be
provided.
[2] When the setback is a requirement of Chapter 175,
Zoning, relief from the setback shall only be granted by
way of a variance subject to the requirements of Article
XII.
[3] The applicant shall provide a hold-harmless agreement
and indemnification in favor of the Township for any
damage that may occur to the structure or any other
private property as a result of the presence of colluvial
soils.
G. Activities permitted on steep slopes with colluvial soils. For any new
lots created after the date of enactment of these regulations upon
which both steep slopes and colluvial soils are present, the following
activities shall be permitted and shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section:
(1) Forestry uses.
(2) Private passive park and recreational areas that do not include any
habitable structures.
§ 153-34.7 PATTON CODE § 153-34.7
123:478
§ 153-34.8. Temporary use design standards. [Added 12-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-549]
Purpose. These regulations have been enacted to provide a set of standards
by which temporary use applications shall be reviewed. In addition to the
general purpose of this chapter as detailed in § 153-2, these regulations
shall provide requirements that pertain to those unique circumstances that
generally accompany a temporary use. The regulations contained herein are
intended to further preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of Patton Township.
(3) Horticultural and agricultural uses related to the tilling of the land,
the raising and propagation of crops, trees, shrubs, flowers, fruits
and vegetables, and other plant materials.
(4) Public or private conservation areas for the conservation of open
space, water soil, and wildlife resources.
A. Applicability.
(1) The following regulations shall pertain to all temporary use
applications submitted to the Township for review and approval in
addition to the procedures of Article XI of Chapter 175.
(2) In addition to the requirements contained herein, any structure
installed and used for a temporary use as permitted by these
regulations shall meet all applicable building, electrical, property
maintenance, fire prevention, mechanical and plumbing codes
administered by the Centre Region Code Agency.
B. Definitions. The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to this
section.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure brought on site or installed
on site for the purposes of conducting an activity associated with a
temporary use. This type of structure shall not consist of a permanent
foundation or footing and shall be removed when the time limit for the
temporary use has expired.
TEMPORARY USE — A use that is conducted for a fixed period of
time with the intent of discontinuing such use upon expiration of an
established time limit.
C. Procedures. Except when otherwise provided for herein, prior to
conducting any temporary use activity and prior to installing any
related structures or facilities, a temporary use application must be
submitted to the Township for review and approval by the Board of
Supervisors. The application shall be submitted a minimum of seven
days in advance of the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission
meeting and in accordance with the following.
D. Site plan requirements. A site plan, drawn to a scale of no less than one
inch equals 10 feet, shall be submitted. The site plan may be an
§ 153-34.7 (RESERVED) § 153-34.8
123:479
informal sketch of the proposal, but shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) Address of the property, name and address of the owner of the
property, name and address of the individual(s) proposing the use;
(2) Location, height, and size of any proposed structure, in relation to
property and setback lines, and municipal boundaries (if
applicable);
(3) Description of the use of any temporary structure;
(4) Length of time the structure(s) will remain on site;
(5) Locations and height of any structure(s) existing on the site;
(6) Existing and proposed means of ingress and egress;
(7) Existing and proposed parking and traffic circulation;
(8) Any proposed lighting;
(9) Proposed hours of operation;
(10) A signed statement by the owner(s) of the property authorizing
such use.
E. Permit fee. Unless exempt from the fee, a temporary use application
shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and as per the Patton Township
Fee Schedule.178 An application will not be considered complete until
the appropriate fee has been submitted.
F. Approvals. The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to approve
an initial application for a temporary use. The Township Zoning Officer
or Assistant Zoning Officer shall have authority to approve any
subsequent application for renewal of a previously approved
application in accordance with the following:
(1) The application for renewal shall be consistent with the initial
application and approved temporary use. Any application that
includes a significant change from the initial application shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors for their approval. A
significant change may include but may not be limited to: the
addition of structures, parking spaces, lighting, changes in the
hours of operation and ingress/egress.
(2) Any use not listed herein shall be reviewed for its similarity to
another use that is included in these regulations. Any such
requested permit shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for
their approval.
178. Editor's Note: The Township Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-34.8 PATTON CODE § 153-34.8
123:480
(3) In the event that a dispute arises regarding whether or not a
requested use is in compliance with the regulations included
herein, any such requested permit shall be submitted to the Board
of Supervisors for their approval.
G. Activities exempt from regulations. When the following activities do not
exceed the limits established in Subsection H(2) through (4) and do not
require a permit issued by the Centre Region Code agency for any
proposed structure, they shall not be subject to these regulations. At
such time that the use exceeds the established limits or does require a
permit by Centre Region Code, these regulations shall be in effect.
(1) Nonprofit activities.
(2) Membership activities.
(3) Customer appreciation.
H. Temporary uses permitted. A permit shall be required for the following
temporary uses, which shall only be permitted in the zoning districts
specified for each use and in accordance with the standards of this
section. Unless specifically prohibited herein, a temporary use not
listed below shall not be considered prohibited but shall be reviewed for
its similarity to other uses consistent with the applicable zoning district.
(1) Retail uses. In addition to the standards contained in Table 1,179 the
following shall also apply to retail uses.
(a) Roadside stand, farm stand.
[1] Items sold: Items sold shall be limited as follows:
[a] Agricultural crops produced on site.
[b] Other consumer-ready crops produced within
Pennsylvania.
[c] Food products produced by Pennsylvania producers.
[d] Other retail products not to exceed 20% of the total
sales of the operation.
[2] Exemptions: If the sale of agricultural products is
permitted as part of an accessory use or other approved
plan as per the existing regulations of the Township, these
regulations shall not apply.
(b) Christmas tree sales.
[1] Items sold: Items sold shall be limited as follows:
179. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.8 (RESERVED) § 153-34.8
123:481
[a] Christmas trees, garlands and other related items
created from Christmas trees.
[b] Other crafts not to exceed 20% of the total sales of the
operation.
(c) Fireworks sales.
[1] Setbacks:
[a] Front: public rights-of-way: 30 feet.
[b] From residential property lines or lands zoned
residential: 100 feet.
[c] Outdoor smoking setback: A setback area of 50 feet
shall be established around the perimeter of any
location where fireworks are sold and shall be clearly
marked as such.
[d] Fuel source setback: Fireworks sales shall not be
conducted any closer than 300 feet from any existing
fueling station, or any fuel source.
[2] Items sold: Items sold shall be limited as follows:
[a] Only legal fireworks as licensed by the PA State
government.
[b] Other goods commonly associated with Independence
Day, such as flags, banners, party favors and the like.
(d) Food stand. In addition to other application requirements for
temporary uses, any individual proposing to operate a food
stand shall submit to the Township verification that all required
licenses have been obtained from the state and in accordance
with Chapter 83, Food Establishments and Food Handling.
[1] Items sold. Items sold shall be limited to items permitted
by the state in accordance with Chapter 83, Food
Establishments and Food Handling.
(e) Farmer's market.
[1] Time limit. Farmer's markets shall be limited to eight
consecutive months of operation.
[2] Setbacks:
[a] Each stand or booth within a farmer's market shall
comply with all the setbacks of the zoning district in
which it is located.
[b] A farmer's market may be located in another
designated area where strict conformance with the
§ 153-34.8 PATTON CODE § 153-34.8
123:482
setbacks of the zoning district is not required. Such an
area shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors
and shall be clearly marked and located so as to
ensure the safety of all marketers and patrons.
[3] Items sold: Items sold shall be limited as follows:
[a] Any and all foods permitted and properly licensed in
accordance with state law as per Chapter 83, Food
Establishments and Food Handling.
[b] The sale of crafts and other works of art not to exceed
20% of the total number of stands or booths
comprising the farmer's market.
[c] The sale of other agricultural products, including, but
not limited to, flowers, plants, ornamental straw and
the like produced in Pennsylvania.
(f) Outdoor flea market.
[1] Items sold: Items sold shall be limited as follows:
[a] Pre-owned items such as antiques, clothing,
collectibles, books, tools, sporting goods, furniture
and the like.
[b] New items, provided they are not sold in bulk and
account for no more than 20% of the total value of all
items in any one booth or stand.
[2] Exemptions: Indoor flea market. Indoor flea markets shall
not be subject to the requirements of this section, but shall
be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and
requirements with any other required zoning permit and/
or approval process.
(g) Outdoor events. Outdoor events shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: festivals, automotive shows, outdoor
performances and the like and are subject to the following
standards.
[1] Setbacks:
[a] No special event shall be located any closer than 300
feet to a residential structure. An event shall be
exempt from this setback requirement if a written
agreement is established with the owner of the
residential structure.
[b] In addition to the above, the limits of any special event
shall comply with all the setbacks of the zoning
district in which it is located.
§ 153-34.8 (RESERVED) § 153-34.8
123:483
[2] Items sold. Items sold shall be limited to those items
permitted for other temporary uses regulated under this
section. All applicable licenses and approvals must be
provided at time of permit application.
[3] Mechanical amusement rides. Mechanical amusement
rides shall only be permitted upon verification of
inspection and approval by the PA State Department of
Agriculture.
[4] Exemptions: Some special events will not require a
temporary use permit. See Subsection H(2) through (4).
(2) Nonprofit. Educational or fund-raising activities carried out by
nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section in accordance with the following:
(a) The use shall be limited to no more than six consecutive days
for each of no more than three events per year. Any use lasting
longer than the limit shall be required to obtain a temporary
use permit in accordance with this section.
(b) Any nonprofit use including the sale of food products shall be
required to obtain any applicable license or approval from the
state and/or the Health Department and shall provide
verification of such to the Township prior to conducting the
temporary use.
(c) Any proposed structure does not require a permit from the
Centre Region Code Agency. Any use including a structure that
must be permitted by Centre Region Code Agency must meet
the requirements established herein.
(3) Membership events. Private events when only members of an
existing organization attend and are conducted on site shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section in accordance with
the following:
(a) The use shall be limited to no more than six consecutive days
for each of no more than three events per year. Any use lasting
longer than the limit shall be required to obtain a temporary
use permit in accordance with this section.
(b) Any membership event including the sale of food products shall
be required to obtain any applicable license or approval from
the state and/or the Health Department and shall provide
verification of such to the Township prior to conducting the
temporary use.
(c) Any proposed structure does not require a permit from the
Centre Region Code Agency. Any use including a structure that
§ 153-34.8 PATTON CODE § 153-34.8
123:484
must be permitted by Centre Region Code Agency must meet
the requirements established herein.
(4) Customer appreciation. Customer appreciation events include
those events such as open houses, grand openings or promotional
events where items are either displayed or given away to
customers free of charge. Such temporary uses shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section when in conformance with
the following conditions:
(a) The use shall be limited to no more than six consecutive days
for each of no more than three events per year. Any use lasting
longer than the limit shall be required to obtain a temporary
use permit in accordance with this section.
(b) No food products shall be sold.
I. Activities not requiring a permit. The following activities shall not
require a permit, provided that no public nuisance is created by any
such activity. No activity shall in any way disrupt the normal flow of
traffic or otherwise interfere with any public right-of-way. Any such
temporary use shall be limited to no more than three consecutive days
and limited to no more than two occasions per year, per parcel.
(1) Garage sale, yard sale.
(2) Neighborhood special events.
J. Temporary uses prohibited. Any use not specifically permitted in
accordance with these regulations shall not be deemed to be prohibited
but shall be considered on the basis of its similarity to another use
included herein. Any temporary use proposing to conduct an activity
which is not permitted in the zoning district within which it is proposed
shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
K. Temporary use location. In addition to the zoning districts identified in
Table 1,180 a temporary use may be permitted in another district not
listed, provided that the proposed use and location are consistent with
the character of adjacent land uses and a written agreement with the
adjacent landowners is provided.
L. General standards. The following standards shall apply to all temporary
uses.
(1) Access. All proposed temporary uses shall provide for unobstructed
access to, from and within the site. No part of any temporary use,
facilities or structures shall be located within any access area.
(2) Lighting. Any temporary use to be conducted past dusk shall be
required to install lighting on the premises. All lighting shall
180. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-34.8 (RESERVED) § 153-34.8
123:485
consist of full cutoff fixtures. Illumination shall not extend onto
any public right-of-way or onto any adjacent residential property
without written permission from the landowner.
(3) Nuisances. No activity conducted as part of a temporary use shall
prevent any adjacent or local landowner from enjoying the full use
of his or her property nor shall it endanger his or her health, safety
or welfare. Nuisances include, but may not be limited to the
following:
(a) Excessive noise.
(b) Dust, dirt or other debris generated on the site of the
temporary use.
(c) Exterior lighting not installed according to Subsection L(2)
above.
(d) Traffic congestion or hazards caused by insufficient parking or
poor access to and from the temporary use.
(4) Parking. Parking shall be provided for temporary uses in
accordance with the following. Parking spaces shall be of the size
and dimensions required in § 153-38, Off-street parking
regulations.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Retail (roadside stand, farm
stand, Christmas tree sales,
fireworks sales, food stand,
farmer's market, flea market,
flower sales, etc.)
1 per 250 square feet of gross
retail area, plus 1 per employee
§ 153-34.8 PATTON CODE § 153-34.8
123:486
ARTICLE V
Improvement Specifications
§ 153-35. General requirements.
§ 153-36. Required improvements.
The following improvements, as shown on the approved plan, shall be
provided by the subdivider:
A. Physical improvements to the property being subdivided shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the approved plan and
in accordance with all rules, regulations and requirements of the
Township.
B. As a condition to review a final plan by the Township Planning
Commission, the subdivider shall agree with the municipality as to
installations of all improvements shown on the plan and required by
these regulations.
C. All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be constructed in
accordance with the design specifications herein contained.
D. Supervision of the installation and construction of such improvements
shall be the responsibility of the Township's designated professional
engineer or the appropriate state regulatory agency.
A. Streets and sidewalks. Street construction, curb placement and
sidewalk construction shall be done in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 149, Streets and Sidewalks. [Amended
9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-273]
B. Sewers.
(1) Storm sewers. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed
consistent with the design principles and requirements contained
in § 153-33 of these regulations.
(2) Sanitary sewage disposal. Sanitary sewage disposal means shall be
installed consistent with the design principles and requirements as
set up by the Township authority or any joint Township authority in
existence at the time of the proposed subdivision activity and
having jurisdiction over the particular subdivision.
C. Water supply. Water supply shall be maintained consistent with the
design principles and requirements contained in § 153-32 of these
regulations.
(1) Fire protection water supply requirements for new developments
served by community water systems. These requirements apply
only to subdivisions and land development plans submitted after
the enactment of these regulations. [Added 12-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-419]
§ 153-35 (RESERVED) § 153-36
123:487
(a) Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with this section
for the protection of buildings or portions of buildings. Fire
hydrants shall be provided along required fire apparatus
access roads and adjacent to public streets along the route of
travel for fire apparatus.
[1] Fire hydrants will be located on the basis of
recommendations provided by the Alpha Fire Company,
Patton Township staff and any other party reviewing
development plans as applicable. [Added 6-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-559]
[2] Fire hydrants will be located in a manner that allows the
greatest number of structures to be served on the basis of
hose length, water pressure and proximity. [Added
6-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-559]
[3] Fire hydrants will be located in a manner that takes into
consideration where the fire hose will be placed after
connecting and en route to the site of the fire and in an
effort to afford the greatest access for firefighting
apparatus and personnel. [Added 6-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-559]
(b) Existing fire hydrants on public streets may be considered
available. Existing fire hydrants on adjacent private properties
shall not be considered available.
(c) The minimum fire flow requirements for developments of oneand
two-family dwellings with front, side and rear yard setback
requirements of 15 feet or greater or building separations
between dwellings and other occupied structures of 30 feet or
greater for developments with multiple dwelling units on a
single parcel shall be 750 gallons per minute.
(d) The minimum fire flow requirements for developments of oneand
two-family dwellings with any setback requirement of less
than 15 feet or building separations between dwellings and
other occupied structures less than 30 feet shall be 1,000
gallons per minute.
(e) The minimum fire flow requirements for developments other
than one- and two-family dwellings shall be determined using
the Needed Fire Flow Method described in the Fire
Suppression Rating Schedule published by the Insurance
Services Office, Inc. (ISO).
(f) Fire hydrant spacing and marking. [Amended 6-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-559]
[1] In developments of one- and two-family dwellings the
spacing between fire hydrants shall not exceed 1,000 feet
§ 153-36 PATTON CODE § 153-36
123:488
for through streets and 400 feet for cul-de-sacs as
measured along the center line of fire apparatus access
roads.
[2] In all other developments the spacing between fire
hydrants shall not exceed 600 feet for through streets and
400 feet for cul-de-sacs as measured along the center line
of fire apparatus access roads.
[3] With the exception of one- and two-family dwellings, the
distance to any dwelling or occupied structure shall not
exceed 300 feet.
[4] In any development with a temporary cul-de-sac the
developer may, with the posting of sufficient surety with
the Township, install fire hydrants at the spacing
permitted for through streets. If the street is not extended
to become a through street within three years of the
Zoning Officer's approval of the first occupancy permit for
a structure on the temporary cul-de-sac, the developer
shall install additional fire hydrants on the temporary culde-
sac at the spacing required above for cul-de-sacs. The
plan for the temporary cul-de-sac shall show the proposed
location of the additional fire hydrants. Sufficient water
pipes and fittings shall be installed such that the
installation of these additional fire hydrants shall not
require any street cuts.
[5] On cul-de-sacs and temporary cul-de-sacs the fire hydrant
furthest from the through street where the cul-de-sac
begins shall be shall be marked or identified as determined
by the Alpha Fire Company and public water service
provider or agency that maintains the fire hydrants. This
marking aids fire-fighting personnel in locating the best
fire hydrant to use as they respond to an incident.
(g) If the needed fire flow is not provided in developments served
by a community water system, the subdivision or land
development plan shall include a note stating that all dwellings
and occupied structures shall be provided with an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with
the applicable NFPA standard.
Exception: The Fire Chief is authorized to accept a deficiency
of up to 10% of the required fire flow where existing fire
hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire flow.
(Written notice of the deficiency and approval shall be noted
on the plan.)
(h) Exception: Subdivisions and land developments located
outside of the Regional Growth Boundary and served by a
§ 153-36 (RESERVED) § 153-36
123:489
community water system may utilize water storage systems,
as described in Subsection C(2), to meet the water supply
requirements.
(2) Fire protection water supply requirements for new developments
outside of community water system areas. [Added 12-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-419]
(a) The minimum water supply requirement for developments of
one- and two-family dwellings shall be a four-thousand-gallon
approved water storage source located along required fire
apparatus access roads. The spacing between the fourthousand-
gallon water storage sources shall not exceed 1,500
feet as measured along the center line of fire apparatus access
roads. The distance from the closest lot line of each lot to a
four-thousand-gallon water storage source shall not exceed
750 feet as measured along the center line of fire apparatus
access roads.
(b) The minimum water supply requirements for developments
other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be determined
using NFPA Standard 1142, Water Supplies for Suburban and
Rural Fire Fighting.
(c) If the minimum water supply is not provided in developments
outside of the community water system area, the subdivision or
land development plan shall include a note stating that all
dwellings and occupied structures shall be provided with an
approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed in
accordance with the applicable NFPA standard.
D. Monuments. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(1) Permanent monuments shall be accurately placed at the
intersections of all lines in the boundary (perimeter) of the property
being subdivided.
(2) All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor and shall be scored or pinned
so that the pin or score mark coincides with the point of
intersection with the boundary lines being monumented.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the developer and his contractor to
ensure that such monuments are not destroyed during construction
but will be maintained and locatable upon completion of the
development of the subdivision. Any monuments destroyed or
disturbed during construction shall be returned to their original
position by a registered professional engineer or registered land
surveyor or by the designated Township Engineer with the
restoration costs to be reimbursed to the Township by the
developer.
§ 153-36 PATTON CODE § 153-36
123:490
(4) Pin, pipe or acceptable survey markers shall be accurately placed
at the street right-of-way lines at all changes in direction of street
lines, points of curvature and points of compound curvature,
including arcs at intersections.
(5) Pin, pipe or acceptable survey markers shall be accurately placed
at all lot corners within the subdivision being constructed. Such
property corner markers shall be subject to the same conditions of
permanence as referenced in § 153-36D(3).
E. Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. The design and placement of such signs shall be subject
to approval by the Township Supervisors. Such sign costs and
placement to be borne by the developer.
F. Street trees. Street canopy trees shall be located along streets in all
residential and nonresidential developments. Street canopy trees shall
be planted at thirty-foot intervals and shall be a minimum of 2 1/2
inches caliper measured six inches above ground. [Added 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-384]
G. Fire apparatus access. [Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
(1) Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings hereafter constructed
in subdivisions or land developments approved after the effective
date of this section shall be accessible to Fire Department
apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with
an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of
supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus. An exception shall
be granted for private roads or driveways that serve four or less
dwellings.
(2) The minimum paved cartway width for fire apparatus access roads
that are curbed shall be 20 feet. The minimum paved cartway width
for fire apparatus access roads that are noncurbed shall be 18 feet,
if the adjacent berms are stabilized and mud-free. An exception
shall be granted for private roads or driveways that serve four or
less dwellings.
(3) Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet shall be
provided with turnaround provisions in accordance with municipal
standards.
H. Fire lanes. [Added 12-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-419]
(1) When necessary, fire apparatus access roads may be designated as
fire lanes by the Fire Chief in concurrence with the Code Official.
Designated fire lanes shall be marked on the land development
plans. Revisions to fire lanes shall use the procedure for
amendment/revision of subdivision or land development plans and
require comments of the Fire Chief as per § 153-10.1 of this
chapter.
§ 153-36 (RESERVED) § 153-36
123:491
§ 153-37. Recommended improvements. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-384]
The following improvements, intended to enhance the sales value of the
subdivision as well as to benefit the municipality, are recommended:
§ 153-38. Off-street parking regulations. [Amended 7-25-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-225; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
Off-street parking shall be provided to adequately serve various uses within
the Township. Each required off-street parking space shall be at least nine
feet wide and 18 feet long if set at an angle to the access aisle or eight
feet wide and 24 feet long if parallel to the access aisle. The length of
parking spaces may be reduced up to two feet if an equal amount of vehicle
overhang length is provided beyond the end of the paved space. At the
discretion of the Township, parking spaces at an angle of 30° or less may
have stall widths with a minimum of 8.5 feet. Handicapped parking spaces
shall not be less than 12 feet in width. Parking stall spaces shall be an
approved paved surface, shall be adequately marked and shall have safe
and convenient access in all seasons. There shall be no angled areas within
15 feet of a public street.
(2) The minimum width of fire lanes shall be 20 feet.
A. Streetlights. In accordance with the conditions to be agreed upon by
the subdivider, the municipality, and the appropriate utility, streetlights
are recommended to be installed in all subdivisions.
(1) Streetlights should be placed at all roadway intersections at a
minimum.
(2) Streetlights shall comply with § 175-48.2 (Illumination Standards).
B. Shade trees. Reasonable care should be made by the subdivider to
preserve existing shade trees and, in addition, trees with a minimum
caliper of 1 1/2 inches should be provided in accordance with Township
regulations.
C. Bikeways. Accommodations in the form of on-street bike lanes or offstreet
bike trails may be required to create and/or connect a bikeway
system.
A. Automobile parking space. There shall be provided at the time of
construction of any new main building, or at the time any existing main
building is enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off-street
parking space with adequate provision for ingress and egress by
standard-sized automobiles, as stated in the following sections:
B. Parking space for dwellings.
(1) In all single-family residential districts there shall be provided,
either in a private garage or on the lot, space for the parking of two
§ 153-36 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:492
automobiles for each dwelling unit. In multifamily residential
zoning districts where the street width is greater than or equal to
28 feet there shall be provided at least two spaces per dwelling
unit. Where the street width is less than 28 feet, 2.3 spaces per
dwelling unit shall be provided to accommodate visitor parking.
(2) For congregate housing such as a group house or halfway house,
off-street parking shall be provided as follows: one space per two
persons based on maximum design capacity.
(3) The required parking spaces shall be laid out to permit a motor
vehicle to proceed to and from all unoccupied spaces without
moving other parked vehicles.
C. Parking space for nonresidential uses.
(1) Required off-street parking for new construction, enlargement or
change in use shall be as listed below. Any portion of a building
used for office, retail or restaurants require the parking as pertains
to each use, as if it were a freestanding use. Commercial Uses in
the C-2 (Planned Commercial) District must also comply with the
requirements of Subsections C(1)(a) and (b). [Amended
11-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-359; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-496]
(a) Threshold for additional improvements. Planned Commercial
(C-2) land development plans that do not provide the
improvements required in Subsection C(1)(b) shall not exceed
110% of the minimum number of parking spaces required.
(b) Additional improvements required to exceed threshold.
[1] The developer of a C-2 property may exceed the threshold
value established in Subsection C(1)(a) if a satisfactory
plan employing enhanced landscaping, architectural
features and/or an enhanced stormwater management
plan meeting the requirements of Chapter 175, Zoning,
§ 175-17D(9) (C-2 Planned Commercial District; maximum
impervious coverage) is accepted by the Township.
[2] The enhancements shall include two or more developerselected
items from the list of approved enhancements
maintained by the Township. At least one enhancement
shall be taken from each of the two categories,
Landscaping and Architectural/Other, on the list. If an
enhanced stormwater management plan is required for a
development under Chapter 175, Zoning, § 175-17D(9)
(C-2 Planned Commercial District; maximum impervious
coverage), it shall be allowed as one of the items to satisfy
the requirements of this section.
§ 153-38 (RESERVED) § 153-38
123:493
[3] The threshold for mixed-use developments shall apply to
the development as a whole and be calculated from the
minimum requirements for all uses within the
development.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Commercial Uses
All business and
commercial
establishments, except
those specified below.
1 per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Banks and financial
institutions
1 per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Bowling alleys, miniature
golf
5 per alley, 2 per golf tee
Car wash 4 per wash bay
Convenience stores 1 per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Eating and drinking
establishments (not
taverns)
1 per 50 square feet of gross
inside seating area plus 1
per 100 square feet of
outside seating area
Furniture stores, appliance
stores
1 per 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Gasoline service stations 1 per pump plus 2 spaces for
each service bay
Hotels and motels 1 per room and 1 per 100
square feet of gross floor
area for restaurants and
meeting rooms
Medical, dental and
veterinary offices
1 per 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Mortuary/funeral homes 1 per 3 seats based on
maximum design capacity
New and used motor
vehicle, manufactured
home and trailer sales and
rental lots
1 per 400 square feet of
gross floor area and 1 per
3,000 square feet of outside
sales area
Professional and public
administration offices
1 per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Retail stores 1 per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 153-38 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:494
Use Parking Spaces Required
Taverns 1 per ewvery 3.3 persons of
the establishment's
maximum capacity in
persons
Theaters 1 per 3 seats
Industrial Uses
All industrial uses, except
those listed below
3 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Warehouse, storage and
wholesale establishments
1 per 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Public, Quasi-Public and Miscellaneous
Auditorium, gymnasium 1 per 3 seats based on
maximum design capacity
Community Center and
rehabilitation center
1 per 3 persons based on
maximum design capacity
Churches and other places
of worship
1 per 3 seats based on
maximum design capacity
Elementary and middle
schools
1 per 600 square feet of
gross floor area
Golf courses 4 per hole, driving ranges, 2
per tee
Hospitals 3 per bed
Institutions of higher
education including
business and vocational
schools
1 per 3 students based on
maximum design capacity
trade
Nursing or convalescent
homes
0.5 per bed
Personal care boarding
home for adults
1 per 2 occupants based on
maximum design capacity
Private clubs, lodges 1 per 3 persons based on
maximum design capacity
Secondary schools 1 per 500 square feet of
gross floor area
Swimming pools and clubs 1 per 40 square feet of
water surface area
(2) Parking spaces for public, quasi-public and miscellaneous uses not
listed in this section shall be provided in accordance with the
determination of the Township based on G.F.A. and/or M.D.C. of a
similar above use. Handicapped parking for nonresidential uses
shall be included with the required number of spaces. Multi-family
§ 153-38 (RESERVED) § 153-38
123:495
residential uses must provide handicap parking stalls. [Amended
4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-339]
Total Parking in Lot
Required Number of
Accessible Spaces
Up to 25 2
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2 percent of total
Over 1000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
NOTES:
Gross Floor Area (G.F.A.) — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face
of exterior walls or from the center line of a wall separating two
buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space
for motor vehicle or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than six feet.
Maximum Design Capacity (M.D.C.) — The actual number of
occupants for whom each occupied space, floor or building is
designed.
Off-street parking for future building expansion on any land
development shall remain as landscaped open space until
development of such.
(3) Provisions to reduce required off-street parking spaces. In an effort
to reduce impervious coverage, traffic congestion and allow an
increase in landscaped green space area, the following shall be
considered.
(a) Shared parking spaces that are accessible by neighboring
properties or uses may be permitted when use of the spaces
does not occur during the same daily time period. The
applicant must provide justification showing calculations of the
peak parking use for the spaces that would have overlapping
users during their respective hours of operation. The hours of
operation must show that sufficient spaces would be available
for the shared parking purpose. Should the use change in the
§ 153-38 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:496
future, and its associated off-street parking, the parking must
be provided as required or shared parking be pursued.
(b) Car-pooling.
[1] When increasing the passengers per vehicle to sites with
high employment would decrease parking demand, relief
in the required parking spaces may occur. The applicant
may utilize one or a combination of the following modes of
transportation to reduce single occupant vehicles:
[a] Shared-ride/car-pooling.
[b] Van pooling.
[c] Subscription bus service(s), public transportation.
[2] As part of the request to reduce parking spaces, the
applicant shall show to the satisfaction of the Township
that the actions proposed shall reduce the parking demand
by the amount requested.
(c) Other options.
[1] At the option of the Township, and requiring approval by
the Supervisors, a reduction of off-street parking spaces
may be considered as follows that would pertain only to
parking at the site fronting arterial roads:
[a] The buffer yard in the front contains unique natural
features as determined by the Township that may
require an area to be wider than the minimum front
buffer.
[b] The buffer yard in the front contains features that
contribute to the community character of the
Township as determined by the Township that may
require area to be wider than the minimum front
buffer.
[c] The requirements of a corridor overlay zone that may
provide for a wider than minimum buffer.
[2] The Township may recommend the reduction in the offstreet
parking spaces associated with increasing the front
buffer yard. The area removed from parking may be
allowed as off-street parking at a future date should the
operator of the use experience a parking shortage based
on demand after the use is in operation for a period
exceeding two years. The requirements of site plan
submission and approval are to be followed. All density
and yard requirements of the zoning ordinance districts
shall be met by this section.
§ 153-38 (RESERVED) § 153-38
123:497
D. Parking lots. For the purposes of this chapter, "parking lots" are defined
as facilities providing off-street parking spaces for five or more motor
vehicles. All parking lots shall meet the design and maintenance
standards specified below.
(1) Dimensions.
(a) All parking spaces shall comply with the dimensions as
specified above. The minimum dimensions of all aisles
providing access to parking lot spaces shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
(Feet)
Angle of Parking
Space to Aisle
(degrees) One-Way Two-Way
Parallel 12 20
30 12 20
45 15 20
60 18 20
90 24 24
(b) No portion of any parking space shall intrude into the required
aisle width. For aisles providing access to parking spaces set at
angles other than those specified above, the required aisle
width shall be that of the nearest specified angle of parking. If
equidistant from specified angles, the greatest aisle width of
the two nearest angles shall apply.
(2) Obstructions. Parking lots shall be designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from all unoccupied parking spaces
without requiring the moving of any other parked motor vehicle
and without leaving the lot.
(3) Ingress and egress. Entrance and exit driveways and aisles linking
parking lots to public streets shall comply with the standards for
motor vehicle access stipulated above. Parking spaces shall be
designed to prevent motor vehicles from backing onto a public
street in order to leave the lot.
(4) Location and yard requirements.
(a) All parking lots shall meet the location requirements as
stipulated above. All yards surrounding the parking lot,
exclusive of driveways providing ingress and egress to the lot,
shall be bordered by a concrete (Class A) curb no less than
four-inch high reveled curb along the sides of the yard abutting
§ 153-38 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:498
the parking lot, including spaces and aisles. Details for curbing
shall be provided by the applicant.
(b) Curbs may be deleted from portions of the parking lots if a part
of a stormwater management plan providing water quality or
groundwater recharge benefits. Wheel stops or other approved
barrier shall be provided in lieu of curbs.
(c) Setback areas shall be planted with grass or other vegetative
material and may include shrubs, fences or walls, provided that
they are not placed closer than three feet to any parking space.
(5) Structures. Utility poles, light standards and similar structures
shall not be permitted within any aisle or parking space. Any
structure located elsewhere within a parking lot shall be
surrounded on all sides abutting the spaces or aisles by a concrete
curb no fewer than four inches in height, separated from the
structure by at least three feet.
(6) Raised islands.
(a) Raised islands shall be installed at the ends of all parking bays
abutting an aisle or driveway. In addition, when parking bays
incorporate more than 10 parking spaces in a continuous row,
a raised island shall be incorporated within the parking bay for
over nine parking spaces. The raised islands shall be bordered
by a concrete curb four inches high (at a minimum). Wherever
it abuts a space or aisle it shall be 10 feet wide and extend the
length of the parking space and/or bay. Islands, when required,
shall include shade trees that are tolerant to the parking lot
environment.
(b) Interior parking lot landscape alternatives. In order to provide
flexibility in parking lot landscaping to reduce heat, glare and
visual expansiveness, the following alternatives shall be
considered and/or combined with interior landscaped islands.
The amount of landscaped open space shall not be less than
what is required in § 153-34A.
[1] Provide a continuous landscape strip between every four
rows of parking. The strip shall be a minimum of eight feet
in width to accommodate a low level landscaping and
shade trees.
[2] Create large planting islands (over 600 square feet) to be
located throughout the lot and planted with shade trees,
low level landscaping and/or ground cover.
[3] The required ratio of landscaped islands (one island per
nine parking stalls) must be maintained but can be utilized
in any combination within the parking area.
§ 153-38 (RESERVED) § 153-38
123:499
(c) In areas where excessive cut and fill is required for parking lot
site development, terraced parking shall be considered in
order to reduce visual expansiveness.
(d) Brick, block, cobblestone concrete and sawn wood blocks or
other similar material shall be used as surface material for
islands where foot traffic is anticipated. These shall be
installed on a permeable base in a manner to allow water
percolation into the ground. Where foot traffic is not a
consideration, any of these paving materials or shrubs and
living ground cover may be used with threes in the islands.
Bituminous concrete shall not be used.
(e) Utility poles and light standards are permitted within the
raised islands, provided that they are separated from the
spaces and aisles.
(f) No islands are required on sixty-foot width or less parking lots,
as long as perimeter planting is used around entire lot.
Whenever a building adjoins on perimeter of said parking lot,
islands shall be required. Trees for the islands shall be of a
deciduous canopy-type or shade-tree type.
(7) Maintenance. All off-street parking areas, including perimeter
plantings and raised islands, shall be maintained in good condition
and kept free of litter and trash. All required pant material which
dies shall be replaces as soon as seasonal conditions occur for the
replacement of the species, within one year.
(8) Drainage. All parking areas shall comply with Chapter 147,
Stormwater Management.
(9) Perimeter planting.
(a) The perimeter of all areas shall be landscaped with living plant
material to a minimum width of 10 feet measured from the
back of the parking area curb towards the property line or
building wall, except where the perimeter is adjacent to a
public street, in which case the minimum width shall be 15
feet. The perimeter planting shall include a combination of
shrubs, deciduous and coniferous trees, all selected to provide
shade and a view restrictive screen for parking areas. Special
consideration should be given to form, color, texture, density,
growth habits and maintenance requirements.
(b) Trees and shrubs shall be an integral part of this perimeter
planting. Walls, earth mounds and fences or any combination
thereof may be included with living plant material to produce a
view-restrictive screen. Highlights of parked vehicles should
be obscured from the public way. Grass or other living ground
cover shall be planted, mulched and maintained on all portions
§ 153-38 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:500
of the landscaped strip not occupied by other landscape
material.
(c) A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the perimeter
planting area for every 45 feet of the perimeter of the parking
area, exclusive of driveway widths. Required perimeter trees
shall be planted no fewer than 25 feet nor greater than 50 feet
apart. Interior islands within parking lots shall include shade
trees unless the dimension of said island is such that planting a
tree within the island could not be accomplished due to
obscured sight distance.
(10) Tree specifications.
(a) Existing trees, if properly located, may be used to satisfy the
requirement above for perimeter and interior planting.
Existing trees located closer together than the twenty-five-foot
minimum shall, for the purpose of calculating the required
number of trees, be counted as one tree. No required tree shall
be planted closer than 20 feet to an existing columnar tree or
25 feet to an existing tree of other shape.
(b) The size of all trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches caliper,
measured six inches above ground level. These shall be planted
a minimum of three feet from the back of any curbing.
(c) All plant material and installation shall follow the American
Standard for Nursery Stock and the Code of Standards
currently recommended by the American Associations of
Nurserymen.
(11) Sight distance. Clear sight triangles, in conformance with
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials Geometric Design shall be provided at all intersections
between driveways, parking lot aisleways/perimeter roads and
streets. No vision obstructing objects shall be permitted above the
height of 30 inches measured from the center-line grade of the
intersecting streets within such sight triangle.
(12) Building structures and ramps. Motor vehicles parked within,
under or on top of buildings, parking structure or on ramps shall be
screened from public view. On street level, living plant material is
required in the setback areas. Walls, earth mounds, fences or any
combination thereof may also be included with the plant material.
All floors or levels above the street shall be screened by walls,
fences or other approved materials.
(13)Walkways.
(a) Walkways adjacent to or within off-street parking areas shall be
wide enough to provide a minimum of five feet clear horizontal
§ 153-38 (RESERVED) § 153-38
123:501
passenger space exclusive of car overhang, parking meters or
other obstructions.
(b) Walkways shall comply with the design and construction of
standards of § 149-38.
(c) All nonresidential and multifamily residential uses shall
provide a separate pedestrian walkway connecting the primary
building entrance(s) to the nearest public sidewalk abutting
the parcel. Parcels greater than one acre that have frontage on
more than one street may be required to provide multiple
connecting walkways.
(14) (Reserved)181
(15)Woodland preservation. Opportunities to preserve stands of
existing trees using creative landscaping designs shall be
considered for site development.
181. Editor's Note: Former § 153-38C(3)(d)[14], Outdoor lighting, was repealed 8-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-357.
§ 153-38 PATTON CODE § 153-38
123:502
ARTICLE VI
Transportation Impact Report Requirements
[Added 3-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-319]
§ 153-39. When required.
§ 153-40. Applicability.
This article applies only to subdivision and land development activities that
occur after enactment of this chapter.
§ 153-41. Safety or capacity deficiencies.
The Township may also require a transportation impact study because of a
localized safety or capacity deficiency such as:
A. A transportation impact shall be required for any land development
activity that is projected to generate at least 500 trip-ends per day. The
projected number of trip-ends will be determined through use of the
unit trip-end values presented in the latest edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' (ITE) Trip Generation Manual multiplied by
the size of the proposed development. The Township Engineer will
determine the appropriate ITE land use category to be used for a
proposed development.
B. For phased single-family residential subdivisions, the study must be
submitted when a plan is submitted for Township approval that
subdivides the parent tract(s) to the point at which at least 500 tripends/
day are generated.
C. For phased multifamily, commercial or industrial land development, the
study must be submitted when a land development plan is submitted for
Township approval that would generate at least 500 trip-ends/day from
the parent tract(s).
A. Current traffic problems in the local area, such as a high-accident
location, confusing intersection, or an intersection in need of a traffic
signal.
B. The current or projected level of service of the roadway system
adjacent to the development which will be significantly affected.
C. The sensitivity of the adjacent neighborhoods or other areas that may
be perceived as being impacted.
D. The proximity of existing or proposed site driveways to other driveways
or intersections.
E. The ability of the adjacent, existing or planned roadway system to
handle increased traffic or the feasibility of improving the roadway
system to handle increased traffic.
§ 153-39 (RESERVED) § 153-41
123:503
§ 153-42. Study contents.
The area extent and scope of a proposed transportation impact report
are a function of the size and location of the proposed development. The
exact delineation of the study area, required data collection effort and
required analyses will be determined by Township staff with input from
the developer's consultant. As a minimum, the report shall include the
following:
F. Other specific problems or deficiencies that may be affected by the
proposed development or affect the ability of the development to be
satisfactorily accommodated.
A. A description of existing conditions and traffic volumes for the major
road network within the study area.
B. A base condition analysis shall be prepared to establish existing levels
of service followed by analysis and description of projected traffic
conditions based on the land uses proposed within the development.
Trip generation rates for morning and evening peak hours of the project
shall be prepared, as well as the internal/external trip distribution and
intersection analyses.
C. The report shall evaluate the traffic impacts of the proposed
development and identify the need for road and access and traffic
control measure improvements caused by the proposed development.
D. The analysis shall contain recommended internal and off-site road
improvements. These recommended improvements should be specific
as to location and scope of work required along with a phased schedule
for implementation. Examples of additional items that should be
included in this section are: typical sections for each category of street;
and a phasing plan which delineates the street improvements that will
be provided simultaneously within the construction of each
development phase.
E. Utilization of alternate modes of transportation shall be a component of
the traffic impact analysis. Evaluation of traffic mitigation measures as
they relate to public transportation and future development of the site
should also be addressed.
§ 153-41 PATTON CODE § 153-42
123:504
ARTICLE VII
Authority; Amendments
§ 153-43. Fees.
§ 153-44. Modifications.
The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Planning
Commission reserves the right to modify or to extend them conditionally
in individual cases as may be necessary in the public interest; provided,
however, that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of this chapter. The list of such modifications and the reasons
for them shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning Commission, and
a copy of this entry shall be transmitted to the Township Supervisors,
together with the approved plans, for their approval. Upon approval by the
Supervisors, said modifications shall be clearly defined and entered on the
final plan and signed by the Chairman of the Township Supervisors.
§ 153-45. Reconsideration; appeals. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-330]
§ 153-46. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
138; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
A. The Township Supervisors shall establish by resolution a collection
procedure and Schedule of Fees to be paid by the subdivider at the time
of filing a preliminary plan.
B. Said Schedule of Fees shall be posted in the office of the Township
Secretary.
C. Charges for field inspection shall be established on the basis of the
number of lots to be inspected, including improvements to be provided.
D. No final plan shall be approved unless all fees and charges are paid in
full.
A. Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of
the Township Planning Commission may request and shall receive an
opportunity to appear before the Planning Commission to present
additional relevant information and request, in writing, reconsideration
of the original finding, decision and recommendation.
B. Any person aggrieved by action of the Township Supervisors may
appeal within 30 days to the Court of Common Pleas. [Amended
8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 138]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinance enacted
under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
§ 153-43 (RESERVED) § 153-46
123:505
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied
or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 153-46 PATTON CODE § 153-46
123:506
ARTICLE VIII
Subdivision and Land Development University Planned District
(UPD)
[Added 5-26-1999 by Ord. No. 366]
§ 153-47. Uniform subdivision and land development standards
applicable in the UPD.
Land development or subdivision in the University Planned District (UPD)
shall be subject to the uniform subdivision and land development standards
established in this article. The standards set forth in this article, in Article
VII of Chapter 175 and as further specified in the approved UPD Plan shall
serve as the basis for land development and subdivision plan approval.
§ 153-48. Purpose and intent.
See Chapter 175 (Zoning), Article VII, § 175-32.
§ 153-49. Definitions.
See Chapter 175 (Zoning), Article VII, § 175-33A.
§ 153-50. Uniform standards.
A. Streets, sidewalks and bikeways.
(1) Classification of streets.
(a) Public Streets within the UPD, that are to be dedicated to the
Township for public use, shall be classified according to the
standards in effect in Chapter 149 (Streets and Sidewalks) on
the date of land development plan submission.
(b) University streets. All streets within the UPD, which are not
dedicated for public use, shall be university streets.
Classifications of types of university streets, if necessary, shall
be those set forth in the UPD District Plan.
(2) Dedication and public street standards.
(a) Dedication of streets to the Township for public use shall be
required whenever land development results in construction of
a street, which, at the time of construction, provides the sole
access to more than four lots outside the UPD boundary.
(b) Public street standards. All streets required or proposed to be
dedicated to the Township shall be designed and constructed
to the standards for public streets as specified in Chapter 149
(Streets and Sidewalks.)
(3) University street standards; optional dedication.
§ 153-47 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:507
(a) University street standards. University streets shall be
designed and constructed to facilitate the safe and convenient
movement of traffic. Appropriate construction standards, such
as the width of cartways, use of curb and gutter, radii, length of
culs-de-sac and paving specifications shall be those standards
set forth in the UPD District Plan.
(b) Optional dedication. When a road has been designed and
constructed to the standards set forth in Subsection A(2)(b)
above, it may be offered to the Township for dedication.
(4) Coordination with surrounding streets.
(a) Location. The streets required for any land development in the
UPD, whether public or university, shall be coordinated with
existing, proposed and anticipated streets outside the UPD or
portion of the UPD being developed. The location of all public
streets shall conform to the Official Map or Comprehensive
Plan of Patton Township.
(b) Safety. Street connections shall occur in safe and convenient
locations.
(c) Connections to existing streets or neighborhoods. Connections
between public and university streets shall be consistent with
the Patton Township Official Map, Comprehensive Plan of
Patton Township and the approved district plan.
(5) Ingress and egress for land development.
(a) Safety. All land development shall have access sufficient to
afford reasonable ingress and egress for both emergency
vehicles and those accessing the property in its intended use.
(b) On arterials. Whenever land development involving the
creation of one or more new streets borders on or contains an
existing arterial street, as defined by Chapter 149 (Streets and
Sidewalks), no direct driveway access onto the arterial street
will be permitted.
(c) Driveways, general.
[1] All driveway entrances or other openings onto streets shall
be designed so that:
[a] Vehicles entering and exiting the site pose no
substantial danger to themselves, pedestrians or other
vehicles; and
[b] Interference with the free flow of traffic on abutting or
surrounding streets is minimized.
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:508
[2] Driveways shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
any nonuniversity lands.
(d) Connections to public streets. Standards for the design and
construction of university streets or driveway connections to
public streets shall be those specified in Chapter 149 (Streets
and Sidewalks).
(6) Sidewalk and bikeway standards.
(a) Public. Where required as part of the public street standards in
Chapters 149 (Streets and Sidewalks) and 153 (Subdivision
and Land Development), sidewalks and bikeways shall be
provided according to the standards therein.
(b) University. Where proposed in conjunction with land
development, sidewalks and bikeways shall be designed and
constructed to meet the requirements of the intended use.
Bikeways shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.
B. Utilities.
(1) Wastewater disposal and treatment. An application for land
development plan approval shall describe the proposed method for
providing wastewater disposal and treatment. Sewage facilities
planning, as required by state law, shall be completed, and upon
approval by the Township and the appropriate state agency,
deemed to satisfy the need to provide evidence that the method of
wastewater treatment and disposal is feasible and sufficient.
(2) Water supply. An application for land development shall describe
the manner in which potable water shall be supplied to the project
and provide evidence that the appropriate arrangements with the
applicable water provider have been secured.
(3) Fire hydrants and fire apparatus access. The location and design
specifications of fire hydrants or fire apparatus access shall
conform to local fire protection standards as prescribed by Chapter
153 (Subdivision and Land Development) or as required by the Fire
Chief, whichever is most restrictive.
(4) Additional requirements.
(a) Utility installation.
[1] Installed by or on behalf of a university:
[a] If required by the applicable subdistrict regulations,
new utility installations shall be underground.
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:509
[b] When a university proposes to install new
aboveground utilities at the perimeter of the UPD,
such utilities and the required buildings and
structures shall meet the perimeter setback
requirements of Chapter 175 (Zoning), § 175-32E
(Density, dimensional, coverage and open space
requirements).
[c] When aboveground utility installations exist at the
perimeter of the UPD or along streets, the installation
of additional utilities of the same type or service on
these facilities by the university shall be permitted.
[d] All utility installations by a university within a public
street right-of-way shall be underground in those
locations where existing utilities are also
underground.
[2] Installation by others. When a public utility proposes to
install utilities across the UPD for nonuniversity purposes,
installation shall be governed by all applicable laws and
regulations governing such installation.
(b) As-Built plans. As-built plans shall be provided to the Township
for underground university-installed utilities installed by or at
the direction of the owner within the public right-of-way. The
as-built plans shall be prepared according to the standards in
Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land Development).
(c) Relationship of utilities to external development. The
development and installation of public utilities for land
development in the UPD shall be consistent with all applicable
adopted Township plans for such utilities. In addition, such
public utilities shall be compatible with and provide for the
reasonable extension of such utilities for adjacent land
development in a manner consistent with Township plans.
C. Environmental preservation.
(1) Soil erosion and sedimentation control. An application for land
development approval in the UPD shall comply with all applicable
federal and state requirements governing soil erosion and
sedimentation control and earth disturbance. Plans required to
satisfy such requirements shall be submitted with the land
development plan.
(2) Stormwater management. An application for land development
plan approval in the UPD shall include a stormwater plan which
meets the requirements for Chapter 147 (Stormwater
Management).
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:510
(3) Wetlands. Areas of a site constituting wetlands, as defined by
applicable federal and state regulations, shall be shown on the land
development plan. Development in and adjacent to such wetlands
shall be subject to restrictions, if any, set forth in federal and state
regulations.
D. Design standards.
(1) Parking design. Unless otherwise provided in a subdistrict
narrative, the parking area design standards shall be those
specified in the UPD District Plan.
(2) Parking construction standards and specifications.
(a) All parking in the UPD, except special event or temporary
parking, shall be constructed according to the standards and
specifications contained in the adopted UPD District Plan.
(b) Special event and temporary parking shall not be required to
meet standards in Subsection D(2)(a) above, provided that the
parking meets the definition of special event or temporary
parking in Chapter 175 (Zoning), Article VII, (University
Planned District). Such parking will be permitted in those
areas specified in the UPD District Plan for such use and may
be improved to the specified standard at the discretion of the
university, subject to land development plan approval by the
Township.
(3) Service access. Service access or a loading area shall be provided
for all proposed buildings greater than 10,000 square feet in size,
unless otherwise exempted by the Township. Design of service
access should be well integrated with the overall building design.
(4) Parking area landscaping and buffering.
(a) Surface parking areas may be located within perimeter
setbacks unless prohibited by the district plan, provided that a
buffer yard measuring at least 15 feet in width and meeting the
requirements of Subsection E(2) of this section is provided.
(b) The UPD subdistrict narratives may provide for the required
interior landscaping of surface parking areas. When such
landscaping is proposed, the land development plan shall
provide the information necessary to determine compliance
with subdistrict requirements.
(5) Dumpster screening. Dumpsters shall be completely screened from
view from any public right-of-way or residential district by a sightobscuring
six-foot fence, wall or evergreen planting that shall reach
six feet in height within three years of planting. Landscaping plant
material installed to satisfy the requirements of this section shall
be guaranteed to survive for a period of at least one year. Any
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:511
landscape plant material which does not survive the guaranty
period shall be replaced.
(6) Lighting of parking areas. Lighting of parking areas shall be
designed to enhance safety and to minimize glare on public streets,
adjacent neighborhoods, adjoining nonuniversity properties and to
the night sky. When lighting of parking areas is proposed as part of
a land development plan, sufficient information such as type of
fixtures, height of light standards, intensity of illumination and area
to be illuminated shall be provided to allow a determination of
impact on adjoining nonuniversity properties consistent with
Chapter 175 (Zoning), § 175-48.2 (Illumination standards), as
applicable.
(7) Building facades and rooflines. Design of roof areas that are visible
should be well integrated into overall building design so as to
obscure any view of mechanical and electrical equipment and other
appurtenances. In addition, building facades and rooflines should
receive the same treatment on all sides, particularly in locations
where one or more building facades abut adjoining areas in the
community.
(8) Historic buildings, structures and places. Preservation of historic
buildings, structures and places should be given strong
consideration in the design, location, construction and use of new
buildings and structures within the UPD. In addition, land
development under the UPD should give strong consideration to
the preservation and enhancement of the National Register of
Historic Districts with the UPD.
E. Landscaping and buffering.
(1) Landscaping plans. A landscaping plan is required as a component
of land development plan submission if landscaping, including
plantings for screening purposes, is required to buffer perimeter
parking or other areas as required by the district plan.
(2) Buffering standards and requirements. When a landscaped buffer is
required by subdistrict or Chapter 175 (Zoning) regulations, the
flexible options standards and requirements of this subsection shall
apply. The subdistrict narratives shall indicate when these
standards and requirements are specified. The land development
plan shall include a landscaping plan showing compliance with this
subsection. Berms, mounds and fences may be used in combination
with landscape plant material to satisfy buffering standards and
requirements. The flexible option standards and requirements are
shown in Chapter 175 (Zoning), Table 5, Buffer Yard A through
Buffer Yard E.
(3) Street trees. If required by Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land
Development) in conjunction with dedication of a public street,
street trees shall be provided. The land development plan shall
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:512
indicate compliance with this requirement for locations, types and
guaranties. Street trees are encouraged, where appropriate, on
university streets.
(4) Site lighting.
(a) Whenever lighting is proposed as part of a university land
development plan, it shall be designed to enhance safety and
minimize glare on adjoining nonuniversity properties, adjacent
neighborhoods, public streets and to the night sky, consistent
with Chapter 175 (Zoning), § 175-48.2 (Illumination
standards), where applicable. The land development plan shall
show locations and heights of light standards, intensity of
illumination and area to be illuminated to provide for a
determination of compliance with this subsection.
(b) Not withstanding any other provision of this article,
independent third party development in the UPD shall comply
with Chapter 175 (Zoning), § 175-48.2 (Illumination standards)
regulations on outdoor illumination.
F. Land development plan requirements.
(1) Plan submission and review procedures: general requirements.
Proposed subdivision and land development plans, all or part of
which are situated in the Township, shall be reviewed by the
Township Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning
Commission and shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors in
accordance with the procedures specified in Chapter 153
(Subdivision and Land Development).
(2) Sketch plan: required plan contents. A sketch plan for a proposed
subdivision or land development should contain sufficient
information to identify the site location in relationship to the
surrounding area and a conceptual design plan. The conceptual
design plan for land development should show the type and
location of uses proposed and their relationship to natural and
man-made features in and around the site; and for subdivision,
should show a conceptual configuration of lots and streets, if any.
Since the submission of a sketch plan is optional, no other
requirements apply. However, any additional information which can
be provided will enhance the response of the reviewing agencies.
(3) Preliminary plan: required plan contents. All preliminary plans
submitted for review shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 60
feet or larger (e.g., one inch equals 20 feet). Plans shall be
submitted on the following sheet sizes: 18 inches by 24 inches, 24
inches by 36 inches, or 36 inches by 42 inches. All lettering shall be
drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are reduced to half size. All
sheets comprising a submission shall be the same size and shall
contain the following information:
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:513
(a) General notes and data.
[1] Project area for the proposed land development.
[2] Name of the proposed development.
[3] Date of filing of preliminary plan.
[4] The name and address of the owner, along with the deed
book and page numbers of the deeds conveying the
property to the owner; and the name of the developer and
billing address, if different.
[5] Zoning district/subdistrict.
[6] Required setbacks (front, side and rear).
[a] By ordinance.
[b] By deed (if different).
[7] Maximum height allowed (in zoning district).
[8] Current use of property.
[9] Proposed use of property, whether general and/or
designated uses, and accessory uses, if any.
[10] Base or benchmark for topography on plan.
[11] List of source(s) for required utilities, including where
applicable, a list of Act 172/38 utility companies.
[12] The name and address of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
[13] Density calculation. A table shall be included on the plan
describing each phase or section with quantitative data,
including the following:
[a] The total area of the development and approximate
area of each phase.
[b] The total area devoted to general and designated uses,
the approximate number of dwelling units, the
percentage of each type of use, and the total floor area
in the development and in each phase.
[c] Floor area information consisting of the following:
[i] Maximum permitted floor area ratio (FAR) for the
subdistrict in which the land development is
proposed.
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:514
[ii] Amount and percentage of permitted building
floor area existing in the subdistrict before the
proposed land development.
[iii] Total gross floor area of the buildings to be
constructed in the land development proposed.
[iv] The total building floor area and the resultant
floor area ratio for the subdistrict after the land
development.
[d] Floor area information for designated uses consisting
of the following:
[i] Maximum permitted designated use FAR for the
subdistrict in which the land development is
proposed.
[ii] Amount and percentage of permitted designated
use building floor area existing in the subdistrict
before the proposed land development.
[iii] Total gross floor area of designated use buildings,
by use, to be constructed in the land development
proposed.
[iv] The total designated use building floor area, by
use, and the resultant floor area ratio for the
subdistrict after the land development.
[e] The area of streets, parking, sidewalks and walkways
and the total area paved and percent of area paved or
covered by structures in the development and each
phase or section.
[f] The total acreage and percent of acreage in open
space for the district as a whole and each subdistrict,
if any.
[g] The calculation of impervious surface in the
development and in each phase.
[14] A written narrative which includes the following (as
applicable):
[a] A description of the ownership of all of the land
included within the subdivision or land development.
[b] An explanation of the purpose of the subdivision or
land development.
[c] Details regarding covenants, grants of easements or
other proposed restrictions to be imposed on the use
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:515
of land, building and structures, including proposed
easements or grants for public use or utilities.
[d] A statement describing the landscape design concept
for the subdivision or land development.
[e] A description of proposals to preserve natural features
and existing amenities.
[f] A statement describing the stormwater management
methods to be employed in the design of the
subdivision or land development.
[g] A reference to the narrative statement shall be made
on the proposed subdivision or land development plan.
[h] Description of the effect of the proposed land
development on the parking plan as described in both
the district plan transportation study and the parking
projections report.
[15] Calculation showing the impact of the proposed land
development on the open space percentage and
impervious surface limits of the UPD and the applicable
subdistrict.
[16] All exterior features and improvements which are being
provided to satisfy accessibility requirements for disabled
individuals under the Americans with Disabilities Act or
any other applicable laws and regulations.
[17] When a development is proposed to be submitted for final
plan approval in phases over a period of years, a
description of the proposed phasing plan shall be included
with the application for preliminary plan approval. The
description shall address:
[a] The phases in which the development will be
submitted for final plan approval and the approximate
date when each phase will be submitted for final plan
approval.
[b] The approximate date when the development and
each phase will be completed.
(b) Graphic information and plan content. The following
information shall be provided:
[1] North point, graphic scale and legend describing all
symbols shown on the plan.
[2] Project area boundaries with dimensions.
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:516
[3] A key map showing the location of the proposed
development, within the UPD and the applicable
subdistrict, roads and all major developments within 2,500
feet thereof at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet.
[4] The day, month and year that the plan was prepared, the
date on which revisions to the plan occur after initial
submission, a description of those revisions and the date of
the zoning permit application.
[5] For any land development area which abuts the perimeter
of the UPD, the names of abutting property owners, their
mailing addresses, tax parcel numbers and deed book and
page numbers where their property listings may be found.
[6] All utility and drainage easements for public utilities or
easements to be dedicated to the public.
[7] Natural features.
[a] Sinkholes, watercourses and depressions.
[b] Floodplain of the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(Also show any floodplain soils.)
[c] Steep slopes as defined by Chapter 175 (Zoning),
§ 175-45 (Slope controls).
[d] Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of two
feet for land with average undisturbed slopes of 4% or
less and at intervals of five feet for land with average
slopes exceeding 4%. The source of topographic data
shall be specified.
[e] Planting areas/beds and landscape features, including
tree masses.
[8] Man-made features on or within 150 feet of the land
development area.
[a] Sewer lines (including laterals).
[b] Water mains and fire hydrants (including laterals).
[c] Electrical lines and poles (surface and subsurface).
[d] Culverts and bridges (type, size and appropriate
slope).
[e] Railroads.
[f] Buildings (including parking lots and plantings).
[g] Streets, including rights-of-way, cartway widths,
approximate grades and bike paths.
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:517
[h] All other utilities (including service entrances).
[i] Street addressing for private third party development.
[9] Proposed development.
[a] Street information including:
[i] Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
[ii] Proposed street names.
[iii] A typical cross section, showing materials for
base and surfacing, and method of construction.
[iv] Profiles along the center line of each proposed
street finished grade at a scale of one inch equals
50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
[v] Radius of horizontal curves.
[vi] Length of tangents between reverse curves.
[vii] Curb radii at intersections.
[viii] Vegetation to be planted between curb or
shoulder and the right-of-way line.
[ix] Curb and gutter locations and typical designs.
[x] Topographic contour lines for proposed finished
grades within rights-of-way at intervals specified
in Subsection F(3)(b)[7][d] above.
[xi] Typical cross section of proposed roads.
[b] Sidewalks, walkways and bike paths, including
location, width, grades, surfacing materials and
locations of ramps for the handicapped.
[c] Yard setback lines as required by the UPD.
[d] Location of streetlights, including required entrance
lights.
[e] Utility and drainage easements.
[f] Location and species of shade trees.
[g] Location and size of utilities.
[h] Location of fire hydrants.
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:518
[i] Location, total ground floor area, total floor area,
height and use of the buildings and other structures.
(All area dimensions shall be indicated in square feet.)
[j] Location, size and height of all proposed signage.
[10] All fire apparatus access lanes as required by Chapter 78
(Fire Lanes) or the Fire Chief.
[11] All outdoor storage facilities such as bulk trash containers
and raw material storage and any screening, if required.
[12] Motor vehicle access to site.
[a] All setbacks required for driveways or property
access.
[b] Driveway throat widths, including radii. (Show vehicle
turning path of largest trucks servicing the site.)
[13]Off-street parking.
[a] Location, including required setbacks.
[b] All required handicapped spaces.
[c] All curbing and raised islands.
[d] Storm drainage systems.
[e] All perimeter plantings such as shrubs, deciduous and
coniferous trees. (Include size and quality of plants
used for headlight screening and proposed methods of
installation.)
[f] Location of all required loading spaces.
[g] Information concerning the installation of landscaping
in the parking lots, including section elevations, plans
and details of all landscaping elements.
[14] Planting beds and landscape features.
[15] A general grading plan showing any major alterations to
the topography of the site.
[16] A stormwater management plan must be prepared in
accordance with Chapter 147 (Stormwater Management).
[17] Traffic impact study.
[a] A traffic impact study shall be submitted to the
Township as part of an application for a land
development plan if:
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:519
[i] The land development plan includes parking
facilities which would generate 100 new vehicle
trips (inbound or outbound) during the peak hour
of vehicular traffic use of the parking facilities; or
[ii] The land development plan includes the addition,
removal or relocation of a street; or
[iii] The proposed development alters the
transportation patterns on a public street
providing vehicular access to the development; or
[iv] For nonuniversity development defined as a
"designated" use, 100 new vehicle trips (inbound
or outbound) are generated during the peak hour
based on trip generation rates from the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual (most recent edition). Trip
rates may also be determined based on research
from existing nearby generators of a similar size
and nature, with documentation of the following
factors:
[A] Development size.
[B] Proposed uses in the development and the
development being observed.
[C] Times, dates and locations of traffic counts
(three days of data should be averaged).
[b] The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a
qualified professional and include the following:
[i] A narrative description of existing conditions and
traffic volumes for the external road network
servicing the development.
[ii] Existing and future level of service analysis which
shall be based on the most recent edition of the
Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209
(published by the Transportation Research Board,
National Research Council), and will include the
following:
[A] Existing conditions. Analysis of current
conditions to allow comparison of actual
conditions modeled in the district plan
transportation study (DPTS).
[B] Future conditions. Analysis of future
conditions without the proposed development
traffic, if the site is not developed, and if only
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:520
previously scheduled improvements are
completed.
[C] Future conditions with site developed.
Analysis of the incremental impact of the
development on traffic conditions and
identification of improvements needed to
mitigate the impacts.
[D] Future conditions with site development and
mitigation in place. Analysis of conditions if
the proposed development is built and
improvements are implemented to mitigate
the impacts.
[E] The study must detail the methods used to
arrive at future traffic projections and must
project traffic impacts at least to the first full
year of operation of the development. If the
proposed development is phased over time,
traffic projections must be prepared for each
phase.
[F] Level of Service D shall be the minimum
acceptable level of service (LOS) for an
intersection approach in the postdevelopment
condition.
[iii] The traffic impact study shall include a narrative
discussion of the need for improvements or
facilities to mitigate impacts which have been
produced by development of the site.
[c] The external road network and intersections to be
analyzed, the peak hours to be included in the analysis
for both general and designated uses and all other
assumptions shall be determined at a scoping meeting
attended by representatives of the applicant, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT),
affected municipalities and the Centre Regional
Planning Commission (CRPC). In order to select the
external road network and intersections to be
analyzed, the intersections analyzed in the district
plan transportation study (DPTS) will be reviewed to
determine which intersections are projected to
operate at Level of Service (LOS) D, E or F. District
plan transportation study intersections that exhibit
LOS E or F will be candidates for inclusion in the
traffic impact study to undergo a more detailed
analysis. District plan transportation study
intersections which exhibit LOS D will also be
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:521
candidates for additional analysis if the delays
projected at the intersection are near the midpoint
between LOS D and E.
[18] Signatures.
[a] Signature(s) and seals(s) of a licensed engineer or
architect who prepared and/or supervised the
preparation of the plan.
[b] Signed, notarized statement by the landowner or
landowner's representative certifying ownership of
the property.
[c] Space for approval signatures by the appropriate
Township officials, including the date of such
approval.
[d] As applicable, a signed, notarized statement by the
owner certifying and acknowledging all offers of
dedication of land or facilities to the Township and
acknowledging that the owner will be responsible for
maintenance of lands or facilities until they are
completed and accepted for dedication by the
Township.
[e] Fire Chief's signature.
[f] Add the following note for the appropriate plan:
[i] Subdivision plans - Approval of this preliminary
plan and the final stormwater management plan
grants the developer the right to construct the
public improvements for this development. Only
after final plan approval can the developer
construct, offer for sale, transfer, agree or enter
into an agreement to sell any lot or unit.
[ii] Land development plans - Preliminary approval
shall not authorize construction or the issuance of
any building or zoning permit.
(4) Contents of final plan. Final plans submitted for review shall
include all information required by submission of a preliminary
plan, plus the following:
(a) Location and elevation of installed monuments and markers, if
any.
(b) Final dimension and bearings of right-of-way lines and
easements, including radii of curves and acres and delta angles
of all curves.
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:522
(c) A final stormwater management plan if required by Chapter
147 (Stormwater Management).
(5) Plan approval and recording. Plan approval and recording shall
occur according to the procedures specified in Chapter 153
(Subdivision and Land Development).
§ 153-50 (RESERVED) § 153-50
123:523
Chapter 158
TAXATION
§ 153-50 PATTON CODE § 153-50
123:524
ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 6-29-1964 by Ord. No. 22]
§ 158-1. Authority. [Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53
P.S. § 6901 et seq.182) and its amendments.
§ 158-2. Definitions.
§ 158-3. Imposition of tax. [Amended 11-20-1974 by Ord. No. 103;
8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 111; 1-6-1986 by Ord. No. 86-209; 4-23-1986
by Ord. No. 86-212; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have for
the purpose of this article the meaning herein indicated:
COLLECTOR — The persons elected or designated by the Township
Supervisors to collect or receive the taxes imposed by this article.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person domiciled in the Township of Patton, Centre
County, Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay a per capita tax.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine, the feminine
and the neuter.
A. There is hereby imposed and levied for general revenue purposes to the
Township, an annual tax of $10 upon each and every resident of the
Township of Patton, who shall have attained the age of 18 years and
who shall not have attained the age of 65 years on or before the first day
of January of the tax year.
B. Effective January 1, 1999, the per capita tax rate shall be reduced to
zero. The regulations in this article shall remain in effect for collection
of per capita taxes due to the Township for 1998 and earlier years,
regardless of the year in which payment, billing, collection or
enforcement takes place. The regulations in this article shall not
require billing, collection or enforcement for taxes due to the Township
for years in which the per capita tax rate is zero. [Added 1-4-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-362]
182. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 158-1 (RESERVED) § 158-4
123:525
§ 158-4. Notice. [Amended 11-20-1974 by Ord. No. 103; 8-12-1975
by Ord. No. 111; 1-6-1986 by Ord. No. 86-209; 4-23-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-212]
On or before the first day of September of any year, the Collector shall send
to every resident of the Township over the age of 18 years and under the
age of 65 years a notice that a per capita tax is due by each resident for
the tax year. Such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the Township;
provided that the failure or omission of the Collector to send or the taxpayer
to receive such notice shall not relieve such person from the payment of
such tax.
§ 158-5. Early payment discount; interest for late payment.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall
be entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax, upon making
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of
the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such
taxes imposed against them for four months after the date of the notice,
shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes
by the Collector and collected by him. The Collector shall furnish a receipt
to every person paying said tax.
§ 158-6. Collection of taxes.
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Collector in the manner authorized by law in the case of
school per capita taxes within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 158-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
111; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
Any person convicted of violating or failing to carry out any provision of
this article, or failing, neglecting or refusing to pay any tax or penalties;
or of attempting to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall be liable to
a fine or penalty not to exceed $600 for each and every offense and the
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees. Such fine and penalty shall
be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this
article. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
§ 158-4 PATTON CODE § 158-7
123:526
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 110; amended in its entirety
11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-534]
§ 158-8. Authority. [Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53
P.S. § 6901 et seq.).
§ 158-9. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act183 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — Person, entity, or authorized representative of the Tax
Officer, appointed as Tax Officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to
collect the tax.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Patton Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person domiciled in the political subdivision levying the tax.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Patton Township.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
183. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 158-8 (RESERVED) § 158-9
123:527
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT — This article.
§ 158-10. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax return and each tax return thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.45%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and with regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 158-9 PATTON CODE § 158-11
123:528
§ 158-11. Exemptions.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 158-12. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
return shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act. Individuals who are no longer employed or whose tax is
withheld in full must file an informational tax return notifying the tax office
that there is no payment due for the specific tax year.
§ 158-12.1. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 158-12.2. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 158-12.3. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 158-12.4. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish an
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
§ 158-11 (RESERVED) § 158-12.4
123:529
enactment shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 158-12.4 PATTON CODE § 158-12.4
123:530
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 4-13-1976 by Ord. No. 144; amended in its entirety
11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-488184]
§ 158-13. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "local services tax."
§ 158-14. Authority.
This article is enacted under authority of Act 511 of 1965, as amended,
known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act."185
§ 158-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
CALENDAR YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31.
COLLECTOR — Person, public employee, public agency, or private agency
designated by governing body of Patton Township to collect and administer
the tax.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation" as determined under Section 303
of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971,"186 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part 1, Subpart B, Article
V (relating to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to individuals on active military service. Employee
business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article
III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. The amount of any housing allowance
provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation,
including self-employed individuals.
EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE — An exemption certificate substantially in the
form of the uniform certificate prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality of less than $12,000 in the calendar year
for which the exemption certificate is filed, which exemption certificate has
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the municipality for the year prior to the calendar
184. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective with respect to the
calendar year 2008 and each year thereafter. See § 158-16.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
186. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 158-13 (RESERVED) § 158-15
123:531
year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
In addition to the income exemptions, provision has been made for certain
military exemptions.
LOCAL SERVICES — Emergency services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; and property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Subchapter F.187
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Patton.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part 1, Subpart B, Article V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside Patton Township.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or otherwise, for which
any earned income and/or net profits are charged and received from
sources within the municipality.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town,
township, school district, vocational school district and county institutional
district.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
TAX — The tax imposed by § 158-16 of this article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by § 158-16 of this
article.
§ 158-16. Levy of tax.
The municipality hereby levies and imposes on every individual engaging
in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the municipality a tax
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm (definition
amended December 9, 2002, P.L. 1364, No. 166).
D.
187. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8581 through 8587.
§ 158-15 PATTON CODE § 158-16
123:532
in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of January 2008
and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter, until modified or
repealed by a subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the municipality.
§ 158-17. Exemptions.
The tax levied by § 158-16 shall not be imposed upon the following persons:
§ 158-18. Collection through employers.
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
calendar year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of
the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United
States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United
States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National
Guard.
C. Any person whose total earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality is less than $12,000 for the calendar
year in which the local services tax is levied.
A. Every employer shall, within 15 days after first becoming an employer,
register with the Collector the employer's name, address and such
other information as the Collector may require. Failure to register in a
timely manner does not relieve the employer of the requirements of this
article.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time during any payroll
period of an employer during the calendar year, each employer shall
deduct a pro rata share of the tax from the earned income payable to
the taxpayer with respect to such payroll period. The pro rata share of
the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a payroll period shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax ($52) levied for the calendar year by the
number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar
year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share of the tax, an
employer shall round down the amount of tax deducted for each payroll
period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar.
C. Each employer shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Collector
and pay the Collector the full amount of all such taxes deducted during
§ 158-16 (RESERVED) § 158-18
123:533
a calendar quarter within 30 days after the end of the calendar quarter.
A tax return must be filed for each calendar quarter, regardless of
whether withholdings were completed or any tax liability exists.
D. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation during the
calendar year shall, within 15 days after discontinuing business or
ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove required and pay the tax
to the Collector.
E. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section or who fails to pay
such tax to the Collector shall be liable for such tax in full, as though the
tax had originally been levied against such employer. No employer shall
be liable for failure to deduct the tax if the failure to deduct the tax
arises from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to the
employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed.
F. Priority of withholding.
(1) The tax shall be withheld at the place of employment on the first
day the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll
period.
(2) In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, i.e.,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the
person working in more than one political subdivision during the
payroll period, the priority to withhold the local services tax shall
be in the following order:
(a) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed.
(b) The political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(c) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
G. The employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate
records concerning the employees in the cases described in § 158-17A,
§ 158-17B and § 158-17C.
(1) It is the intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the
payment of the local services tax in more than one municipality
during each payroll period. No taxpayer shall be required to pay
more than $52 in total during the calendar year. In the case of
concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides:
§ 158-18 PATTON CODE § 158-18
123:534
(a) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes
the name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and
the amount of local services tax withheld; and
(b) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from
the employee's principal employer and the employee will notify
other employers of a change in principal place of employment
within two weeks of its occurrence.
(2) In the case of an employee claiming the exemption set forth at
§ 158-17C, an employer shall refrain from withholding the local
services tax if:
(a) The employee has provided an exemption certificate to the
employer;
(b) The Collector has not otherwise instructed the employer;
(c) The employer has not received notification from the person
who claimed the exemption or from the Collector that the
person has received earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year; and
(d) The employer has not paid to the person earned income within
the municipality an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year.
(3) If a person has claimed exemption from the tax under § 158-17C for
a given calendar year but either a) the employer has received
notification from the person who claimed the exemption or from the
Collector that the person has received earned income and/or net
profits from all sources within the municipality equal to or in excess
of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or b) the
employer has paid to the person earned income within the
municipality an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, then the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year, and the employer shall withhold
from the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification described in (item a) above or for the first payroll
period after payments described in (item b) above have been made,
a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from
the person due to the exemption claimed by the person, plus the
per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of
tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
§ 158-18 (RESERVED) § 158-18
123:535
§ 158-19. Direct payment by taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed and has not filed an exemption
certification with the Collector, or whose tax for any other reason is not
collected under § 158-16 of this article, shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Collector and shall pay a pro rata share of the tax directly
to the Collector within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The
pro rata share of the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall
be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied ($52) for the calendar
year by four.
§ 158-20. Nonresident taxpayers.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the municipality, be subject to the tax and the provisions
of this article.
§ 158-21. Administration and enforcement.
The Collector, on behalf of the municipality, shall collect and receive the
taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article; shall maintain
records showing interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article; and
shall maintain records showing the amounts received and the dates such
amounts were received. The Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms
necessary for the administration of the tax and shall enforce regulations
adopted by the governing body relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration of this article, including, but not limited to, requirements
for collection through employers, requirements for evidence and records,
and provisions for the examination and correction of returns. The Collector
and any designated agents may examine the records of any employer or
supposed employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to
ascertain the tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer
or supposed employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Collector may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with an exemption certificate form at the time of
hiring and prior to the first pay period of each calendar year.
(5) A person seeking exemption from the tax under § 158-17C must
annually file an exemption certificate with the employer and the
Collector.
(6) Each employer within the municipality and each employer located
outside the municipality who engages in business within the
municipality is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax
from each of the employees engaged by the employer and
performing work for the employer within the municipality.
§ 158-18 PATTON CODE § 158-21
123:536
the Collector and any designated agent all means, facilities and opportunity
for the examinations hereby authorized. Any such examination shall be
conducted within this municipality or at the office where the tax return is
processed.
§ 158-22. Suits for collection of tax.
The municipality or it's collector of the tax may collect unpaid taxes from
the taxpayer or employer owing such taxes by suit as provided for by Act
511 of 1965, as amended, know as "The Local Enabling Tax Act".
§ 158-23. Interest and penalties for unpaid tax.
§ 158-24. Violations and penalties.
§ 158-25. Refunds.
A. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and payable on the
date on which the taxpayer is required to file a return, as set forth
hereinbefore, and if the same is not paid on that date, a penalty of 10%
shall be added thereto plus interest at the rate of 0.5% per month of the
unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax
remains unpaid.
B. The failure of a taxpayer to receive a tax return does not relieve his or
her filing or payment responsibility.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section in this article.
A. Any taxpayer or employer who fails, neglects, or refuses to make a
return required; any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register
or to pay the tax deducted from employees or fails, neglects, or refuses
to deduct or withhold the tax from employees; a taxpayer or employer
who refuses to permit the collector to examine the books, records, and
papers; and a taxpayer or employer who knowingly makes any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of tax due in order
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed shall,
upon conviction thereof before the district magistrate be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in
default of said fines and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
30 days.
B. The failure of taxpayer or employer to receive or procure forms
required for filing the required return does not excuse the taxpayer or
employer from the filing requirement.
A. Any person who has overpaid the tax may obtain a refund by making a
written application for a refund to the Collector no later than one
calendar year after payment of the tax or three years after the due date
§ 158-21 (RESERVED) § 158-25
123:537
§ 158-26. Receipt.
The Collector shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment of the tax
upon request by the taxpayer. A stamped, self-addressed envelope shall be
furnished by the taxpayer if a receipt via return mail is desired.
§ 158-27. Applicability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the municipality under the Constitution of the United States and
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 158-28. Duration.
This article shall continue in force from one calendar year to another
without annual reenactment.
§ 158-29. (Reserved)
§ 158-30. (Reserved)
for payment of the tax, whichever is later, and satisfactorily proves
to the Collector that the taxpayer is entitled to the refund. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day
the employer is required to remit the tax to the Collector for the last
quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to
interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. A refund shall be provided
only for an amount overpaid in a calendar year that exceeds $1.
B. Refund requests must be submitted on the form approved by the
Collector. It should be noted that incomplete refund requests will be
deferred until the missing or incomplete information is provided.
Refunds in the deferred status are not subject to the payment of
interest requirement.
§ 158-25 PATTON CODE § 158-30
123:538
ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-11-1987 by Ord. No. 87-217]
§ 158-31. Authority.
This article is adopted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. 6901, et seq., as amended; and
also pursuant to the authority granted by the Act of the General Assembly
of 1986, being Act No. 77, Article XI (d), Section 1101(d).
§ 158-32. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have for the
purpose of this article the meaning herein indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm public utility easements. "Document" shall also include
a declaration or acquisition required to be presented for recording (see
§ 158-38).
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to hunting, fishing,
carping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
§ 158-31 (RESERVED) § 158-32
123:539
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individuals parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal decedents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
REALTY TRANSFER TAX COLLECTOR — The person designated by the
Township to enforce and administer this article.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this commonwealth,
including without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts' from the ownership
or disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on a#n established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
B.
§ 158-32 PATTON CODE § 158-32
123:540
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Patton.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitations, leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
In the case of a bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease or occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsections A and B, the actual
monetary worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 158-32 (RESERVED) § 158-33
123:541
§ 158-33. Imposition of tax.
After the effective date of this article, on every document whereby any
lands, tenements or hereditaments or any interest thereon, lying and being
situate wholly or part within the boundaries of the Township shall be
granted, bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed, a tax for general revenue
purposes is hereby imposed and assessed on each such document at the
rate of 1/2 of 1% on every $100 of the value of the real estate, lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, which is conveyed or
transferred by such document; provided that where any lands, tenements or
hereditaments being situate partly within and partly without the boundaries
of the Township are conveyed, such tax so levied shall be collected on the
valuation of the portion of such lands and tenements lying within the limits
of the Township; provided further that on all transactions where the value
by which the tax is determined involves a figure not divisible by $100, no tax
shall be collected on that part of the value or selling price over and above
the highest even $100 valuation.
§ 158-34. Payment and liability.
§ 158-35. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 158-36. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
or for or in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such
document is written or printed, a tax at the rate of 0.5% of the value of
the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for
recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within
30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. This tax shall apply to the privilege of transferring title to real estate
lying within the Township or any interest thereon as herein defined.
A. The tax imposed by § 158-33 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
§ 158-33 PATTON CODE § 158-36
123:542
of condemnation which conveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
the spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration or property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative or a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the sale property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
§ 158-36 (RESERVED) § 158-36
123:543
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(16) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture.
(17) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
(18) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(19) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
§ 158-36 PATTON CODE § 158-36
123:544
§ 158-37. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided, documents which make, confirm or evidence
any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or
corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 158-38. Acquired company.
(20) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Sections 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954 [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(21) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(22) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(23) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(24) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereon.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation or the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however, effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary disposition, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this resolution.
§ 158-36 (RESERVED) § 158-38
123:545
§ 158-39. Credits against tax.
§ 158-40. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will he exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 158-41. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by an
official stamp imprinted on every document indicating the amount of the
tax paid. The person using said stamp shall write or cause to be written on
the stamp so imprinted the date upon which such stamp is imprinted on the
document.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county.
A. Where there is a transfer of residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of tax due upon
the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 158-38 PATTON CODE § 158-42
123:546
§ 158-42. Duties of Realty Transfer Tax Collector.
The Realty Transfer Tax Collector shall prescribe, prepare and furnish the
rubber stamp required to imprint the payment of the tax imposed and
assessed by this article.
§ 158-43. Authority of Realty Transfer Tax Collector.
The Realty Transfer Tax Collector is hereby charged with the enforcement
of the provisions of this article and is authorized and empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to imprinting the stamp on such document and any other matter or thing
pertaining to administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
article.
§ 158-44. Affidavit required with certain documents.
Every document upon which a tax is imposed by this article and which
does not reflect the actual value of the land, tenements or hereditaments,
or interest therein granted, bargained, sold or conveyed by said document
shall be accompanied by an affidavit executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connecting and setting forth
the true, full, complete and actual value thereof.
§ 158-45. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 158-46. Interest added to unpaid tax.
All taxes imposed by this article not paid when due shall bear interest
thereon at the rate of 1/2% or 1% per month until paid.
§ 158-47. Recovery of taxes and interest.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest from the due date
shall be recovered as other debts of like character are recovered.
A. Make, execute, issue, deliver or accept, or cause to be made, executed,
issued, delivered or accepted, any document without the full amount of
tax thereon being duly paid.
B. Make use of any stamps to denote payment of any tax imposed by this
article without canceling such stamp, as required by this article, or as
prescribed by the Realty Transfer Tax Collector.
C. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with, or violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Realty
Transfer Tax Collector under the provisions of this article.
§ 158-42 (RESERVED) § 158-48
123:547
§ 158-48. Tax constitutes lien against property.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being and
situate, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Township, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest thereon are described in or
conveyed or transferred by the documents which is the subject of such tax
imposed and assessed by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharged by
payment or in accordance with the law. The Solicitor is authorized to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas.
§ 158-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
§ 158-48 PATTON CODE § 158-49
123:548
ARTICLE V
Occupation Assessment Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1990 by Ord. No. 90-258]
§ 158-50. Authority for enactment.
This article is adopted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901, et seq., as amended.
§ 158-51. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Occupation Assessment Tax Ordinance."
§ 158-52. Imposition of tax.
§ 158-53. Amount of tax. [Amended 12-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-318]
§ 158-54. Notice to taxpayers.
On or before the first day of March each year the collector shall send to
every resident of the Township over the age of 18 years a notice that an
occupation assessment tax is due. Such notice shall be on a form prescribed
by the Township; and provided that the failure or omission of the Collector
to send or the taxpayer to receive such notice shall not relieve such person
from the payment of such tax. Said tax shall be due and paid within four
months after the date of the tax notice.
A. For calendar year 1991, and annually thereafter, a tax for the purpose
of providing revenue for general Township expenditures is hereby
levied, assessed and imposed on the occupations of all persons
physically residing within Patton Township, Centre County,
Pennsylvania, at any time during the calendar year and being of the age
of 18 years or older.
B. The regulations in this article shall remain in effect for the collection of
occupation assessment taxes due to the Township for 1998 and earlier
years, regardless of the year in which payment, billing, collection or
enforcement takes place. The regulations in this article shall not
require billing, collection or enforcement for taxes due to the Township
for years in which the occupation assessment tax rate is zero. [Added
1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 99-362]
A. The amount of the occupation assessment tax shall be 450 Mills (45%)
of the occupational assessment as determined by the Centre County
Occupational Assessment list.
B. The amount of the occupation assessment tax shall be reduced to zero
mills [zero percent (0.0%)] effective January 1, 1999. [Added 1-4-1999
by Ord. No. 99-362]
§ 158-50 (RESERVED) § 158-55
123:549
§ 158-55. Discounts.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall
be entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax, upon making
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of
the tax notice.
§ 158-56. Appointment of Collector.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a person or office to collect the
occupation assessment tax. This appointment shall remain in effect until
revised by the Board and shall continue from year to year without further
action required. The position or office thus appointed is referred to as
"Collector" or "Tax Collector" in this article.
§ 158-57. Powers and duties of the Collector.
§ 158-58. Suits for collection. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
Collection of delinquent occupation assessment taxes shall be as provided
for in Section 19 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended (53 P.S. § 6919).
§ 158-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
Any person convicted of violating or failing to carry out any provision of
this article, or failing, neglecting or refusing to pay any tax or penalties
or of attempting to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall be liable to
a fine or penalty not to exceed $600 for each and every offense and the
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees. Such fine and penalty shall
be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this
article. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
or penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the Collector's duty
to keep a record showing the amount received from each resident
paying the tax and the date of such receipt. The collector shall furnish a
receipt to every person paying said tax and requesting a receipt.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and, together with the
governing body of the Township of Patton, or its duly qualified designee,
is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article.
§ 158-55 PATTON CODE § 158-59
123:550
Chapter 163
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 58.
§ 163-1. Purpose.
In order to preserve the beauty of Patton Township and to protect property
owners' single plantings or stands of trees from diseased trees, it is
necessary that best management practices be required to reduce the spread
of Dutch Elm Disease and Oak Wilt.
§ 163-2. Duty of property owners.
A. Dutch Elm Disease. To reduce the spread of Dutch Elm Disease within
existing American elms (Ulmus Americana) and other species of this
genus, it is necessary to reduce the breeding sites for the two beetles
(Scolytus multistriatus marshan and Hylurgopinus rufipes eichoff) that
transport the pathogen which causes Dutch Elm Disease, i.e.,
Ceratostomella ulmi buisman. The major breeding sites for these
beetles are dead and dying elm trees and logs and debris from cut elm
trees.
B. Oak Wilt. To reduce the spread of the fungal pathogen (Ceratocystis
fagacearum) that causes Oak Wilt, it is necessary to reduce the vectors
for transmission by removing infected oak trees (Quercus spp.) and by
disrupting root grafts that will transmit the fungus from infected oak
trees to uninfected oak trees. Infected trees provide sites that produce
spores for the fungus that may be carried to uninfected oak trees by
insects. In addition, it is necessary to regulate the pruning and spiking
of any oak trees which would provide sites that may be easily infected
by insects. Oak species commonly killed by Oak Wilt in the northern
United States include Black Oak (Q. velutina), Bur Oak (Q. macrocarpa),
Northern Pin Oak (Q. ellipsoidalis), Northern Red Oak (Q. rubra),
Chestnut Oak (Q. montana), and White Oak (Q. alba).
A. It shall be the duty of every property owner in the Patton Township to
remove, treat and dispose of or destroy the following trees from their
property in accordance with the best practices recommended by the
Pennsylvania State University, their Extension Service, or the United
States Department of Agriculture.
(1) Dead and dying elm trees.
(2) Oak trees that have Oak Wilt.
§ 158-59 (RESERVED) § 163-2
123:551
§ 163-3. Report of infested or infected trees; removal by owner.
The Township may or, if a resident of Patton Township provides a report in
writing, shall investigate cases of failure to remove a tree or trees suspected
of being infected by a pathogen specified in § 163-1. If it appears that the
tree or trees are infected by a pathogen specified in § 163-1, or otherwise
appear to be dying from a pathogen specified in § 163-1 or has tested
positive for a pathogen specified in § 163-1, the Township shall instruct the
property owner to remove, treat, and dispose of or destroy the infected
tree or trees within 30 days. A property owner providing plant pathology
test results, conducted in accordance with procedures recommended by
the United States Department of Agriculture, showing the tree to be free
from the suspected pathogen shall be relieved of the duty to remove the
suspected tree.
§ 163-4. Testing and removal by Township.
§ 163-5. Transportation of elm logs through the Township.
It shall be unlawful to transport elm logs through, to, or within Patton
Township in an uncovered vehicle from May 1 to September 1 of each year.
B. It shall be the duty of every property owner; and every arborist,
landscaper, utility company, contractor or other vendor providing tree
care services; in the Patton Township to follow these best practices in
limiting the spread of Oak Wilt by:
(1) Not pruning, nor allowing or permitting others to prune, oak trees
between April 1 and October 31 without sealing the pruning cuts
with a commercial tree paint or wound dressing.
(2) Not climbing, nor allowing or permitting others to climb, with boot
spurs or spikes, or the like, any oak tree unless the tree is being
entirely removed.
A. If the owner fails to remove the tree or trees within the specified period
of time, the Township shall employ a qualified person or company to
collect sample(s) for testing, remove, treat, dispose of and/or destroy
the tree or trees. For trees suspected of Oak Wilt infection the Township
shall only proceed to remove, treat, dispose of and/or destroy the tree
after testing of a sample confirms the presence of the fungal pathogen.
B. In such case, the Township shall forthwith, upon completion of the
work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the removal and associated
work to the owner of the property where the infected tree or trees were
located, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or
refusal by the owner of such property to pay said bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien within six months of the date of the
completion of the removal and associated work, the same to be subject
in all respects to the general law provided for the filing and recovery of
municipal liens.
§ 163-2 PATTON CODE § 163-6
123:552
§ 163-6. Storage of infected logs and debris.
Logs and debris from a tree or trees infected by a pathogen specified in
§ 163-1, shall only be stored, stockpiled, or used within Patton Township
in accordance with the best practices recommended by the Pennsylvania
State University, their Extension Service, or the United States Department
of Agriculture (materials available upon request).
§ 163-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 167
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 78.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 149.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 169.
A. A person, firm, association or corporation having the duty to remove,
treat and dispose of or destroy a tree or trees infected by a pathogen
specified in this chapter shall, upon failure to do so within the specified
time period after notice via certified mail, return receipt requested, has
been given by the Township Manager, Zoning Officer, Township
Engineer, Assistant Township Engineer, police officer or Code
Enforcement Officer, be liable to the Township for costs to remove, treat
and dispose of or destroy the tree or trees.
B. Also, a person, firm, association or corporation having the duty to
remove, treat and dispose of or destroy a tree or trees infected by a
pathogen specified in this chapter shall, upon failure to do so within the
specified time period after notice via certified mail, return receipt
requested, has been given by the Township Manager, Zoning Officer,
Township Engineer, Assistant Township Engineer, police officer or Code
Enforcement Officer, shall be found guilty of violating provisions of this
chapter and shall be fined not less than $100 for the first offense and
not less than $500 for any subsequent offenses in any 120-day period
and, upon failure to pay such fine, shall be sentenced to jail for a term
not to exceed 30 days for each offense.
C. A person, firm, association or corporation not following the best
practices in limiting the spread of Oak Wilt by pruning an oak tree
between April 1 and October 31 without sealing the pruning cuts or
climbing any oak tree with boot spurs or spikes, or the like, unless the
tree is being entirely removed, shall be found guilty of violating
provisions of this chapter and shall be fined not less than $100 for the
first offense, and not less than $500 for any subsequent offenses in any
120-day period and, upon failure to pay such fine, shall be sentenced to
jail for a term not to exceed 30 days for each offense.
§ 163-6 (RESERVED) § 163-7
123:553

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 167-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 167-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Patton.
§ 167-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 167-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Board of Supervisors and the Police Department in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in
violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
§ 167-1 (RESERVED) § 167-4
123:555
§ 167-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 167-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections, in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers, or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 167-4 PATTON CODE § 167-6
123:556
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 167-7. Speed limits. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-356]
The speed limit for all streets in the Township is set at 25 miles per
hour except for those streets or parts of streets enumerated in Schedule I
(§ 167-26), attached to and made a part of this chapter, where the speed
limit is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said schedule.
The speed limit for all streets ordained by the Township after the initial
enactment of this § 167-7 shall be enumerated in Schedule I. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 167-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule II (§ 167-27), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 167-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 167-28), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 167-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 167-29), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 167-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 167-30), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 167-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 167-31), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 167-13. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VII (§ 167-32), attached to and
made a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through
§ 167-7 (RESERVED) § 167-13
123:557
streets established by this chapter), are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 167-14. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 167-33), attached to and
made a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through
streets established by this chapter), are hereby established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 167-15. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or
portions thereof, described in Schedule IX (§ 167-34), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on
said streets.
§ 167-16. School speed limits. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-596]
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule X (§ 167-35), in the area described in said Schedule X, on days
that school is in session during the time periods indicated in said Schedule
X.
§ 167-16.1. Vehicle size limits. [Added 6-17-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-509]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a height, width
or length in excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets
or bridges, or portions thereof, described in Schedule XVII (§ 167-42),
attached to and made part of this chapter, in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 212, Official Traffic Control
Devices § 212.117(d).
§ 167-13 PATTON CODE § 167-16.1
123:558
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 167-17. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 167-17.1. Vehicle repair work on streets prohibited. [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-575]
No person shall park or allow to be parked any vehicle on any Township
street for the principal purpose of repairing or providing maintenance to
said vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency when such
repairs would reasonably be expected to take no more than one hour to
make the vehicle operable.
§ 167-18. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XI (§ 167-36), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 167-19. Parking prohibited in handicapped/disabled spaces.
[Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-346]
Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or
severely disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a handicapped or
severely disabled veteran parking placard when such vehicles are being
operated by or for the transportation of a handicapped person or severely
disabled veteran, no person shall park a vehicle on public or private
property reserved for the handicapped person or severely disabled veteran
which property has been so posted. Any person who violates this provision
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $200 nor
less than $50.
§ 167-20. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 167-37), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. Parking prohibited after snowfall. [Amended 12-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-448]
§ 167-17 (RESERVED) § 167-20
123:559
(1) Snow removal zones established. All highways, streets and roads in
the Township shall hereby be designated as “snow removal zones.”
(2) Prohibited parking in snow.
(a) Snow accumulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle, tractor or trailer, or allow same to remain parked
or unattended on the paved or improved portion of any public
highway, street or road in the Township at any time during or
after any snowfall when the depth of such snowfall shall have
reached or exceeded two inches.
(b) Snow emergency. At such time as it may be deemed necessary,
the Township Manager or designee may declare a snow
emergency, requiring that all vehicles be removed from the
streets of the Township until the snowfall has ceased and the
Township Manager or designee has declared the snow
emergency ended. All such snow emergency declarations shall
be provided to local media for public broadcast and
publication.
(c) Re-parking after snow.
[1] It shall be unlawful to re-park any vehicle, tractor or trailer
on the paved or improved portion of any public highway,
street or road in areas otherwise permitted under the law
and the ordinances of the Township until the snowfall has
ceased and the Township Manager or designee has
declared the snow emergency ended.
[2] Where no snow emergency has been declared under
Subsection B(2)(b) above, the prohibition on parking in
Subsection B(2)(a) above shall end 48 hours after a snow
accumulation of two inches or more has occurred.
(3) Report and notice of violation.
(a) Police officers or other designated Township employees,
finding any vehicle parked in violation of § 167-20B(2) above,
may issue a parking violation notice.
(b) The continuation of any violation of Article III for a period of
more than 24 hours shall constitute a new and separate offense
for each successive twenty-four-hour period.
C. Excepting transit vehicles operated by the Centre Area Transit
Authority, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the
streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XVI (§ 167-41), attached
to and made a part of this chapter. [Added 10-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-372]
§ 167-20 PATTON CODE § 167-21
123:560
§ 167-21. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Amended
10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 372]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 167-38), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule.
§ 167-22. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIV (§ 167-39),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 167-23. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XV (§ 167-40), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 167-24. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 9-24-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-346]
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any parking
provision of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 33,
Subchapter E) shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $15 and costs (except as provided in § 167-19); provided, however,
that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement
personnel of the Township to report to the Township Manager or his
designated representative all violations of any provision of this article,
indicating, in each case, the section violated, the license number of the
vehicle involved in the violation, the location where the violation took place
and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police
officer or other person making the report shall also attach to or place
upon every such vehicle (or issue to owner/operator if present) a notice
stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and/or the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. This notice shall contain instructions to the
owner/operator that a response to the Patton Township offices and the
payment of the penalty as specified in this notice, within 72 hours of the
time of the notice, will save the violator from further prosecution and costs.
§ 167-21 (RESERVED) § 167-24
123:561

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 167-25. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 167-25 (RESERVED) § 167-25
123:563

ARTICLE V
Schedules
§ 167-26. Schedule I: Speed Limits. [Amended 3-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-338; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-356]
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-7, speed limits for streets
ordained by the Township after the initial enactment of § 167-7 and for
streets other than those for which the speed limit was set at 25 miles per
hour by the initial enactment of § 167-7 are hereby established upon the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Adler Court [Added 1-30-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-493]
25 Entire length
Alma Mater Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
25 Entire length
Ambleside Court [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-427]
25 Entire length
Barrens Court [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Basin Street [Added 2-24-1999
by Ord. No. 99-364]
25 Entire length
Beaumanor Road [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
25 Entire length
Blackberry Hill [Added
1-3-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-374]
25 Entire length
Bolton Avenue [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
25 Entire length
Brackenbourne Drive [Added
2-26-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-412]
25 Gray's Woods Boulevard to
school entrance
Briar Court [Added 11-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-576]
25 Entire length
Brothers Court [Amended
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
25 Entire length
§ 167-26 (RESERVED) § 167-26
123:565
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Brynwood Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Carnegie Drive [Added
9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-435; amended
3-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-470]
25 Entire length
Chippendale Lane [Added
11-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-382]
25 Entire length
Circleville Road 35 Entire length
Clemson Court [Added
10-11-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-476]
25 Entire length
Colonnade Boulevard [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
25 Entire length
Colonnade Way [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
25 Entire length
Crandall Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Dean's Way [Added 11-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-576]
25 Entire length
Deerbrook Drive 35 Entire length
Doubletree Place 25 Entire length
East Shadow Lane [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Essex Drive [Added 11-8-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-382]
25 Entire length
Fernridge Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
25 Entire length
Forest Glen Circle [Added
2-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-386; amended
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
25 Entire length
§ 167-26 PATTON CODE § 167-26
123:566
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Fox Hill Road 35 Entire length
Fox Hollow Road 35 Entire length
Garret Way [Added 3-26-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-554]
25 Entire length
Ghaner Drive [Added
4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-387]
25 Beginning at a point 740
feet west of the
intersection with Carnegie
Drive and ending 1,114
feet west of beginning
point
Ghaner Drive [Added 9-8-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-435]
25 From Ghaner Road to a
point 1,200 northeasterly
thereof
Ghaner Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
25 Entire length
Gibson Place [Added 1-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-451]
25 Entire length
Glenndale Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Gray's Woods Boulevard
[Amended 10-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-371; 2-26-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-412; 3-26-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-554]
35 Entire length
Greenmeadow Lane [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383; amended 1-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-451]
25 Entire length
Hawbaker Industrial Drive
[Added 2-24-1999 by Ord. No.
99-364]
35 Entire length
Hemlock Hill Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Honors Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-466; amended
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
25 Entire length
§ 167-26 (RESERVED) § 167-26
123:567
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Hunter Wood Way [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
25 Entire length
Julian Pike [Added 10-13-1999
by Ord. No. 99-371]
35 From Buffalo Run Road
(SR 0550) to Patton/
Huston Township
boundary
Kensington Drive [Added
10-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-371]
25 Entire length
Lowe's Boulevard [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-381; 2-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-398; repealed
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
Manhasset Court [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-397]
25 Entire length
Manhasset Drive [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-385; amended
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-397]
25 Entire length
Martin Street [Added
3-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-470]
25 Entire length
McKivison Court [Added
11-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-489]
25 Entire length
Meeks Lane 35 Entire length
Michael Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-397]
25 Entire length
Montauk Circle [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-385]
25 Entire length
North Allen Street [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
25 From Clearview Avenue to
Bolton Avenue
Overfield Circle 25 From Skytop Lane for
entire length
§ 167-26 PATTON CODE § 167-26
123:568
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Pantops Parade [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398; amended
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-466]
25 Entire length
Paul Joseph Drive [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
25 Entire length
Pin Oak Road [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
25 Entire length
Pleasant Hill Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Presidents Drive [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
25 Entire length
Red Alder Road [Added
2-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-386]
25 Entire length
Rhapsody Drive [Added
11-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-382]
25 Entire length
Sandy Ridge Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
Scarlet Oak Circle [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
25 Entire length
School Drive [Added 6-17-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-568]
25 Entire length
Scotia Road 35 Entire length
Sellers Lane 35 Entire length
Skytop Lane [Amended
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383; 2-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-398]
25 Entire length
Spring Glen Place [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
25 Entire length
§ 167-26 (RESERVED) § 167-26
123:569
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Stonehouse Circle [Added
10-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-515]
25 Entire length
Stoney Point Drive [Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-444]
25 Entire length
Thorndale Road 25 From Cherrywood Road to
Doubletree Place
Timberton Circle [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
25 Entire length
Toftrees Avenue [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-452]
35 From Fox Hollow Road to
3,526 feet west of said
road
Toftrees Avenue [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-453]
35 Waddle Road to 3,526 feet
west of Fox Hollow Road
Tradition Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-466; amended
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
25 Entire length
Valley Vista Drive 35 Entire length
Varsity Lane [Added 2-28-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-480]
25 Entire length
Victory Boulevard [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
25 Entire length
Waddle Road 35 From Oakwood Boulevard
to Toftrees Avenue
Welty Lane [Added 2-13-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-398]
25 Entire length
Westminster Court [Added
3-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-375]
25 Entire length
Whisper Ridge Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
25 Entire length
White Birch Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
25 Entire length
§ 167-26 PATTON CODE § 167-26
123:570
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Woodledge Drive [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511; 11-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-576]
25 Entire length
§ 167-27. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-8, traffic control signals shall be
installed and operated at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Fox Hollow Road and Toftrees Avenue [Added 1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-452]
Lowe's Boulevard and Colonnade Way [Added 2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
North Atherton Street and Colonnade Way [Added 2-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-398]
North Atherton Street and Lowe's Boulevard [Added 2-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-398]
North Atherton Street and Patriot Lane [Added 3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
North Atherton Street and Vairo Boulevard
North Atherton Street and Valley Vista Drive
North Atherton Street and Woodycrest Street
Vairo Boulevard and North Atherton Place Driveway
Waddle Road and Lowe's Boulevard
§ 167-28. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-9, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street onto another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn
on Red Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 167-29. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-10, no driver of any vehicle
shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following
intersections:
§ 167-26 (RESERVED) § 167-29
123:571
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Park Forest
Avenue
[Added
11-2-2016
by Ord. No.
2016-576]
Northeast Left All North Atherton
Street
§ 167-30. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-11, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Location
Toftrees Avenue [Added 1-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-452]
Median opening at 955 Toftrees
Avenue
§ 167-31. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-12, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Green Tech Drive cul-de-sac Counter-clockwise
Hemlock Hill Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-554]
North (Between Fox Hill Road and
Scarlet Oak Circle)
§ 167-32. Schedule VII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-13, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Alma Mater Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
East Varsity Lane
Alma Mater Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
West Toftrees Avenue
Ambleside Court [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-427]
East Skytop Lane
Amblewood Way North Galen Drive
§ 167-29 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:572
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Amblewood Way West Valley Vista Drive
Ashwood Place East Pinewood Place
Asper Way North North Oak Lane
Asper Way South Norwood Lane
Barrens Court [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
West Brynwood Drive
Basin Street [Added 2-24-1999
by Ord. No. 99-364]
East Stevenson Road
Beaumanor Road [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
East Toftrees Avenue
Belmont Circle South Melissa Lane
Bellevue Circle East Canterbury Drive
Berkshire Drive (western
terminus)
North Devonshire Drive
Blackberry Hill [Added
1-3-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-374]
East Meeks Lane
Bolton Avenue [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
East North Allen Street
Bolton Avenue [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
West North Allen Street
Briar Court [Added 11-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-576]
Northeast Meeks Lane
Briarwood Lane East Highland Drive
Briarwood Lane West Westgate Drive
Brittany Drive South Devonshire Drive
Brittany Drive East Sierra Lane
Brothers Court [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
North Skytop Lane
Brothers Court [Added
2-11-1998 by Ord. No.
98-356]
West Skytop Lane
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:573
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Brynwood Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
South Gray's Woods Boulevard
Camelot Lane East Oakley Drive
Camelot Lane South Canterbury Drive
Candlewood Drive (south end) East Canterbury Drive
Canterbury Drive North Douglas Drive
Canterbury Drive North Melissa Lane
Canterbury Drive South Candlewood Drive
Canterbury Drive South Devonshire Drive
Canterbury Drive South Oakley Drive
Carnegie Drive Both Valley Vista Drive
Carnegie Drive South Galen Drive
Carnegie Drive [Added
9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-435]
25 Ghaner Drive
Carogin Drive North Circleville Road
Chateaux Circle North Leawood Lane
Cherrywood Road North Gray's Woods Boulevard
Cherrywood Road South Thorndale Road
Chippendale Lane [Added
11-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-382]
North Rhapsody Lane
Circleville Road North Scotia Road
Clearview Avenue Both Waddle Road
Clearview Avenue Both North Allen Street
Clearview Avenue [Repealed
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554; 11-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-576]
Clearview Avenue North Oakwood Avenue
Clemson Court [Added
10-11-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-476]
North Carnegie Drive
Colgate Court North Rose Drive
Cornwall Road East Park Lane
Cornwall Road North Sierra Lane
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:574
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Coventry Lane West Woodledge Drive
Crandall Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
South Circleville Road
Crandall Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
West Sandy Ridge Road
Cricklewood Circle (eastern
terminus)
North Cricklewood Drive
Cricklewood Circle (western
terminus)
North Cricklewood Drive
Cricklewood Drive East Fox Hollow Road
Cricklewood Drive [Added
1-21-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-421]
South Toftrees Avenue
Dean's Way [Added 11-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-576]
South Toftrees Avenue
Deerbrook Drive North Buffalo Run Road
Devonshire Drive East Berkshire Drive (western
terminus)
Devonshire Drive West Berkshire Drive (western
terminus)
Devonshire Drive West Brittany Drive
Devonshire Drive West Valley Vista Drive
Douglas Drive Both North Oak Lane
Douglas Drive East North Atherton Street
Driftwood Drive East Carnegie Drive
Earl Drive East Brittany Drive
East Shadow Lane [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
East Sandy Ridge Road
East Springwood Place West Deerbrook Drive
East Willowood Court West Deerbrook Drive
Eastwood Lane North Fairwood Lane
Eastwood Lane South North Oak Lane
Essex Drive [Added 11-8-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-382]
South Rhapsody Lane
Exeter Court West Melissa Lane
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:575
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Fairwood Lane East North Atherton Street
Fairwood Lane North Douglas Drive
Fenwick Drive East Rose Drive
Fernridge Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
West Skytop Lane
Fifth Avenue East Lauck Street
Forest Glen Circle [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
East Pin Oak Road
Galen Drive Both North Oak Lane
Galen Drive East North Atherton Street
Galen Drive South Amblewood Way
Garret Way [Added 3-26-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-554]
North Brynwood Drive
Garret Way [Added 3-26-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-554]
South Glenndale Drive
Ghaner Drive [Added 9-8-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-435]
West Carnegie Drive
Ghaner Road East Carnegie Drive
Ghaner Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
East Ghaner Drive
Ghaner Road South Valley Vista Drive
Ghaner Road West Scotia Road
Gibson Place [Added 1-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-451]
East Spring Glenn Place
Gibson Place [Added 1-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-451]
West Spring Glenn Place
Glenndale Drive [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
East Brynwood Drive
Gray's Woods Boulevard
[Repealed 11-6-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-402]
Gray's Woods Boulevard [Added
10-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-371; Repealed 11-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-402]
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:576
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Greenmeadow Lane [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
East Pin Oak Road
Greenmeadow Lane [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
West Pin Oak Road
Green Tech Drive North Valley Vista Spur
Hampshire Circle South Wiltshire Drive
Hampton Court North Cricklewood Drive
Harvard Road Both North Atherton Street
Hawbaker Industrial Drive
[Added 3-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-470]
West Entire length, including all
of cul-de-sac
Heiskel Drive North Skytop Lane
Heiskel Drive West Meeks Lane
Highland Drive East Sierra Lane
Highland Drive North North Oak Lane
Hillside Avenue North Douglas Drive
Hillside Avenue West Fairwood Lane
Honors Lane [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
South Presidents Drive
Honors Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-466]
West Tradition Lane
Julian Pike Both Buffalo Run Road
Kensington Drive [Added
10-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-371]
West Julian Pike
Kristina Circle East Fillmore Road
Kristina Circle South Kristina Circle/Windtryst
Avenue intersection
Lanceshire Lane (eastern
terminus)
South Brittany Drive
Lanceshire Lane (western
terminus)
West Brittany Drive
Lauck Street Both Strouse Avenue
Lauck Street South Clearview Avenue
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:577
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Laurel Lane North North Oak Lane
Laurel Lane South Park Forest Avenue
Leawood Lane East Oakley Drive
Leawood Lane West Camelot Lane
Longbarn Road East Devonshire Drive
Longbarn Road South Devonshire Drive
Longbarn Road North Stoneledge Road
Manhasset Court [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-397]
South Michael Road
Manhasset Drive [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-385]
North Michael Road
Manhasset Drive [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-397]
North Michael Road (eastern)
Mattern Lane South Buffalo Run Road
Mattern Lane East North Atherton Street
McKivison Court [Added
11-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-489]
South Carnegie Drive
Meeks Lane [Added 11-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-402]
East Gray's Woods Boulevard
Meeks Lane North Buffalo Run Road
Meeks Lane South Scotia Road
Meeks Lane [Added 11-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-402]
West Gray's Woods Boulevard
Melissa Lane South Devonshire Drive
Michael Road West Stevenson Road
Montauk Circle [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-385]
North Manhasset Drive
Montauk Circle [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-385]
West Manhasset Drive
Morningside Circle West Oakley Drive
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:578
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
North Allen Street [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
North East Clearview Avenue
North Allen Street South Clearview Avenue
North Allen Street West Pickwick Avenue
North Barkway Lane South Cricklewood Drive
North Oak Lane Both Douglas Drive
North Oak Lane South Park Forest Avenue
North Oak Lane West Galen Drive
North Springwood Place South East Springwood Place
Norwood Lane South Park Forest Avenue
Norwood Lane North North Oak Lane
Oakley Drive Both Canterbury Drive
Oakley Drive North Douglas Drive
Oakley Drive West Valley Vista Drive
Oakwood Avenue South Oakwood Avenue
Oakwood Avenue West Waddle Road
Old Farm Lane North Devonshire Drive
Overfield Circle [Added
2-11-1998 by Ord. No.
98-356]
West Skytop Lane
Pantops Parade [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
North Blackberry Hill
Park Forest Avenue East North Atherton Street
Park Forest Avenue North North Oak Lane
Park Lane North Park Forest Avenue
Patton Lane East North Atherton Street
Patton Lane West North Oak Lane
Paul Joseph Drive [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
North Sellers Lane
Picadilly Road South Buffalo Run Road
Pickwick Avenue North Oakwood Avenue
Pinewood Place South Gray's Woods Boulevard
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:579
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pin Oak Road [Added
12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-383]
South Gray's Woods Boulevard
Pleasant Hill Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
North Fox Hill Road
Pleasant Hill Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
South Hemlock Hill Road
Portsmouth Road South Stoneledge Road
Portsmouth Road East Brittany Drive
Presidents Drive [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
North Toftrees Avenue
Red Alder Road [Added
2-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-386]
East Gray's Woods Boulevard
Red Alder Road [Added
2-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-386]
West Forest Glen Circle
Regina Circle North Fox Hill Road
Rhapsody Drive [Added
11-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-382]
West Upper Julian Pike
Rose Drive North Picadilly Road
Rose Drive South Buffalo Run Road
Sandy Ridge East Valley Vista Drive
Sandy Ridge Road [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
North Valley Vista Drive
Saraway East Skytop Lane
Scarlet Oak Circle [Added
3-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-554]
South Hemlock Hill Road
School Drive [Amended
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-568]
North Amblewood Way
School Drive [Amended
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-568]
South Douglas Drive
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:580
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Scotia Road [Added 8-21-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-601]
East Circleville Road
Scotia Road East North Atherton Street
Scotia Road [Added 11-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-402]
North Gray's Woods Boulevard
Scotia Road [Added 8-21-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-601]
West Circleville Road
Sellers Lane East North Atherton Street
Sellers Lane West Meeks Lane
Service Road A South North Atherton Street
Severn Drive South Melissa Lane
Seymore Avenue North North Allen Street
Seymore Avenue West Waddle Road
Shadow Lane West Circleville Road
Shannon Lane West Park Lane
Sierra Lane East Park Lane
Sierra Lane North Park Forest Avenue
Skytop Lane [Added 2-13-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-398]
North North Atherton Street
Skytop Lane (right turn keep
moving)
West Heiskel Drive
South Barkway Lane North Cricklewood Drive
Spring Glenn Place [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
South Gray's Woods Boulevard
Stevenson Road North Buffalo Run Road
Stevenson Road South North Atherton Street
Stonecliffe Place South Deerbrook Drive
Stonehouse Circle [Added
10-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-515]
West Meeks Lane
Stoneledge Road West Longbarn Road
Stoneledge Road West Melissa Lane
Stoney Point Drive [Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-444]
West Buffalo Run Road
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:581
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Strouse Avenue [Added
3-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-375]
Both Lauck Street
Strouse Avenue East Waddle Road
Strouse Avenue West Woodycrest Street
Surrey Lane East Cornwall Road
Surrey Lane West Wiltshire Drive
Sylvan Circle West North Oak Lane
Teaberry Circle East Canterbury Drive
Thorndale Road [Added
3-12-1997 by Ord. No.
97-338]
West Doubletree Place
Timberton Circle [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
North Buffalo Run Road
Tionesta Court East Melissa Lane
Toftrees Avenue (eastern stop)
[Repealed 1-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-421]
Toftrees Avenue (western stop)
[Repealed 1-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-421]
Tradition Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
South Honors Lane
Tradition Lane [Added
1-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-466]
South Presidents Drive
Vairo Boulevard North Oakwood Avenue
Vairo Boulevard West Waddle Road
Varsity Lane [Added 2-28-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-480]
North Presidents Drive
Victory Boulevard [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
East Woodledge Drive
Waddle Road Both Toftrees Avenue (includes
Right Turn Keep Moving
sign)
Waddle Road South Clearview Avenue
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-32
123:582
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Waddle Road South Vairo Boulevard (includes
Right Turn Keep Moving
sign)
Wayland Place East Park Lane
Weaver Street Both Strouse Avenue
Weaver Street South Clearview Avenue
Welty Road [Added 2-13-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-398]
West Ghaner Road
Westgate Drive North North Oak Lane
Westgate Drive South Earl Drive
West Hillside Avenue South Douglas Drive
West Hillside Avenue West North Oak Lane
Westminster Court [Added
3-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-375]
North Oakwood Avenue
West Willowood Court East Deerbrook Drive
Weymouth Circle North Sylvan Circle
Whisper Ridge Drive [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-480]
South Ghaner Road
White Birch Road [Added
2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-398]
North Forest Glen Circle
White Birch Road South Gray's Woods Boulevard
Whitepine Place North Gray's Woods Boulevard
Whitepine Place South Thorndale Road
Wildernest Lane South Skytop Lane
Wilts Lane North Cricklewood Drive
Wiltshire Drive North Sierra Lane
Windfield Court South Deerbrook Drive
Windtryst Avenue North Kristina Circle
Wooded Way South Shadow Lane
Woodledge Circle Northeast Woodledge Drive
Woodledge Drive [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
North Beaumanor Road
Woodledge Drive North Cricklewood Drive
§ 167-32 (RESERVED) § 167-32
123:583
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Woodledge Drive [Added
8-19-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-511]
South Beaumanor Road
Woodledge Drive [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
Southwest Dean's Way
Woodycrest Street Both Clearview Avenue
§ 167-33. Schedule VIII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-14, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Blackbourne Drive [Added
2-26-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-412]
North Roundabout at Gray's
Woods Boulevard
Gray's Woods Boulevard [Added
2-26-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-412]
West Roundabout at
Brackenbourne Drive
Hunter Wood Way [Added
1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-451]
South Gray's Woods Boulevard
roundabout
Park Forest Avenue South North Atherton Street
§ 167-34. Schedule IX: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-15, gross weight limits are
hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets, bridges or portions
thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Max. Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
(Reserved)
§ 167-32 PATTON CODE § 167-35
123:584
§ 167-35. Schedule X: School Speed Limits. [Amended6-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-568; 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-576; 9-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-596]
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-16, no person shall drive a
vehicle in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated
below, during the time periods listed below for each school on days that
school is in session.
A. Time periods for school speed limits.
Name of School Time Period
Park Forest Elementary and Middle
Schools
7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 4:15 p.m.
Gray's Woods Elementary School 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m.
2:45 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
B. Locations and maximum speed for school speed limits.
Name of Street Speed
Limit
(mph)
School Location
Amblewood Way 15 Park Forest From a point 550 feet
west of the Park Forest
Elementary School exit
drive to a point 300
feet east
Brackenbourne
Drive
15 Gray's
Woods
From Gray's Woods
Boulevard to the
Gray's Woods
Elementary School
entrance drive
Douglas Drive 15 Park Forest From School Drive to a
point 325 feet east and
west thereof
Gray's Woods
Boulevard
15 Gray's
Woods
From a point 1,000
feet west of the Gray's
Woods Elementary
School exit drive to a
point 300 feet east
Hunter Wood Way 15 Gray's
Woods
From Gray's Woods
Boulevard to a point
300 feet north
School Drive 15 Park Forest Entire length
§ 167-35 (RESERVED) § 167-36
123:585
§ 167-36. Schedule XI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-18, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 167-37. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-20, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Adler Court [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
Both Entire length
Alder Court [Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-414]
Both From East Clearview Avenue to
278 feet east of East Clearview
Avenue
Amblewood Way [Added
9-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-512]
West From Valley Vista Drive to Galen
Drive
Bolton Avenue [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
Both Entire length
Carnegie Drive [Added
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-567]
East From 175 feet north of Galen
Drive to 120 feet north of Galen
Drive
Carnegie Drive [Added
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-567]
East From 100 feet south of Valley
Vista Drive to 277 feet north of
Galen Drive
Carnegie Drive [Added
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-567]
West From Valley Vista Drive to 116
feet of north of Galen Drive
Clearview Avenue Both From Woodycrest Street to North
Allen Street
Douglas Drive Both From North Atherton Street to
Hillside Avenue
Galen Drive [Amended
9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-461]
Both From North Atherton Street
westerly to a point 245 feet west
of Amblewood Way
§ 167-36 PATTON CODE § 167-37
123:586
Name of Street Side Location
Marjorie Mae Street [Added
10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
96-332]
West From Patton Township-Ferguson
Township boundary to beginning
of cul-de-sac
North Allen Street [Added
1-30-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-493]
Both From Clearview Avenue to Bolton
Avenue
Oakwood Avenue North From East Clearview Avenue to
Pickwick Avenue
Oakwood Avenue [Added
10-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-372]
Inside of
loop
From East Clearview Avenue to
120 feet east of East Clearview
Avenue
Oakwood Avenue [Added
10-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-371; amended
10-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-372]
Inside of
loop
From 120 feet southwest of Vairo
Boulevard to 180 feet north of
Vairo Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue [Added
10-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-372]
Inside of
loop
From 340 feet north of Vairo
Boulevard to 900 feet north of
Vairo Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue [Added
10-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-372]
Outside
of loop
From 60 feet west of East
Clearview Avenue to 150 feet
south of Vairo Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue [Added
6-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-377]
Outside
of loop
From 150 feet east of Pickwick
Avenue to 120 feet west of
Westminster Avenue
Oakwood Avenue [Added
10-27-2000 by Ord. No.
99-372]
Outside
of loop
From 150 feet north of Vairo
Boulevard to 900 feet north of
Vairo Boulevard
Park Forest Avenue North From North Atherton Street to
Boal Alley
Park Forest Avenue South From North Atherton Street to
North Oak Lane
Patton Lane Both From North Atherton Street to
North Oak Lane
School Drive [Added
6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-568]
Both From Amblewood Way to a point
180 feet north 0f Douglas Drive
Sellers Lane [Added
11-19-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-561]
Both From North Atherton Street to
500 feet southwest of North
Atherton Street
Strouse Avenue Both From Lauck Street to Woodycrest
Street
§ 167-37 (RESERVED) § 167-37
123:587
Name of Street Side Location
Toftrees Avenue [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
North From Cricklewood Drive to 62
feet west of Cricklewood Drive
Toftrees Avenue [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
North From 81 feet west of Cricklewood
Drive to 110 feet west of
Cricklewood Drive
Toftrees Avenue [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
North From 149 feet west of
Cricklewood Drive to 175 feet
west of Cricklewood Drive
Toftrees Avenue [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
South From the entrance to Turtle
Creek 60 feet east
Toftrees Avenue [Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-576]
South From the entrance to Turtle
Creek 61 feet west
Valley Vista Drive Both From North Atherton Street to
Ferguson Township Line
Waddle Road Both From Clearview Avenue to U.S.
322 bypass
Woodycrest Street Both From Clearview Avenue to North
Atherton Street
§ 167-38. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-372]
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-21, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified below of any day upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Oakwood Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From intersection of
Oakwood Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue and
Pickwick Avenue
Oakwood Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 900 feet north of Vairo
Boulevard to intersection of
Oakwood Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue
Oakwood Avenue Inside of
loop
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 120 feet east of East
Clearview Avenue to 120 feet
southwest of Vairo Boulevard
Oakwood Avenue Outside of
loop
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Pickwick Avenue to 60
feet west of East Clearview
Avenue
§ 167-37 PATTON CODE § 167-38
123:588
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Oakwood Avenue
[Added
6-14-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-377]
Outside of
loop
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 150 feet east of
Pickwick Avenue to 300 feet
west of East Clearview
Avenue
§ 167-39. Schedule XIV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-22, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described below, between the hours specified, for longer than the time
indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Amblewood Way
[Added 6-17-2009
by Ord. No.
2009-508]
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.; All
except nonschool
days as
defined by
State College
Area School
District
From Galen Drive to
School Drive
Park Forest Avenue
[Amended
10-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-333]
West 15 mins.; All
except Sunday
From Boal Alley to North
Oak Lane
§ 167-40. Schedule XV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-23, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Amblewood Way Both 7:45 to 8:15
a.m. 3:00 to
3:30 p.m.
From the Park Forest
Junior High School
driveway to a point 120
feet east and 130 feet west
thereof
North Atherton
Street
South All From Park Forest Avenue
to the stoplight at
Woodycrest Street
§ 167-38 (RESERVED) § 167-41
123:589
§ 167-41. Schedule XVI: Bus Only Parking. [Added 10-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-372]
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-20C, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time excepting transit vehicles operated by the Centre Area
Transit Authority upon any of the described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Oakwood Avenue Inside of
loop
From 180 feet north of Vairo
Boulevard to 340 feet north of Vairo
Boulevard
§ 167-42. Schedule XVII: Vehicle Size Limits. [Added 6-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-509]
In accordance with the provisions of § 167-16.1:
Name of Street Limitation
Limit
(feet) Location
East Clearview
Avenue
Length 30 From Woodycrest Street to
Waddle Road
West Clearview
Avenue [Added
7-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-510]
Length 30 From Woodycrest Street to
Waddle Road
§ 167-41 PATTON CODE § 167-42
123:590
Chapter 169
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 92.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGINE-POWERED VEHICLES — Includes all wheeled and belt-driven
vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, including, but not limited
to motorcycles, motorbikes, trail bikes, motor scooters, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles, etc., but shall not be construed to include properly licensed
motor vehicles operated upon the public highways, streets, roads and
private driveways in accordance with law; agricultural equipment used in
the course of farming or commercial equipment being properly used in the
trade or business of the owner or by such owners' employees or agents.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Includes all houses, apartments, manufactured
homes and other permanent structures occupied by one or more persons
as their primary home and residence, but shall not include the "private
residence" (as defined herein) of the owner or operator of any enginepowered
vehicle operated upon the land of such owner.[Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
OFFICER — Any designated official authorized to act within Patton
Township.
§ 169-2. Operation of engine-powered vehicles.
A. On and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate, cause to be operated or to participate in the
operation of any engine-powered vehicle upon the public roads, streets,
highways, sidewalks or alleys situate within the Township of Patton.
B. On and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate, cause to be operated or to participate in the
operation of any engine-powered vehicle within 1,500 feet of any
private residence or church situate in the Township of Patton without
first obtaining permission of the owner or inhabitants of such private
residence or church. If permission is granted for the operation of an
engine-powered vehicle on private property, such operation shall not
take place within 1,500 feet of an adjacent residence or church without
approval of the inhabitants of those contiguous facilities. This section
shall not prohibit the use of engine-powered vehicles in other areas of
§ 167-42 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 169-2
169:591
§ 169-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-442]
Any person, firm, association or corporation who or which shall violate or
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding commenced before a magisterial
district judge pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures,
be sentenced to a fine of not less than $35, nor more than $1,000, plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days.
§ 169-4. Permit for special exceptions.
The Township Manager shall, upon cause being shown and where specific
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may cause undue hardship,
issue a permit for specific and limited use of engine-powered vehicles.
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, and set forth the name
and address of the applicant and the nature of the hardship.
the Township when such use is either incidental to demonstration for
sale by a commercial vendor, incidental to moving or transporting the
vehicles to or from a private residence and confined to the operator's
private residence or attendant to operation in a public park or public
right-of-way where such use is expressly authorized or permitted.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of
power mowers, garden tractors, snow blowers or similar instruments or
vehicles when such use is incidental to home, lawn or garden work or
maintenance.
C. On and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful to operate an
engine-powered vehicle anywhere within the Township of Patton unless
that vehicle is equipped with a United States Department of Agriculture
or Forestry Service approved spark-arrestor type muffler in good
working order and permanently attached to the vehicle exhaust system
to prevent excessive noise.
§ 169-2 PATTON CODE § 169-4
169:592
Chapter 172
(RESERVED)
Chapter 175
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Centre Regional Planning Commission — See
Ch. 4, Art. I.
Official Map — See Ch. 28.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Junkyards — See Ch. 92.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 103.
Open space and recreation areas — See Ch.
110.
Parks — See Ch. 112.
Signs — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
153.
§ 169-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 169-4
169:593

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Short title.188
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Patton, Centre County, Pennsylvania."
§ 175-2. General intent. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
The provisions of this chapter shall be designed:
§ 175-3. Establishment of controls.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports and
national defense facilities; the provisions of adequate light and air;
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space; transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational
facilities, public grounds; the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate
water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use
and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural,
scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography,
soil type and classification and present use.
D. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements,
manufactured homes and manufactured home parks; provided,
however, that no zoning ordinance shall be deemed invalid for the
failure to provide for any other specific dwelling type. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
E. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
A. Minimum and uniform regulations. The regulations set by this chapter
within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
188. Editor's Note: Former Section 101.1, Long title, was deleted 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-3
169:595
§ 175-4. Establishment of districts.
B. For new uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date of
this chapter, any new building or other structure or any tract of land
shall be constructed, developed and used only in accordance with the
regulations specified for each district.
C. For existing uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date
of this chapter, any lawfully existing building or other structure or any
tract of land which is not in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which it is located shall be deemed as nonconforming and
subject to the regulations of Article X. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-330]
D. Types of control. The following minimum and uniform regulations shall
apply in the respective districts: use regulations, including uses by right
and accessory uses and uses by special permit; area and bulk
regulations, including required front, side and rear yards, maximum
permitted height and allowable lot coverage and floor-area ratio
requirements in those districts in which they apply; off-street parking
and loading regulations; and sign regulations.
A. Types of districts. For the purpose of this chapter the Township is
hereby divided into the following districts: [Amended 8-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-330; 10-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-369; 10-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-379; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-438; 7-19-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-471; 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4820;
5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
General Districts:
R-1 Rural Residence District
R-2 Low-Density Residence District
R-3 Medium-Density Residence District
R-M Manufactured Home Residence District
R-MHP Manufactured Home Park
C-1 General Commercial District
C-2 Planned Commercial District
PAD Planned Airport District
PC Planned Community District
OB Office Buffer District
OBD2 Office Buffer District 2
C-T Commercial Transitional District
Conservation Districts:
A-1 Rural District
NR-1 Natural Resource District
§ 175-3 PATTON CODE § 175-4
169:596
§ 175-5. The Zoning Use District Map.189
§ 175-6. Definitions; interpretations of regulations.
Conservation Districts:
NR-2 Natural Resource and Recycling District
FP-1 Floodplain District
I-1 Industrial District
I-RD Research, Development and Light Industry District
UD University District
B. Lot sizes. Any lot as well as the open spaces reserved on it, must equal,
or exceed, the minimum sizes prescribed by this chapter for the district
in which the lot is included.
A. Adoption of Zoning Map. The areas within the Township as assigned to
each district and the location of boundaries of the districts established
by this chapter are shown on the Zoning Map which is declared to be a
part of this chapter and shall be kept on file with the Township
Secretary. If, and whenever, changes are made in boundaries or other
matter included on said Zoning Map, such changes in the map shall be
made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
Township Supervisors.
B. District boundary lines. The district boundary lines shall be as shown on
the Zoning Map. District boundary lines are intended to coincide with
lot lines, center lines of streets, the corporate boundary of the Township
or as dimensioned on the map. In case of doubt or disagreement
concerning the exact location of the boundary line, the determination of
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Article XII shall prevail.
A. Language interpretations. For the purpose of this chapter, certain
words shall have the meanings assigned to them as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
(2) The word "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
(3) The word "building" includes "structure" and any part thereof.
(4) The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for."
(5) The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association or any other similar entity.
189. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:597
(6) The word "includes or including" shall not limit the term to the
specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given in this section as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building and is used for
an accessory use and is located on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE OR ACCESSORY — A use conducted on the same lot
as a principal use to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental
to and customarily found in connection with a particular principal use.
ACCESS POINT — The point of entering and exiting a development
site from a designated public street.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign" and "billboard."
AGRICULTURE (within The Planned Airport District) — The use of land
for agricultural purposes, including farming, horticulture, floriculture
and viticulture and the necessary accessory uses of packing, treating
or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural
activities. The raising or keeping of livestock is not a permitted
agricultural use in the Planned Airport District, except within the area
of the Planned Airport District situated within 1,000 feet of the
northwest perimeter of the district.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
AGRICULTURAL USE — The use of land for agricultural purposes,
including farming, raising of livestock, horticulture, floriculture and
viticulture and the necessary accessory uses of packing, treating or
storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses is secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity
conducted on the parcel.[Added 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
ALLEY — Is a minor way, which may or may not be legally dedicated,
and is used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATION OF HISTORIC BUILDING — Any addition or modification
to the character, size and shape of the historic part of the
building.[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
MINOR ALTERATION — A change that does not affect the
character, size and shape of the historic building.
(1)
MAJOR ALTERATION — An alteration that involves substantial
changes to the character, size and shape of the exterior facade of
the historic building, including repositioning of existing exterior
architectural elements.
(2)
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:598
ALTERATIONS — Alterations include, but are not limited to the
following: all incidental changes in or replacements to the
nonstructural parts of a building or other structure; minor changes or
replacements in the structural parts of a building or other structure.
AMENDMENT — Any duly enacted change or revision to this
chapter.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
AMUSEMENT ENTERPRISE — Establishments engaged in providing
amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge (indoor or
outdoor) for uses including, but not limited to musical entertainment,
bowling alleys, billiard and pool establishments, commercial sports,
coin operated games and similar entertainment and amusement
devises.[Added 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting
or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to
directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite
dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.[Added
12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354]
ANTIQUE SHOPS — A place offering antiques for sale. For the purposes
of this chapter, an antique shall be a work of art, piece of furniture,
decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least 30
years old.[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building which consists of three or more
dwelling units other than flats but does not include "group dwellings."
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY — An "automobile laundry" is a structure or
area, used for the purpose of cleaning or reconditioning the exterior
and interior surfaces of automotive vehicles, but not including an
incidental one-bay washing facility in a gasoline service station.
BASEMENT or CELLAR — An enclosed area partly or completely below
grade. It shall be considered a building story if more than 1/3 of the
walls are five feet or more above grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied single-family dwelling
providing for compensation, sleeping accommodations and breakfast
for transient guests.[Added 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-303]
BICYCLE PARKING SPACE — A physical space that is a minimum of
2.5 feet in width by six feet in length with a vertical clearance of at
least seven feet that allows for the parking of one bicycle and, if located
outside, is hard surfaced and well drained.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-590]
NATURAL OR ACCIDENTAL ALTERATION — An alteration that
occurs as a result of a cause beyond the owner's or operator’s
control, such as a fire or weather-related causes (for example, wind
storms or tornadoes), resulting in the destruction of a substantial
portion of the historic part of the building.
(3)
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:599
BICYCLE PARKING SPACE, SHELTERED — A bicycle parking space in a
secure facility which protects the entire bicycle and its components and
accessories against theft and inclement weather. This type of facility
includes, but is not limited to, bicycle lockers, check-in facilities,
monitored bicycle parking, restricted access parking, and personal
storage.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
BICYCLE PARKING, LONG-TERM — Bicycle parking that is primarily
intended for bicyclists who need parking for three hours or
more.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
BICYCLE PARKING, SHORT-TERM — Bicycle parking that is primarily
intended for bicyclists who need parking for three hours or less.[Added
7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
BICYCLE RACK — A device consistent with industry standards that
is capable of supporting a bicycle in a stable position, is made of
durable materials, is no less than 36 inches tall from the base to
the top of the rack and no less than 1.5 feet in length, permits the
securing of the bicycle frame and one wheel with a U-shaped lock, and
is of a character and color that adds aesthetic value to the immediate
environment.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
BIKE LANE — A one-way facility that carries bike traffic in the same
direction as adjacent motor vehicle traffic and is designed in
accordance with the 1999 American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of
Bicycle Facilities, as amended.[Added 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384]
BIKE PATH — A minimum ten-foot-wide shared use path constructed
in accordance with the 1999 American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of
Bicycle Facilities.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261; amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
BILLBOARD — A sign other than one indicating a business conducted
on the premises; a sign upon which advertising matter of any character
is printed, posted or lettered; and it may be either freestanding or
attached to a surface of a building or other structure.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, public parks, railroad
rights-of-way or corporate boundary lines of the Township.
BLOCK FACE — The area which encompasses the buildings on both
sides of the street, bordered at either or both ends by the nearest cross
street.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-201]
BOUNDARY — A line marking the limit or border of a lot or
district.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
BUILDING — Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land,
has one or more floors or stories and is bounded by either lot lines
or yards. A "building" shall not include such structures as billboards,
fences or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:600
to human use, such as gas tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers or
similar structures. A "building" may accommodate more than one family
and have more than one dwelling unit and be used for residential or
commercial or manufacturing purposes.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building which has yard areas on all sides.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED — A building which is surrounded on
three sides by yard area and so constructed that one wall is on a side
lot line in common with an attached building on the neighboring lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — An established line within a property
defining the minimum required distance between any structure to be
erected and an adjacent right-of-way or street line.
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other
structures and their relationship to each other, to open areas such as
yards and to lot lines and includes: the size, height and floor area of
building or other structure; the relation of the number of dwelling units
in a residential building to the area of the lot (usually called density);
all open areas in yard space relating to buildings and other structures.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services for individuals, business and government
establishments and other organizations.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-261]
CANDLEPOWER — The amount of light that will illuminate a surface
one foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one footcandle.
Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower
emitted by any lamp, light source or luminaire.[Added 8-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-357]
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — A place for the burial of deceased human beings, by
cremation or in a grave, mausoleum, vault, columbarium, or other
receptacle.[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-574]
CENTER LINE OF STREET — See "street, center line of."
CHURCHES AND OTHER PLACES OF WORSHIP — The use of land or
structures for religious exercise (as defined by the Religious Land Use
and Institutionalized Persons Act190), including worship, education, and
related activities; includes, but is not limited to, chapels, cathedrals,
temples, mosques, synagogues, and the like.[Added 12-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-578]
COMMON FACILITIES — All the real property and improvements set
aside for the common use and enjoyment of the residents, including
but not limited to buildings, open land, private roads, parking areas,
walkways, recreation areas, landscaped areas, drainage easements and
190. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 2000cc et seq.
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:601
any utilities that service more than one unit, such as sewer and water
facilities.[Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-334]
COMMUNITY CENTER — The nonprofit use of land and structures
for social and community service activities, including recreational
programs, professional counseling services and/or human service
agencies and programs, provided that the sale of intoxicating
beverages on the premises be prohibited.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-201]
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST — A locally based, democratically
controlled (with a local board of directors), 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization that accepts or acquires real estate and then holds it
in perpetuity in order to provide affordable housing though homes
built on the involved real estate. The organization’s adopted mission
statement must reflect this purpose, and the organization’s board of
directors must avoid any conflicts of interest with developers who
may negotiate with the trust under the regulations of the Commercial
Transitional Zoning District. The organization must have policies in
place that restrict the housing built on its land so that the affordability
of these units is maintained in perpetuity. In this chapter, the words
“community land trust” and “land trust” are interchangeable.[Added
6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-482]
COMMUNITY-SUPPORTED AGRICULTURE (CSA) — A farming
operation supported by members of the local community who
contribute to the operation costs of the farm in return for the receipt
of a share in the farm's bounty. For the purposes of this chapter,
this definition shall also apply to the term "development-supported
agriculture" and any other terms expressing a similar concept. When
a CSA is included as part of a development proposal also consisting
of residential and/or other uses, the use of this phrase shall also be
apply to the development as a whole.[Added 3-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-518]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The officially adopted Patton Township
Comprehensive Plan.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is not appropriate to a particular
zoning district as a whole, but which may be suitable in certain
locations within the district only when specific conditions and factors
prescribed for such cases within this chapter are present. Conditional
use is allowed or denied by the Patton Township Board of Supervisors
after receipt of a report from the Township Planning Commission.
CONTINUOUS CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — Residential uses
with assisted care facilities for retirement living, which may include
detached or attached dwellings, duplexes, townhouses, apartments and
other types of residential units, community centers, dining facilities,
nursing homes and long-term care facilities, recreational facilities and
incidental retail sales and services for the benefit of residents and
patients.[Added 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-345]
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:602
CONVERTED HOUSE TRAILER — A trailer rendered immobile and
placed on either a temporary or permanent foundation for use as
sleeping or living quarters (but still considered as a manufactured
home).
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
CRITICAL GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA (one year zone of
contribution) — The area of an aquifer from where a well or wellfield
derives water when pumped for one year. The area takes into account
the influence of both the steady state (ambient) groundwater table and
pumping of the well or wellfield at its maximum capacity without the
influence of precipitation.[Added 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
CUTOFF — The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp or
luminaire are eliminated (cut off) at a specific cutoff angle above the
ground.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction
of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground
from the light source, above which no light is emitted.[Added
8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
CUTOFF-TYPE LUMINAIRE — A luminaire with elements such as
shields, reflectors or refractors, or refractor panels which direct and
cut off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than 90°.[Added
8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
DESIGNATED USE — A use in the University District which by its
nature involves a substantial degree of public use and/or a level of
intensity and nontraditional relationship to a university which suggests
that it should be limited in some way in a given area. Such uses
are permitted in the University District as a conditional use.[Added
9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-345]
DEVELOPER — The person or entity that owns the property to be
developed or that intends to develop the property, or both.[Added
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
DIRECT LIGHT — Light actually seen coming straight from the lamp,
reflector or reflector diffuser, in the luminaire.[Added 8-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-357]
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the commonwealth.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
DEDICATION — The conveyance of land or objects to some public
use, made by the owner and accepted for such use by or on behalf of
the public by a municipality, school district, public authority or other
government agency.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:603
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.[Added 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 154]
DEVELOPMENTS OF REGIONAL IMPACT — The following proposals
are designated "developments of regional impact" (DRI):[Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-479]
DRIVE-THROUGH USE — A use that provides a drive-through lane that
permits a person to receive a product or service without leaving his or
her vehicle.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
DRIVEWAY — A corridor which provides motor vehicle access from a
street into a lot.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
DWELLING, GROUP OR TOWNHOUSE — A building divided by vertical
walls, to consist entirely of three or more dwelling units each having
a separate main entrance and a separate service entrance from the
outside.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building containing a
single dwelling unit designed for and occupied exclusively by one
family. Included in this definition is a manufactured home that is affixed
to a permanent foundation with the wheels and trailer hitch
removed.[Added 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively by two families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building used or designed as a residence
for three or more families living independent of each other and doing
their own cooking therein, including apartment houses, apartment
hotels, flat and group dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT — Consists of one or more rooms for living purposes
together with separate cooking and sanitary facilities and is accessible
from the outdoors either directly or through an entrance hall shared
Any request to expand the Regional Growth Boundary/Sewer
Service Area or to extend public sewer lines to areas outside the
sewer service area.
(1)
Requests to rezone properties or complete zoning text amendments
within the Regional Growth Boundary/ Sewer Service Area that
could increase density by more than 50 equivalent dwelling units.
In determining the number of equivalent dwelling units that will be
generated as a result of a rezoning or by a zoning text amendment,
the highest and most intensive use permitted by the existing or
proposed district will be used.
(2)
Any proposal to rezone or complete rezoning text amendments for
properties outside of the Regional Growth Boundary/Sewer Service
Area that will result in an increase of equivalent dwelling units.
(3)
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:604
with other dwelling units and is used or intended to be used by one or
more persons living together and maintaining a common household.
END — When applied to a building, the shortest dimension of a
building.
ENGINEER — A professional, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, to practice engineering.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of
a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENTRY FEATURE — A sign, flag, fence, wall, fountain, kiosk or pavilion,
plant material or a combination of such structures or decorative
elements located at the entrance to a site to indicate or mark an access
point.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution system, collection, communication
telephone exchange, supply or disposal systems.
ESTATE LOT — A large, privately owned lot compromising all of an area
of open land. The purpose of the estate lot is to provide surrounding
residents with visual access to open land, while keeping the land under
private ownership and maintenance.[Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-334]
FACE — When applied to a building, the longest dimension of a
building.
FAMILY — A person, or two or more persons, who are related by
blood, marriage, parentage, adoption (including foster children) and
living together. In addition to the family, two or fewer unrelated persons
may reside within the dwelling unit. In the case where one or more of
the unrelated persons is a family care client, the number of unrelated
persons permitted to be within the dwelling unit shall be no more
than three. For dwelling units in apartment buildings the number of
persons permitted to occupy a unit shall be determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Patton Township Property Maintenance
Code.191[Amended 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
FAMILY BURIAL CEMETERY — A cemetery on private land in which no
lots are sold to the public and in which interments are restricted to a
group of persons related to each other by blood or marriage.[Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-574]
FAMILY CARE — The provision of care in accord with regulations of
the appropriate state agency(ies) for up to three mentally ill, retarded,
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Property Maintenance.
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:605
disabled or elderly persons in a dwelling unit by a family which resides
in that unit.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-200]
FARM CAFE — An eating establishment that prepares and serves food
grown, raised, or produced on site locally or within Pennsylvania to
the greatest extent possible. The principal objective of a farm cafe is
to support local agriculture and provide alternatives to the conversion
of farmland through sustainable rural economic development while
empowering farmers to undertake entrepreneurial endeavors that
augment, support, and highlight local agriculture.[Added 11-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-573]
FENCE — Any barrier constructed of wood, metal or plastic that is
used as a boundary or means of protection, confinement or for privacy.
The maximum height permitted for fences shall be eight feet.[Added
9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
FISH HATCHERY — A place where fish are propagated for use
elsewhere.[Added 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps and can include
all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole
socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror and/or a refractor
or lens.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
FLAT — A dwelling unit located above a commercial establishment in
a building not exceeding two stories in height and which dwelling unit
is completely separate from such commercial establishment and has a
separate interior entrance from the street which entrance may be used
in common by the occupants of more than one flat.
FLOODLIGHT or SPOTLIGHT — Any light fixture or lamp that
incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output
into a directed beam in a particular direction.[Added 8-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-357]
FLOODPLAIN — Those areas along natural watercourses which are
subject to periodic flooding as delineated by the official Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration, United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, prepared for Patton
Township, dated February 6, 1976.[Added 9-12-1978 by Ord. No.
154]
FLOOD-PRONE SOILS — Those alluvial soils subject to flooding as
delineated by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department
of Agriculture, in the Interim Soils Report of the Centre Region,
1969.[Added 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 154]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross usable area of the floors of a
building measured from the face of exterior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — A measure of land use intensity. It is
computed by dividing the gross building floor area on a parcel by the
total area of the parcel.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:606
FOOTCANDLE (FC) — A unit of illumination produced on a surface,
all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one
candle.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
FRONT YARD — See "yard."
FRONT YARD LINE — See "yard-line."
GAME RESERVE — A place where wildlife is raised for the purpose
of being harvested on-site or transported for off-site release.[Added
5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Accessory to a principal building, either attached
to it or separate, and is used only for storage purposes.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, together with any
structure thereon used for: the retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants
and incidental services, such as lubrication and hand-washing of motor
vehicles and the sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or
other automobile accessories.
GENERAL USE — A use in the University District which is fundamental
to the educational, research, public service or technology transfer
missions of a university.[Added 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-345]
GLARE — Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great
enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see and in extreme cases causing
momentary blindness.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
GREEN ROOF AREA — The area atop a building roof surface, open to
the sky and air, which is surfaced with soil and living plant material for
the purpose of retaining rainwater and absorbing heat from sunlight.
The depth of soil and planted material shall be a minimum of four
inches.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
GROUP DWELLING OR TOWNHOUSES — See "dwellings-group."
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Patton, County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — A building or buildings used for
the growing of plants, all or part of which are sold at retail or
wholesale.[Added 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior
walls or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicle or
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
GROUP HOME — A detached dwelling unit in which care and residence
are provided in accord with regulations of the appropriate state
agency(ies) for more than three, but not more than six nonadjudicated
clients who are dependent children, elderly, mentally ill, retarded or
disabled persons.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-200]
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:607
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial
or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply
treatment plan or air pollution control facility and other discarded
material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining
or agricultural operations and from community activities or any
combination of the above, but does not include solid or dissolved
material in domestic sewage or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject
to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, as amended (86 Stat. 880) or source, special nuclear or by-product
material as defined by the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (68 Stat. 923), which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:[Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
HALFWAY HOUSE — A residence in which social and community
service activities in accord with regulations of the appropriate state
agency(ies) are provided for no more than six resident adjudicated
individuals.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-200]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
average level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of a building
to the mean height between the eaves and ridge, in the case of a
pitched roof; otherwise the highest point of the roof.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The vertical distance from the ground
directly below the center line of the luminaire to the direct light
emitting part of the luminaire.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No.
98-357]
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from ground level
to the highest point on the sign or its supported structure.
HISTORIC BUILDING — For a building to qualify as a historic building,
it shall meet at least one of each standard under Criterias A and
B:[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population.
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
Criteria A:
A building or proposed building of which at least 40% of the
floor area and exterior facade was constructed prior to 1900.
(a)
(b) A building listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
(1)
(2) Criteria B:
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:608
HISTORIC USE — Any historic purpose for which the building was
designed and maintained, or any activity, occupation, business or
operation carried out in the building prior to the year 1900, such as
an inn, stagecoach stop or retail store.[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-422]
HOME OCCUPATION — A "home occupation" is an accessory use which
is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use of the dwelling
unit, and is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory
building by one or more occupants of such dwelling unit; does not
permit selling articles produced elsewhere than on the premises,
having exterior displays of goods visible from the outside or making
external alterations which are not customary in residential buildings;
and includes the following occupations: professional offices such as for
the practice of medicine, dentistry, architecture, law and engineering;
artists, beauticians, barbers, veterinarians (excluding stables or
kennels) and other occupations which do not create objectionable
noise, glare, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical interference, fire
hazards, substantially increased traffic or other nuisances and does not
permit the full-time employment of more than two persons not living
on the premises; does not use more than 25% or 500 square feet,
whichever is less, of the total floor area of the dwelling; and provides
adequate off-street parking if needed.[Amended 9-24-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-214]
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION (HOA) — A community association
combining individual home ownership with shared use or ownership of
common property and facilities. The homeowner owns the lot, including
the interior and exterior of the individual home, while the association
owns and maintains the common facilities.[Added 12-11-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-334]
HOSPITAL — An institution where sick or injured persons are given
medical care and, in the course of same, are housed overnight, fed
and provided nursing and related services. This definition does not
include halfway houses, convalescent or nursing homes, institutions for
mentally ill individuals, or other similar facilities.[Added 9-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-438]
HOUSE TRAILER — See "manufactured home."
HORIZONTAL CLEARANCE ZONE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above
the established airport elevation of 1,239 feet mean sea level, the
A building identified with a person or group that contributed
significantly to the Township’s cultural or historical
development.
(a)
A building possessing distinctive characteristics of
architecture, building type, construction period or method that
is representative of the area.
(b)
(c) A building used for a "historic use" (see definition).
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:609
perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs 10,000 feet out from
the center of each end of the runway and connecting the opposing arcs
by using straight lines.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the penetration of
water into the ground.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
INDIRECT LIGHT — Direct light that is reflected from or has scattered
off other surfaces.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
INN — A historic building used for the purpose of offering public
lodging on a day-to-day basis, not including a bed-and-breakfast home.
An inn shall be considered as a historic use (see definition for "historic
use") and subject to regulations specified in § 175-40.6.[Added
2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
INTERCHANGE ACCESS ROAD — The highest order road serving an
interchange and providing access to the interstate highway.[Added
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
INTERMENT — The act of burying a deceased human being.[Added
11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-574]
INTERSTATE CORRIDOR — The area located within 1/8 mile along
each side of the interstate highway and the interchange access
road.[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY — That roadway designated as Interstate 99,
U. S. Highway 322 or Mount Nittany Expressway.[Added 5-16-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-388]
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to, waste paper, rags, metal,
building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts
thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or
other use or disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of
two or more unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles or the major part
thereof, shall be deemed to make a "junkyard."
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual
light.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
LANDMARK FEATURE — A prominent or conspicuous feature, such
as a clock tower, cupola, or other uninhabitable portion of a building
or a freestanding object that serves as a unique and distinct element
marking a site or location.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if they
are authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner
or other persons having a proprietary interest in land.[Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:610
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A professional, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to practice landscape
architecture.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
LOT, CORNER — One side bounded on at least two sides by streets
that intersect adjacent to the lot.[Amended 9-11-1991 by Ord. No.
91-274]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The line generally parallel to the front lot line
which defines the rear of the lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the front lot line.
LOW-OCCUPANCY FACILITY — A building or use with limited customer
or nonemployee contact and less than one employee per every 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-590]
LUMEN — A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per
square foot. For the purposes of this chapter, the lumen output values
shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.[Added 8-12-1998
by Ord. No. 98-357]
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source
and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.[Added
8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-built structure which bears the
seal of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or
applicable agency or department of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or its agent, and is equipped with the necessary service
connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit on its own
running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without
a permanent foundation.[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured
home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single
manufactured home.[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two
or more manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of
manufactured homes.[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:611
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive preliminary land development plan
and narrative which indicates the design pattern for development,
establishes FAR, establishes residential densities, locates access points
and defines the gross square footage of all uses.[Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-261]
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE FOR BUILDINGS — The percentage of
lot area which may be occupied by the footprint area of all
buildings.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
MAXIMUM PERMITTED ILLUMINATION — The maximum illumination
measured in footcandles at the property line.192[Added 8-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-357]
MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS — Organizations that include
individuals formally organized for a common interest, usually cultural,
humanitarian services, with regular meetings and formal written
membership requirements. This definition does not include wholesale
or retail uses.[Added 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-438]
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings having units containing
sleeping accommodations which are available for temporary occupancy
by transients and providing off-street parking facilities adjacent or
convenient thereto.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE — A device that will sense motion
electronically and switch on security lighting for a timed
duration.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
MOTOR VEHICLE ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any commercial business
which, by design, type of operation and nature of business, either
requires or encourages the physical presence of a motor vehicle in
order to perform its function and to justify its existence. It shall be
deemed to include gasoline service stations, drive-in banks, drive-in
restaurants, drive-in beverage sales, car wash operations and other
businesses which essentially create the frequent entry on and exits
from the premises of motor vehicles. The foregoing specific examples
are not intended as an inclusive list of such businesses.
MUNICIPAL — Of or for the Township of Patton, unless specifically
in reference to another municipality.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — Authorized under the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the National Register of
Historic Places, administered by the National Park Service, a part of the
U.S. Department of Interior, is the nation's official inventory of districts,
sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology and culture. (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq., 36 C.F.R.
Part 60)[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
192. Editor's Note: The definitions of "mobile home," "mobile home lot," and "mobile home
park," which followed this definition, were repealed 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379.
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:612
NATURAL AREAS — Undeveloped land that contains one or a
combination of the following: steep slopes, wetlands, forest,
floodplains, water features and drainage ways, meadows, and animal
habitat areas.[Added 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which
it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.[Amended
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such
ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning
ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed
or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to
individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity,
are unable to care for themselves.[Added 2-24-1993 by Ord. No.
93-300]
OFF-SITE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COMMUNITY — A sanitary
sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual
lots by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant,
generally serving a neighborhood area.
OFF-SITE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary
sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual
lots by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant.
ON-SITE (SEPTIC TANK) SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A covered
watertight settling tank in which raw sewage is biochemically changed
into solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate further treatment and
final disposal.
OPEN LAND[Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-334] — That portion
of a tract within a development meeting rural preservation design
standards (at least 50%) that is set aside for the protection of sensitive
natural features, farm land, scenic views and other unique features.
Open land may be accessible to the residents of the development and/
or the municipality, or it may contain areas of farm land or estate lots
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:613
which are not accessible to the public. If open to the public, it shall be
so stated on the recorded plan.
OPEN SPACE — The areas within the perimeter boundaries of a master
plan that are intended to preserve natural amenities such as
woodlands, wetlands/natural drainage areas and wildlife. Passive and
active recreation areas are also included (playgrounds, hiking/biking
trails, public swimming pools, public recreation centers and picnic/
seating areas). Areas excluded from open space calculations shall
include public and private streets, drives, parking lots (except those
accessory to active and passive recreation areas), pipeline and/or
power easements, schools, clubhouses and private spaces such as
required yard setbacks, lawn and patio areas not available for common
and/or public use.[Amended 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 261; 2-24-1993
by Ord. No. 93-300]
PARKING SPACE — Consists of an open space with a dust-free allweather
surface (or space in a private garage or other structure) which
shall be at least nine by eighteen (9 x 18) feet in size for the storage of
one automobile.[Amended 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
PENAL OR CORRECTIVE INSTITUTION — A publicly or privately
operated facility housing persons awaiting trial or persons serving
a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense.[Added
5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.[Added
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
The following are to be included as open land:
Identified wetlands as shown on NWI (National Wetland
Inventory) mapping and/or field studies.
(a)
The one-hundred-year floodplain as shown on official FEMA
maps and the Zoning (floodplain/alluvial soils) Map.
(b)
(c) Land with slopes of 25% or greater.
Land within the open land required for street rights-of-way
that traverse the open land.
(d)
Land under permanent easement prohibiting future
development, including utility drainage access and utility
easements.
(e)
Land identified within the Centre County Natural Heritage
Inventory.
(f)
(1)
The following may be included as open land to the extent possible:
(a) Woodlands.
(b) Meadows not used as pasturage.
(2)
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:614
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act 247 of
1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).[Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
PERIMETER SETBACK — A distance extending from the boundary
of the University District to a structure within the district. The size
of a required perimeter setback shall be measured as the shortest
distance between the structure and the boundary of the University
District.[Added 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-345]
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY — Any premise licensed or approved that
provides food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision for a
period exceeding 24 hours to individuals who require assistance or
supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet or medication
prescribed for self-administration but do not require hospitalization
or care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care facility.[Added
2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
PERVIOUS PAVEMENT SYSTEM — A low-impact development (LID)
stormwater best management practice (BMP) that consists of a
pervious pavement layer and an aggregate stone bed storage layer
placed on a noncompacted soil subgrade. The pavement layer must be
capable of supporting vehicular or pedestrian traffic and have sufficient
porosity to allow rainwater to percolate into the storage layer below.
A pavement layer is considered pervious if it is one of the following
materials: pervious bituminous asphalt, pervious concrete or
nonseparated pervious paver blocks, all of which must be underlain
by a uniformly graded aggregate stone bed on a noncompacted soil
subgrade. The storage layer typically consists of gravel or crushed
stone with sufficient voids that will store water after a storm until
such time as the water can infiltrate into the soil subgrade below.
Such systems are an effective method for minimizing the environmental
impact of land development. The latest version of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) BMP Manual
provides a detailed description of pervious pavements and their proper
construction and maintenance.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-590]
PHASE — A component or definable part of a whole: a stage of
development. A "phase of a development plan" that is that part of the
entire plan which, if implemented, is capable of standing on its own. A
"phase of planned development" shall be able to function independently
of the undeveloped phases, while being compatible with adjacent or
neighboring land uses, even if the remainder of the planned
development were to be discontinued.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Patton Township Planning
Commission, Township of Patton, County of Centre, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:615
PRIVATE HUNTING LODGE — Area reserved for public or private
hunting of wildlife, fishing, and accessory structures in support of those
activities.[Added 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
PRIVATE RECREATION — Privately owned or operated facilities that
provide active or passive outlets for recreation.[Added 5-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-557]
PROJECT — Any development, including retail, office, commercial,
residential, and industrial uses.[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-388]
PUBLIC CELEBRATION — An event or series of events scheduled in
observance of a state, federal, or religious holiday, or conducting
organized activities for an historical, cultural, or a special theme held
for a limited period of time and where such events or activities are not
being held solely for profit. Public celebrations may include, but are
not limited to, farmers markets, seasonal celebrations, craft fairs, or
festivals.[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-590]
PUBLIC GATHERING PLACE — Any outdoor place to which the public
or a substantial number of the public has access, including but not
limited to parks, courtyards, playgrounds, and the outdoor common
areas of public and private buildings and facilities.[Added 7-11-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-590]
PUBLIC RECREATION — Publicly owned or operated facilities that
provide active or passive outlets for recreation.[Amended 5-28-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-557]
PUBLIC TRANSIT FACILITY — A premises for the transient housing
or parking of motor driven buses and the loading and unloading
passengers in addition to satellite administrative services.[Added
2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
PUBLIC USE — A use by a public governing body, board, commission
or authority or any agency or department thereof for a governmental or
public purpose.[Added 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274; 5-28-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-557]
REAR YARD — See "yard."
REAR YARD LINE — See "yard line."
RECOGNIZED CEMETERY — Any cemetery that is not a family burial
cemetery.[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-574]
REHABILITATION CENTER — A community center in which social
and community service activities in accord with regulations of the
appropriate state agency(ies)) are provided for drop in (nonresident)
adjudicated individuals.[Added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-200]
RETAIL TRADE — Establishments engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:616
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — Residential uses and ancillary facilities
for retirement living which may include detached or attached singlefamily
dwellings, duplexes, townhouses or apartments and other types
of residential units, community centers, recreational facilities and
incidental retail sales for the benefit of residents.[Added 9-24-1997
by Ord. No. 97-345]
RUNWAY APPROACH ZONE — A volume of airspace that is
longitudinally centered along the end of the runway protection zone
and is trapezoidal in shape. The inner width has a dimension of 1,425
feet, a length of 8,500 feet, and an outer width of 3,500 feet. The zone
rises at a slope of 34 feet (horizontal) to one foot (vertical) away from
the end of the runway protection zone.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE — A volume of airspace that is
longitudinally centered along the end of the runway and is trapezoidal
in shape. The inner width has a dimension of 1,000 feet, a length of
2,000 feet and an outer width of 1,425 feet. The zone rises at a slope
of 50 feet (horizontal) to one foot (vertical) away from the end of the
runway.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
SANITARIUM — A health station, retreat, or an institution for the
recuperation and treatment of persons suffering from physical or
mental disorders.[Added 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
SAWMILLS — A facility where logs or partially processed cants are
sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to
produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for
the use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot.[Added
5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
SCHEDULE — A schedule for development is the projected time frame
in which the several phases of a development are to be
implemented.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — An institution for the teaching of
children or adults including primary and secondary schools; colleges;
and professional, dance, business, trade, art schools; or similar
facilities.[Added 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
SCREENING — The provision of a visual shield or barrier, which may
include vegetative plantings; fencing; natural or man-made berms; or
landforms, between adjacent properties, structures or uses.[Added
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
SEMIPUBLIC USE — A nonprofit use or institutions such as a church,
library, public or private school, hospital or municipality owned or
operated building, structure or land used for public purpose.[Added
9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274]
SETBACK — See "building setback line."
SIDE YARD — See "yard."
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:617
SIDE YARD LINE — See "yard line."
SIGN — A sign is any structure, device, light or natural object including
the ground itself, or any part thereof, or any device attached thereto
or painted or represented thereon which shall be used to identify,
advertise or attract attention to any object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity, profession,
enterprise, industry or business or which shall display or include any
letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as an announcement, direction or advertisement
and which is intended to be seen from off the premises or from a
parking lot. The word "sign" shall include signs which are affixed to the
inside of windows and glass doors and are intended to be seen from
roadways or parking lots. No other indoor sign shall be deemed a sign
within this chapter.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
SIGN AREA — Sign area is the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle
or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. All
visible faces of a multifaced sign shall be counted separately and then
totaled in calculating sign area. Three-dimensional signs shall be
treated as dual-faced signs, such that the total area shall be twice
the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle or circle which can totally
GROUND-POLE SIGN — A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
(1)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that provides artificial light directly
or through any transparent or translucent material, from a source
of light connected with such sign or a sign illuminated by a light
focused upon or chiefly directed at the surface of the sign.
(2)
OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which contains a
message unrelated to a business or profession conducted upon
the premises where such sign is located or which is unrelated to
a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located.
(3)
(4) PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which projects from and is supported
by a wall of a building.
(5)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign, constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric,
wood or other similar material, with or without a structural frame
and intended for a limited period of display.
(6)
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to a building wall,
and which does not extend more than 18 inches therefrom, nor
extend above the roofline.
(7)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and maintained upon or above the
roof of any building.
(8)
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:618
circumscribe the sign in the plane of its largest dimension.[Added
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE — Any part of a solar energy system
that absorbs or reflects solar energy for use in the system's
transformation process, including any portion of the frames, supports,
and mounting hardware.[Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system that converts solar
energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
Solar energy systems may be mounted on a building or on the ground,
integrated into the construction of a building, or self-contained whereas
it generates energy exclusively for the device it is mounted to.[Added
7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — The granting of special exceptions to the
provisions of this chapter where specifically stated within this chapter
subject to stated standards and criteria. Special exceptions are
administered by the Zoning Hearing Board.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. The presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
STORAGE SHED — A prefabricated or on-site constructed enclosure
that is less than 12 feet high, less than 150 square feet in area and
is used for the storage of lawn tractors, garden implements, bicycles
and other common household commodities. No more than two storage
sheds having a cumulative area of up to 150 square feet can be placed
in the side or rear yard on any lot of 10 acres or less under the exclusion
contained in the definition of "structure" in this section. Such sheds
shall not be placed within the front yard.[Added 9-11-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-274; amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-340]
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any
floor and the next floor above it.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended
to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or
private.[Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
STREET, CENTER LINE OF — The line which is usually at an equal
distance from both street lines or right-of-way lines.
STREETLIGHT — A luminaire placed in or adjacent to a street rightof-
way for the purpose of illuminating a road, sidewalk and/or
intersection.[Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357]
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:619
STREET LINE — A "street line" is a right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land. Excluded from the definition of a structure are fences, storage
sheds, any deck that is less than 18 inches above ground level,
stairwells to basements, chimneys, heat pumps, air conditioning units,
roof overhangs less than 18 inches from the wall of a structure, tree
houses up to 75 square feet in area and pet houses up to 75 square feet
in area. Excluded from this definition are gazebos under 150 square
feet in area and under 12 feet in height, light poles, utility poles,
retaining walls, decorative walls and awnings.[Amended 9-11-1991
by Ord. No. 91-274; 9-24-1986 by Ord. No. 86-214; 4-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-340]
SURVEYOR — A professional licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice surveying.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-261]
SWIMMING POOL — As defined by the International Building Code as
adopted in Chapter 62.193[Added 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
TAVERN — An establishment that meets one or more of the following
criteria:[Added 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Consists of equipment,
buildings, towers and other structures involved in transmitting,
receiving and the relay of electromagnetic waves.[Added 12-10-1997
by Ord. No. 97-354]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY BUILDING — The building in
which electronic receiving, transmitting and relay equipment for a
telecommunications tower is housed.[Added 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-354]
TOWER — Any ground-mounted structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes,
including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole
towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
Has a name that references alcoholic beverages or the
consumption thereof.
(1)
Has a name that includes words such as bar, sports bar, tavern,
pub, saloon, brewery, speakeasy, lounge, club, or similar term
associated with a purveyor of alcoholic beverages.
(2)
(3) Has more than one serving station for alcoholic beverages.
Will likely have alcohol sales that, based on a study of similar
existing establishments, meet or exceed 20% of total sales.
(4)
193. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-6
169:620
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers,
alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the
structure and any support thereto. Not included are towers and
supportive structures on residential dwellings for private
noncommercial amateur purposes, including but not limited to ham
radios and citizen band radios that are regulated by the residential
district section of this chapter.[Added 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-354]
TOWN CENTER — An area within a planned community that contains
a variety of land uses, including but not limited to residential, retail,
office, professional, service, educational, cultural, governmental and
recreational within a defined area shown on a master plan. The land
uses are to be located in close proximity to each other. The town
center shall promote pedestrian movement, social interaction and the
environmentally sound conservation and development of land. The
design and development of a town center core area should not exceed
an area with a radius of approximately one-fourth (1/4) mile.[Added
2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of any waste so as to neutralize such waste or
so as to render such waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, suitable
for recovery, suitable for storage or reduced in volume. Such term
includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical
form or chemical composition of waste so as to render it neutral or
nonhazardous.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied or
any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on in a building
or other structure on a tract of land.
UAJA — University Area Joint Authority.[Added 3-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-518]
UTILITY SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Any commercially sized
or scaled solar energy system that is the principal use on the property
and its operator has signed an official agreement of power purchase
with a utility provider, or it produces energy in excess of 125% of the
energy needed by the property's principal use, or produces energy in
excess of 10 megawatts.[Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
VARIANCE — A permissive waiver from the terms and conditions of this
chapter where literal enforcement would create hardship. A variance
can be granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board.
WALKWAY — A right-of-way intended to provide pedestrian
access.[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
WELL SITE — The physical structure, facility or device at the land
surface from or through which groundwater flows or is pumped from
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-6
169:621
§ 175-7. Interpretation of regulations.
The interpretation of the regulations of this chapter is intended, in addition
to the provisions of § 175-3 to be such that whenever these requirements
are at variance with any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, as particularly refer to area
and bulk regulations and impose higher standards, the most restrictive
requirement shall govern.
§ 175-8. Official Zoning Map. [Amended 9-27-1977 by Ord. No. 151;
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330; 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-340;
3-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-415]
The Zoning District Map of Patton Township, prepared by the Centre
Regional Planning Agency and the Pennsylvania State University Land
subsurface water bearing formations then distributed off-site by a
water provider.[Added 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300]
WHIP ANTENNA — A single pole antenna that is used for the purpose
of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves and is less than one
inch in diameter with a maximum height of 15 feet. This type of antenna
is usually mounted to a supporting structure.[Added 12-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-354]
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION — Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise
for or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies.[Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
YARD — That portion of the lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky
and extends from the lot line to the yard line.
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending along the full length of the front
lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the
required front yard to the required rear yard.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to the corresponding lot line at
a distance specified for the required depth of yard in each respective
case.
YARD LINE, FRONT — Bounds the front yard and is parallel to the front
lot line.
YARD LINE, REAR — Bounds the rear yard and is parallel to the rear
lot line.
YARD LINE, SIDE — Bounds the side yard and is parallel to the side lot
lines.
§ 175-6 PATTON CODE § 175-8
169:622
Analysis Laboratory, dated February 12, 2003, and approved by the Board of
Supervisors on March 26, 2003, as amended, shall hereafter be the Official
Zoning Map of Patton Township.
§ 175-8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-8
169:623

ARTICLE II
Residential Districts
§ 175-9. Intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, the districts established in
this regulation are intended to achieve the following:
§ 175-10. R-1 Rural Residence District. [Amended 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-200; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 274; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384; 9-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-545]
A. To provide sufficient space, appropriately located, for residential
development to meet the housing needs of the present and expected
future population of the Township, within the range of house types and
densities anticipated.
B. To assure light, air and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
C. To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
D. To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
population and the bulk of buildings and by providing for off-street
parking.
E. To protect residential neighborhoods as far as possible, against heavy
traffic or through traffic.
F. To make possible provision of those public and private educational,
recreational, health and similar facilities serving the needs of nearby
residents which perform most effectively in a residential environment
and/do not create objectionable influences.
G. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well considered plan, to promote stable
residential development, to protect the character of any district and its
peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and
buildings and to protect the Township tax revenues.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to encourage residential development which will
blend with existing agricultural uses and perpetuate the rural
atmosphere of the area. With such restrictions it will be possible for
limited residential uses to develop while preserving natural features
and scenic landscapes. It is also the purpose of this section to provide
sufficient space for on-lot sewage disposal which will not create any
menace to public health. In this manner, sufficient open space will be
retained thus reducing the need for such municipal facilities.
§ 175-9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-10
169:625
B. Use regulations, area and bulk regulations and off-street parking
regulations are detailed in Table 1, herein.
(1) Uses by right. Land, buildings or premises on any R-1 District lot
shall be used by right only for one of the uses shown in Table 1, in
addition to essential services.
(2) Accessory uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted.
(a) Accessory uses with additional restrictions:
[1] Swimming pool. A swimming pool shall be permitted,
provided that it is within the side or rear yard of the
dwelling to which it is accessory and it is enclosed by a
continuous barrier not less than four feet high.
[a] A swimming pool may be located in the rear yard
setback area provided that the water's edge is a
minimum of 25 feet from the rear property line.
[Added 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-562]
§ 175-10 PATTON CODE § 175-10
169:626
R-1 Uses
(§ 175-10B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Singlefamily
Group
homes
Essential
services
Customary
related
accessory
uses2
Swimming
pools3
Private
greenhouse
Home
occupations
Hospitals
Sanitariums
Penal or
correctional
institutions
Churches
Clinics
Golf
courses
(commercial)
Public uses
Semipublic
uses
Cemeteries
Public and
private
schools
Nursing
homes
Public
recreational
facilities
NOTES:
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically
prohibited uses in this district.
2 Accessory structures are permitted in the rear
yard setback area provided they are a minimum of
40 feet from the rear property line.
3 See § 175-10B(2)(a)[1] for additional regulations
on swimming pools.
§ 175-10 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-10
169:627
§ 175-11. R-2 Low-Density Residence District. [Amended 2-13-1985
by Ord. No. 85-201; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274; 1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-384; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-426; 9-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-545]
R-1 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-10C)
Minimum
Lot
Size
(acres)
Minimum
Lot
Width
at
Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
at
Street
Line
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
1 150 100 20% Front:
30; 40 on
collector
streets
Side: 30
each
Rear: 75
Building:
35
Structure:
50
Required Off-Street Parking
(§ 175-10D; see § 153-38)
Use Required Parking
Single-family
dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit (space
for parking of two automobiles for
each dwelling unit in a private
garage or on a lot)
Group homes 1 space per two persons based on
maximum design capacity
(3) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42.
If a conditional use approval is granted for any of these uses by the
Board of Supervisors, the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A
must be addressed for all uses within this district.
C. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 1 shall be
observed.
D. Off-street parking regulations. (See § 153-38 or Table 1.)
§ 175-10 PATTON CODE § 175-11
169:628
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to regulate residential development of lowdensity
on lots of sufficient size to provide for on-site sewage disposal
and water and off-site sewage disposal and water. In addition, this
district will enable the creation of a buffer zone between rural sections
and higher density residential sections.
B. Use regulations, area and bulk regulations and off-street parking
regulations are detailed in Table 1.
(1) Uses by right. Land, buildings or premises on any R-2 District lot
shall be used by right only for one of the uses shown in Table 1, in
addition to essential services.
(2) Accessory uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted.
(a) Accessory uses with additional restrictions:
[1] Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard
or side yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory, 25 feet
from any lot line and enclosed by a continuous barrier not
less than four feet high.
(3) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42.
If a conditional use approval is granted for any of these uses by the
Board of Supervisors, the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A
must be addressed for all uses within this district.
C. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 1 shall be
observed.
D. Off-street parking regulations. (See § 175-46, § 153-38 or Table 1.)
E. Multiple dwellings per lot regulations. In addition to the regulations
contained in Table 1, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply
to land development plans approved for multiple dwellings on a single
lot for which a condominium association has been developed. The land
development plan shall state, by reference to this section of the Code of
Patton Township, that the following regulations apply:
(1) Density. The maximum number of units permitted upon a parcel
shall not exceed the number of lots that can be created in
accordance with the area and bulk regulations of § 175-11C, Table
1. The land development plan shall include a yield plan illustrating
the layout, dimensions, area and number of lots that can be created
in accordance with § 175-11C, Table 1.
(2) Public street frontage. Each lot shall include a total length of
frontage on a public roadway of not less than 75 feet for each
dwelling unit. Vehicular access to dwelling units may consist of
§ 175-11 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-11
169:629
individual driveways from each unit to a public street or shared
driveways.
(3) Off-street parking regulations. (See § 175-46, § 153-38 or Table 1.)
(a) There shall be provided, either in a private garage or on the lot
within 25 feet of an entrance to each dwelling, space for two
automobiles for each dwelling unit.
(b) The parking spaces shall be laid out to permit a motor vehicle
to proceed to and from all unoccupied spaces without moving
other parked vehicles.
(4) Landscaping controls. (See § 175-40A, Table 1.)
R-2 Uses (§ 175-11B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
Singlefamily
Group
homes
Essential
services
Customary
residential
accessory uses
Swimming
pool
Private
greenhouse
Home
occupations
Churches
Philanthropic
or religious
institution
Public and
private
schools
Public uses
Semipublic
uses
Hospitals
Sanitariums
Penal or
correctional
institutions
NOTE:
1 There are no special exceptions in this district.
§ 175-11 PATTON CODE § 175-11
169:630
R-2 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-11C)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Street
Line
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
With
public
sewer:
10,000
feet
80 50 25% Building:
30
Structure:
50
Without
public
sewer: 1
acre
Front: 30
Side: 10
each
Rear: 25
Multiple Dwellings Per Lot
(§ 175-11E)
Public
Street
Frontage
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Distance
Between
Buildings
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Frontage on
public
roadway: 75
feet per
dwelling
unit
33% Perimeter:
25
20 Building: 30
Front Setbacks
Driveway located between the front or the side of the dwelling
nearest to the roadway or sidewalk and the roadway and/or
sidewalk: 25 feet
Driveway is not located between the front or the side of the
dwelling nearest to the roadway or sidewalk and the roadway and/
or sidewalk: 20 feet.
§ 175-11 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-11
169:631
§ 175-12. R-3 Medium-Density Residence District. [Amended
8-23-1983 by Ord. No. 93-184; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-201;
11-11-1987 by Ord. No. 87-225; 1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-297;
4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-340; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384;
1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-297; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496;
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498; 9-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-545]
Multiple Dwellings Per Lot Landscaping Controls
[§ 175-11E(4), § 175-40A]
See Tables 3, 4 and 5
Parking lots with less than 7 spaces shall be exempt from the
parking lot landscaping requirements of Chapter 153.
Required Off-Street Parking
[§ 175-11C, E(3); see § 153-38]
Use Required Parking
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit (space for
parking of two automobiles for each
dwelling unit in a private garage or on a
lot)
Group homes 1 space per two persons based on
maximum design capacity
Multiple-dwelling
units
2 spaces per dwelling unit (space for
parking of two automobiles for each
dwelling unit) Spaces shall be located
within a private garage or on lot, within
25 feet of an entrance to each dwelling.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to regulate residential development in those
areas near major highways, commercial areas and/or centers of
employment. Such areas are suitable for medium-density residential
development, provided that off-site water and sewer services are
provided. However, restrictions are provided to maintain suitable areas
of open space between residences to create a suburban atmosphere
adequate for family needs.
B. Use regulations and area and bulk regulations are detailed in Table 1.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-3 District, provided that both off-site sewer
and water are provided, land, buildings or premises shall be used
by right only for one or more of the uses shown in Table 1.
(2) Accessory uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted:
(a) Accessory uses with additional restrictions:
§ 175-11 PATTON CODE § 175-12
169:632
[1] Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear yard
or side yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory, 25 feet
from any lot line and enclosed by a continuous barrier not
less than four feet high.
(3) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as a conditional use subject to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42.
If a conditional use approval is granted for any of these uses by the
Board of Supervisors, the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A
must be addressed for all uses within this district.
C. Area and bulk regulations for lots having off-site sewer and water
services only are shown in Table 1. Where off-site sewer and water
services are not provided, the area and bulk regulations of the R-2
District shall apply. Additional area and bulk-related regulations are as
follows:
(1) Single-family (detached or semidetached) dwelling.
(a) Side yards: 25 feet aggregate, 10 feet minimum. (If the
developer aligns the axis of the single-family detached dwelling
at an acute angle with the street line and thus the side property
lines, the developer may utilize an average side yard distance
of 15 feet, which shall imply that no portion of the building
shall be located closer than 10 feet to the side property line
with the average distance along the side of the building being
no less than 15 feet from the side property line.)
(2) Multiple units.
(a) Distance between buildings. Where two or more buildings are
to be located on one lot, the distances between such buildings
shall be the sum of the required side and rear yard depths for
such buildings. As an alternative, the buildings can be moved
closer together, provided that the side and rear yard depths are
correspondingly increased. The minimum distance to be
maintained between buildings is 30 feet.
(b) Location of parking lots and driveways. Only driveways giving
access to parking located within the main building shall be
located within the required minimum yard area. Parking lots or
driveways abutting R-1 and R-2 lands shall be screened by
hedges.
(c) Landscaping. Fifty percent of the total area of any lot on which
apartments are to be erected shall be landscaped. See
§ 175-44C.
(3) Group dwellings (townhouses).
§ 175-12 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-12
169:633
(a) Within the lot containing group dwellings, land may be
subdivided into lots consisting of land immediately beneath
and immediately adjacent to each dwelling unit, provided that:
[1] Such lots not include common elements, such as parking
stalls, driveways, sidewalks and front, side and rear yards
of the group dwellings lot.
[2] Such lots shall not contain yard lines.
[3] The common elements of the group dwellings lot, exclusive
of the individual dwelling unit lots, be owned by a
homeowners' association consisting of the owners of every
dwelling unit.
[4] The homeowners' association shall be created by recorded
declaration, and said declaration shall contain such
provisions as may be established by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
(b) Distance between buildings. Where two or more buildings are
to be located on one lot, the distances between such buildings
shall be the sum of the required side and rear yard depth for
such buildings.
(c) Location of parking lots and driveways. Only driveways giving
access to parking located within the main building shall be
located within the required minimum yard area. Parking lots or
driveways abutting R-1 and R-2 lands shall be screened by
hedges.
(d) Landscaping. Fifty percent of the total area of any lot on which
group dwellings are to be erected shall be landscaped. See
§ 175-44C.
D. Off-street parking regulations. See § 153-38.
E. The buffer yard requirements contained in § 175-40A, Tables 3, 4 and 5,
shall apply to new multihousehold development within the Medium-
Density Residence (R-3) District. Existing vegetation may be used to
meet these requirements. All trees that are to be used to meet the
requirements of this section (whether planted or preexisting), however,
must have a caliper no less than 2.5 inches measured six inches above
the root ball. Invasive species, as defined by Appendix B of the I-99
Overlay District regulations (Ordinance No. 2001-388),194 may not be
planted or counted towards meeting any landscaping requirements.
194. Editor's Note: See Art. VIIIA in this chapter.
§ 175-12 PATTON CODE § 175-12
169:634
R-3 Uses
(§ 175-11B)
Where both off-site sewer and water are provided
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
Singlefamily
Group
homes
Two-family
Semidetached
Duplex
Apartments
Essential
services
Customary
residential
accessory
uses
Swimming
pool
Home
occupations
Churches
Philanthropic
or religious
institution
Public and
private schools
Public uses
Semipublic
uses
Hospitals
Sanitariums
Penal or
correctional
institutions
NOTES:
1 There are no special exceptions in this district.
R-3 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-11C)
Where both off-site sewer and water are provided; see R-2
where on-lot sewer and water is provided.
Single-Family Detached or Semidetached
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Street
Line
Maximum
Lot
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
8,000 80 n/a 35% Front: 30
Side: 25
aggregate,
10 minimum
Rear: 25
Building:
35
§ 175-12 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-12
169:635
Multiple Units: 2 to 4 units per structure, detached or
semidetached
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Street
Line
Maximum
Lot
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
15,000
minimum
or 5,000
per
dwelling
unit,
whichever
is greater
80 n/a 25% Front: 30
Side: 25
aggregate,
10 minimum
Rear: 25
Building:
35
Multiple Units: 5 to 12 units per structure
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Street
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
3,500 per
dwelling
unit
100 n/a 25% for
principal
building
35%,
including
all
accessory
buildings
and tenant
garages
Front: 30
Side: 30
Rear: 50
Building:
35
§ 175-12 PATTON CODE § 175-12
169:636
Multiple Units: 13 or more units per structure
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Street
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
1 acre or
3,500
square
feet per
dwelling
unit,
whichever
is greater
150 n/a 25% for
principal
building
35%
including
all
accessory
buildings
and tenant
garages
Front: 30
Side: 30
Rear: 50
Building:
60
Multiple Units: Group Dwellings (Townhouses)
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
Line
Minimum
Lot Width
at Street
Line
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
13,500,
with
3,500
minimum
per
dwelling
unit
n/a 100 for
each
building
containing
group
dwellings
25% Front: 30
abutting
arterial;
20
abutting
all others
Side: 15
Rear: 25
§ 175-12 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-12
169:637
§ 175-13. R-MHP Manufactured Home Park District. [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379; 9-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-545]
All other uses
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Street
Line
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
10,000 100 n/a 25% Front: 30
Side: 20
Rear: 25
Building:
35
Landscaping Controls
See full text of § 175-12.
Required Off-Street Parking
(§ 175-12D; see § 153-38)
Use Required Parking
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit (space for parking
of two automobiles for each dwelling unit in
a private garage or on a lot)
Group homes 1 space per two persons based on maximum
design capacity
Multiple-dwelling units 2 spaces per dwelling unit (space for parking
of two automobiles for each dwelling unit)
Spaces shall be located within a private
garage or on lot.
A. Specific intent. The specific purposes of this zoning district are to:
(1) Encourage innovations in neighborhood development.
(2) Encourage greater variety in the type, design and layout of
dwellings, and other buildings and structures.
(3) Encourage conservation and efficient use of open space.
(4) Provide greater opportunities for housing and recreation.
(5) Encourage efficient use of land where public water and sewer
service are available.
§ 175-12 PATTON CODE § 175-13
169:638
(6) Relate the type, design and layout of residential and nonresidential
development to the particular site and particular demand for
housing which exists at the time of development.
(7) Preserve property values within existing residential and
nonresidential areas.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-MHP District, land, buildings, or premises
shall be used only for one or more of the uses shown in Table 1.
Additional use regulations are as follows:
(a) Zero lot line configurations of single-family dwellings and
manufactured homes, provided that:
[1] The zero lot line side yard shall be a maximum distance of
two feet from the property line for access to maintain the
exterior portion of the dwelling unit.
[2] Doors and exhaust vents shall be prohibited on the zero lot
line side of the dwelling unit.
(b) Accessory uses with additional restrictions:
[1] Swimming pool, provided that it meets the setback
requirements for the building to which it is accessory, thus
placing it within the buildable area of the lot, and that it is
enclosed by a continuous barrier at least four feet high.
C. Area, bulk, and setback requirements are shown in Table 1. Additional
area- and bulk-related regulations are as follows.
(1) Public park and open space areas.
(a) Public park and open space areas required within the
development shall be determined by § 153-34, Public use and
service areas, and this section.
(b) Public park and open space areas required as part of a R-MHP
development shall be constructed concurrent with the first
phase of development and sized according to the acreage
required for the entire development.
(2) Lot sizes and dimensions shall be established for each subdivision
plan pursuant to an approved master plan, provided that, for lots to
be subdivided, no lot shall be smaller than 5,000 square feet and no
less than 50 feet in width.
(3) Setbacks from internal front and side lot lines shall be established
for each subdivision plan submitted pursuant to an approved land
development plan. This allows the designer flexibility in the
placement of structures. The sufficiency of the setbacks for each
proposal shall be determined based on the overall design pattern
§ 175-13 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-13
169:639
for which the setbacks are proposed, and the purposes for which
the district was established. The Township shall make the final
determination as to the appropriate location of the setbacks. Rear
yard setbacks shall not be less than 15 feet from rear property
lines.
D. Sidewalks and bicycle paths.
(1) Sidewalks and bikeways shall be incorporated into the
manufactured home design in accordance with Chapter 149,
Streets and Sidewalks. Local roads shall have a sidewalk on at least
one side of the street. Collector roads shall have sidewalks on both
sides of the street.
(2) Bicycle paths shall be provided and placed in locations that connect
with existing and proposed bicycle facilities and other amenities
such as parks, schools, and shopping. The design of the bicycle
paths shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering
standards.
E. Design and improvement standards. Buffer yards shall be designed in
accordance with § 175-42D, Buffer yards.
F. Utilities.
(1) Each lot/lease area within the proposed development shall connect
with the State College Borough Water Authority for public water
service.
(2) Each lot/lease area within the proposed development shall connect
with the University Area Joint Authority for public sewer service.
(3) Utility easements shall be provided in accordance with § 153-34B,
Utility easements.
R-MHP Uses
(§ 175-13B)
Permitted Uses Accessory Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Single-family
detached
dwellings with
permanent
foundations
Customary
residential
accessory uses
Manufactured
homes
Swimming pool
Zero lot line
configurations
Home
occupations
§ 175-13 PATTON CODE § 175-13
169:640
R-MHP Uses
(§ 175-13B)
Permitted Uses Accessory Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Convenience
stores
Child day-care
center
Essential services
Parks, open space
and recreational
areas
Bike paths,
pedestrian trails
and natural areas
Community
centers
Offices of property
owners
associations
Maintenance
facilities owned
and operated by
property owners
associations
Model homes/sales
office
NOTES:
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically prohibited uses
in this district.
§ 175-13 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-13
169:641
RMHP Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-13C)
Single Family Detached or Semidetached
Minimum
Tract
Size
(acres)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling
units per
acre)
Minimum
Buffer
Adjacent
to A1, R1
and R2
Districts
(feet)
Minimum
Public
and/or
Open
Space
Areas
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
20 5.5 of
gross
tract area
50 30% of
gross
tract area
(50%, of
which is
to remain
as natural
areas)
Per lot or
lease
area: 40%
Per
nonresidential
lot or
lease
area: 60%
Building
or
structure:
30
Maximum Land Area: Neighborhood Commercial Uses:
15,000 square feet
Lot Sizes and Dimensions
Setbacks
Landscaping Controls
See full text of § 175-13, § 175-42D
Required Off-Street Parking
(See § 153-38)
Use Required Parking
Dwelling unit 2 paved parking spaces per dwelling unit shall
be provided. These spaces can be provided
within the paved driveways of each dwelling
unit and shall not interfere with any proposed
sidewalk or bicycle path as per § 149-47,
Driveways.
Additional parking may be provided for
visitors and shall be designated in accordance
with the requirements as per § 149-48,
Parking lots, and § 153-38, Off-street parking
regulations.
§ 175-13 PATTON CODE § 175-14
169:642
§ 175-14. R-M Manufactured Home Residence District. [Added
1-26-1982 by Ord. No. 82-167; amended 1-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-297; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384; 9-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-545]
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to regulate residential development of low- to
medium-density consisting primarily of manufactured homes situated
on individual lots serviced by off-site sewage disposal and off-site water.
This district will contribute to the conservation of developable land
while providing for the needs of potential home owners who desire
moderately priced detached dwellings.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-M District, lands, buildings or premises
shall be used by right only for one or more of the uses shown in
Table 1.
(2) Accessory uses. Only the accessory uses shown in Table 1 shall be
permitted:
(a) Accessory uses with additional restrictions:
[1] Swimming pool, provided that it is located in the rear or
side yard within the setback lines in the permitted
buildable area along with the dwelling to which it is
accessory and that it is enclosed by a continuous barrier
not less than four feet high.
C. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 1 shall be
observed:
D. Off-street parking regulations: two paved parking spaces, each at least
nine feet in width and 20 feet in length. The required parking spaces
shall be laid out to permit a motor vehicle to proceed to and from all
unoccupied spaces without moving other parked vehicles. Parking shall
be provided on the lot no closer than two feet to a side or rear lot line,
unless the two adjoining property owners mutually agree to a common
driveway in such form and manner acceptable for recording in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, Pennsylvania, binding
their heirs and assigns to the easement so created or unless the two
adjoining property owners agree that each may locate his or her
driveway at the lot line joined to the driveway of the other. No parking
spaces or driveways shall be allowed in the twenty-foot front yards, side
yards or rear yards described in Table 1. No carport roof or garage shall
be built within any front yard, side yard or rear yard.
E. Right-of-way width. The right-of-way width requirement shall be a
minimum of 34 feet. The restrictions and requirements of right-of-way
contained herein shall apply, notwithstanding the contrary provisions
contained in Chapter 149, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 175-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-14
169:643
R-M Uses
(§ 175-14)
Permitted Uses Accessory Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Essential services
Customary
residential
accessory uses
Swimming pool2
Home occupations
NOTES:
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically prohibited uses in
this district.
2 There are no special exceptions in this district.
RM Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-14C)
Minimum
Tract
Size
(acres)
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling
units
per
acre)
Lot
Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Lot
Width at
Street
Line
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
20 Minimum:
4,000
Average:
5,500,
all lots
5.5 of
gross
tract
area
40 33 Structures:
35%
Building:
30
Minimum Public
Park
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
5% Front: From center line of street: 30; where lot
line is tract boundary: 20 from right-of-way
Side: 5; where lot line is tract boundary: 20
Rear: 5; where lot line is tract boundary: 20
§ 175-14 PATTON CODE § 175-14
169:644
Required Off-Street Parking
(§ 175-14D)
Use Required Parking
Dwelling unit 2 spaces at least 9 feet in width and 20 feet in
length
See full text of § 175-14D
§ 175-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-14
169:645

ARTICLE III
Commercial Districts
[Amended 8-12-1987 by Ord. No. 87-221]
§ 175-15. Intent.
In addition to the general goals in § 175-2, the districts established in this
regulation are intended to achieve the following:
§ 175-16. C-1 General Commercial District. [Amended 1-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-297; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354; 7-16-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-498; 11-2-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-533; 3-27-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-548]
A. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations with public water
and sewer service for the types of commercial and service
establishments anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. To provide appropriate space for the requirements of present-day
merchandising, including the provisions of off-street parking spaces,
safe circulation of pedestrian and motor traffic in the district and in
nearby areas.
C. To promote the most desirable use of land and pattern of building
development in accordance with a well-considered plan, to promote
stable commercial development, to protect the character of the
commercial area and nearby districts and to conserve the value of land
and buildings.
D. To provide a means whereby the Township may, from time to time,
redesignate certain areas for planned commercial uses according to
commercial needs.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to provide commercial and other permitted
facilities to serve primarily the needs of the local residents, including
automotive-oriented facilities, neighborhood-type facilities and general
convenience needs.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-1 District, land and structures may be used
for only the uses shown in Table 3.
(2) Accessory uses are shown in Table 3.
C. Prerequisites for review and approval use. All uses shall comply with
the provisions of § 175-48, Site plan requirements and procedures, and
Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, to issuance of a permit to
occupy or use the lot.
§ 175-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-16
169:647
D. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 4 shall be
observed.
(1) Additional area and bulk regulations are as follows.
(a) Front setback: 70 feet. (As an alternative, the setback may be
reduced to no less than 50 feet upon approval of a site plan
which provides a rear yard of sufficient size so that the sum of
the setback and rear yards is at least 100 feet.)
(b) Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each. (As an alternative, the
Patton Township Planning Commission may recommend and
the Patton Township Supervisors may approve the
consolidation of side yards for a property located in a C-1
Commercial District so that one side yard is eliminated but the
resulting side yard must be a minimum of 30 feet. Such a
conditional approval would be based on a certified statement
that abutting property owners will develop abutting properties
simultaneously, using the same style or types of architecture
and the same types of construction materials.)
(c) Rear yards: 30 feet, except upon approval of a site plan as
provided in the setback section above. Screening shall be
provided at the rear yard, along a ten-foot buffer strip
measured from the rear property line.
E. Off-street parking requirements. See § 153-38.
F. Off-street loading regulations. See § 175-47.
G. Design standards. The following shall be applicable in all C-1
Commercial Districts:
(1) Screening shall be provided along all property lines as follows:
(a) In all front yard areas, canopy shade trees shall be planted at
thirty-foot intervals on average. Shrubs shall be planted
between the canopy trees.
(b) Screening in side and rear yards shall be based on the zoning
of the adjacent property according to Table 1.
(c) Applicants are encouraged to utilize existing vegetation to
meet the screening requirements. Following the completion of
a tree inventory, existing woodland areas may be used to
address the landscaping/screening requirements for setback
areas. All trees that are to be used to meet the requirements of
this section (whether planted or preexisting), however, must
have a caliper no less than 2.5 inches measured six inches
above the root ball. Invasive species, as defined by Appendix B
of the I-99 Overlay District regulations (Ordinance No.
2001-388),195 may not be planted or counted towards meeting
any landscaping requirements.
§ 175-16 PATTON CODE § 175-16
169:648
Table 1
Adjacent Zoning
District
Required Plantings Per 100
Linear Feet of Buffer
Type Amount
Agricultural and
residential districts
Canopy trees 4
Understory trees 6
Shrubs 24
Evergreens 12
All planned community,
university and planned
airport districts
Use appropriate twenty-five-foot
buffer yard standard from Tables 3,
4 and 5
All natural resources
districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
Shrubs 6
All commercial and
industrial districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
Shrubs 6
(d) To allow flexibility in the preparation of screening plans, the
following exchange ratios may be utilized by the applicant:
Table 2
Substitution Equal To
2 understory 1 canopy
1 canopy 2 understory
2 evergreen 1 canopy
1 evergreen 5 shrubs
1 understory 3 shrubs
(e) Where differing requirements are imposed by this subsection
on screening and by other sections requiring landscaping, the
requirements of this subsection shall take precedence.
(2) Storage, landscaping, access and traffic control, interior
circulation, lighting and shopping cart storage shall be as required
by § 175-44B through G of this chapter.
(3) Telecommunications facilities shall comply with the specific
provisions of § 175-48.1.
195. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-16
169:649
Commercial District Regulations
Table 3
C-1 Uses
(§ 175-16B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses1
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
All retail
establishments
for the sale,
service and
rental of goods
Customary
uses
accessory to
permitted
uses
All service
establishments,
including, but
not limited to:
Automobile
service stations
Barbers and
beauticians
Dry cleaning
Health clubs
Mortuaries
Tailors
Ambulance
services
Amusement
enterprises
Animal hospitals
Art galleries
Billiard parlors
Bowling alleys
Bus passenger
stations
Business offices
Churches and
other places of
worship
§ 175-16 PATTON CODE § 175-16
169:650
Commercial District Regulations
Table 3
C-1 Uses
(§ 175-16B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses1
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Clubs
Commercial
dairies
Commercial
parking lots
Community
centers
Dental offices
and clinics
Eating and
drinking
establishments
Financial offices
Firehouses
Fraternal
organizations
Halfway house
(except in PC
District)
Hotels and
motels
Lodges
Medical offices
and clinics
Motion-picture
theaters
Municipal office
buildings
Museums
Newspaper
publishing
§ 175-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-16
169:651
Commercial District Regulations
Table 3
C-1 Uses
(§ 175-16B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses1
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Opticians and
optical goods
Parish houses
and convents
Photographic
studios
Professional
offices
Public and
private garages
for the storage
and
maintenance of
motor vehicles
Public and
private
institutions of
higher education
Public libraries
Public utility
facilities
Radio and
television
studios
Reading rooms
Rehabilitation
center
Skating rinks
Solar energy
stystems
Studios for
instruction in
music and the
performing arts
§ 175-16 PATTON CODE § 175-16
169:652
Commercial District Regulations
Table 3
C-1 Uses
(§ 175-16B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses1
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Taxi and
limousine
service
Telecommunications
facilities
Tourist homes
Veterinary
offices
NOTES:
1 There are no conditional uses, special exceptions or
specifically prohibited uses in this zoning district.
Table 4
C-1 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-16D)
Minimum
Lot
Size
Minimum
Lot
Width
at
Front
Lot
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
at
Street
Line
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Impervious
Minimum
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
n/a 150 n/a (See
at front
lot line)
Structures:
30%
Less
than 3
acres:
75%
Greater
than or
equal to
3 acres:
70%
Front:
70
Side: 15
Rear:
30
50
§ 175-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:653
§ 175-17. C-2 Planned Commercial District. [Amended 1-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-297; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354; 11-18-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-358; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496; 3-27-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-548]
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to provide a cohesive unit of commercial usages
arranged and constructed according to a plan which will serve the
regional needs of this area. It is to reserve areas in the municipality for
specialized stores and larger retailers who must have an expanded
trade area.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-2 District, land and structures may be used
for only the uses shown in Table 3.
(2) Accessory uses are shown in Table 3.
C. Prerequisites for review and approval of use. All uses shall comply with
the provisions of § 175-48, Site plan requirements and procedures, and
Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, prior to issuance of a permit to
occupy or use the lot.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 4 shall be
observed. The following additional regulations shall also apply.
(1) Front setback. The minimum required front yard setback in the C-2
Zoning District shall be 25 feet. In this zoning district (C-2), in
addition to the general prohibition against structures in the yard
areas, development improvements such as parking lots and lighting
standards shall only be permitted in the front yard area when the
requirements of Subsection D(1)(a) are satisfied. Stormwater
basins shall only be permitted in the front yard area when the
requirements of Subsection D(1)(b) are satisfied. This prohibition
shall not include driveways and walkways providing ingress and
egress to the lot.
(a) The front yard setback may be reduced to 10 feet where a plan
for architectural, landscaping and earth-mounding features
acceptable to the Township provides enhanced screening of
such and aesthetic improvements to the property as a whole. A
property owner shall be authorized to place architectural
features and lighting standards, which might otherwise be
prohibited structures, in the reduced ten-foot setback as part
of the plan for enhanced screening. The Township reserves the
right to determine the level and type of architectural
enhancements which will be necessary to achieve the
reduction in the front setback area.
(b) A property owner shall be authorized to place stormwater
management facilities within the front yard setback where a
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17
169:654
plan for enhanced landscaping and/or architectural features
is provided. The plan for enhanced landscaping and/or
architectural features shall meet the following standards:
[1] All perimeter basin walls shall be landscaped with
evergreen and deciduous shrubs and ornamental grasses
to form a continuous landscaping area.
[2] All internal basin walls which are visible from the public
right-of-way or parking lot shall be landscaped with
shrubs, ornamental grasses and, where appropriate,
understory trees.
[3] Architectural features may be substituted for landscape
enhancements if the plan to do so is acceptable to the
Township.
(2) Side setback.
(a) In this zoning district (C-2), in addition to the general
prohibition against structures in the yard areas, no
development improvements, such as parking lots, lighting
standards and stormwater basins, shall be permitted in the
rear or side yard areas. This prohibition shall not include
driveways and walkways providing ingress and egress to the
lot or driveways along a property line when adjacent to a
nonresidential district, provided that the driveway is at least
five feet from the property line.
(b) If a plan acceptable to the Township is presented which
provides a combination of landscaping, mounds and sound
attenuation barriers to buffer the adjacent rural or residential
district, this setback shall be reduced to 75 feet. The Township
reserves the right to determine the level and type of
landscaping, mounds and sound attenuation barriers which
will be necessary to achieve the reduction in the setbacks. The
landscaping requirements shall be as provided in Subsection
G(1).
(c) Stormwater facilities shall be permitted in rear or side yards
adjacent to nonresidential districts or adjacent to identified
nonresidential areas within Planned Community, University
and Planned Airport Districts.
(3) Maximum impervious coverage is illustrated in Table 4. The
following additional regulations also apply.
(a) The developer of a C-2 property may utilize up to 70% of the
property for impervious coverage, provided that an enhanced
plan for stormwater management meeting the following
standards is provided and approved by the Township.
§ 175-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:655
(b) Enhanced stormwater standards. The following standards shall
apply in addition to the standards required under Chapter 147:
[1] Detain the one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm using
the SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made so
that the one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to
drain from the facility from a point where the maximum
volume of water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e.,
the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the
facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the
storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the
invert of the facility). The design of the facility shall
consider and minimize the chances of clogging and
sedimentation potential.
[2] To accomplish the above, the land developer may submit
original and innovative designs to the Township Engineer
for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the
water quality objectives through a combination of best
management practices (BMPs).
[3] Where appropriate, BMPs should encourage infiltration to
reduce detention volumes and recharge groundwater. A
geologic evaluation of the project site shall be performed
to determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified geologist and/
or soil scientist and at a minimum address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole
formation and subgrade stability. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures
to prevent groundwater contamination and sinkhole
formation.
[4] In selecting the appropriate BMPs, the land developer
shall consider the following:
[a] Total contributing area.
[b] Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
[c] Slope and depth to bedrock.
[d] Seasonal high-water table.
[e] Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
[f] Erodibility of soils.
[g] Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(c) A developer shall be entitled to achieve 65% impervious
coverage on the property (or 70% as stated above). If the
setbacks established in Subsection D(4) make it impossible to
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17
169:656
achieve this coverage, because of the small size or odd
configuration of the property, the setbacks shall be
proportionately lessened to permit such impervious coverage
at the limits established by this subsection.
E. Off-street parking requirements. See § 153-38.
F. Off-street loading regulations. See § 175-47.
G. Design standards. The following shall be applicable in all C-2
Commercial Districts.
(1) Screening and landscaping.
(a) In all front yard areas, canopy shade trees shall be planted at
thirty-foot intervals on average. Shrubs shall be planted
between the canopy trees.
(b) Screening in side and rear yards shall be based on the zoning
of the adjacent property according to the following
requirements:
[1] Screening shall be provided at the rear yard, along a tenfoot
buffer strip measured from the rear property line.
Required Plantings Per
100 Linear Feet of Buffer
Adjacent Zoning
District Type Amount
Rural and residential
districts (See Note 1)
Canopy trees 4
Understory
trees
6
Shrubs 24
Evergreens 12
All planned community,
university and planned
airport districts
Use appropriate twenty-fivefoot
buffer yard standard
from Tables 3, 4 and 5
All natural resources
districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory
trees
4
Shrubs 6
All commercial and
industrial districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory
trees
4
Shrubs 6
§ 175-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:657
To allow flexibility in the preparation of screening
plans, the following exchange ratios may be utilized
by the applicant:
Substitution Equal To
2 understory 1 canopy
1 canopy 2 understory
2 evergreen 1 canopy
1 evergreen 5 shrubs
1 understory 3 shrubs
NOTES:
1. The enhanced landscaping required to reduce the side
and rear setback to 75 feet as provided in Subsection
D(5) and (6) shall include 120% of the required
plantings listed herein.
[2] Applicants are encouraged to utilize existing vegetation to
meet the screening requirements. Following the
completion of a tree inventory, existing woodland areas
may be used to address the landscaping/screening
requirements for setback areas.
[3] Where differing requirements are imposed by this
subsection on screening and by other sections requiring
landscaping, the requirements of this subsection shall take
precedence.
(2) Storage, landscaping, access and traffic control, interior
circulation, lighting and shopping cart storage shall be as required
by § 175-44B through G of this chapter.
(3) Telecommunication facilities shall comply with the specific
provisions of § 175-48.1.
(4) Sidewalk at front of store.
(a) A suitable sidewalk shall be provided in front of the
entranceway of each retail store. The following scale shall be
used to determine the minimum width of the sidewalk between
the store front and any area accessible by vehicle (driveway,
parking lot, etc.):
Table 2
Store Size
(square feet)
Minimum Sidewalk Width
(feet)
Less than 50,000 8
50,000 to 99,999 10
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17
169:658
Table 2
Store Size
(square feet)
Minimum Sidewalk Width
(feet)
100,000 to 149,999 12
150,000 or more 14
(b) The minimum length of this sidewalk across the front of the
store shall be the same as the distance across the entranceway
plus the amount of the minimum sidewalk width (as
determined above) on each side of the entranceway. The
sidewalk fronting the remainder of the store shall be a
minimum of five feet in width.
Table 3
C-2 Uses
(§ 175-17B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
Same permitted
uses as C1, with
the addition of
arenas, stadiums
and commercial
auditoriums;
commercial
cemeteries; and
hospitals.
Customary
uses
accessory
to
permitted
uses
All retail
establishments
for the sale,
service and
rental of goods
§ 175-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:659
Table 3
C-2 Uses
(§ 175-17B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
All service
establishments,
including, but
not limited to:
Automobile
service stations
Barbers and
beauticians
Dry cleaning
Health clubs
Mortuaries
Tailors
Ambulance
services
Amusement
enterprises
Animal hospitals
Arenas, stadiums
and commercial
auditoriums
Art galleries
Billiard parlors
Bowling alleys
Bus passenger
stations
Business offices
Churches and
other places of
worship Clubs
Commercial
cemeteries
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17
169:660
Table 3
C-2 Uses
(§ 175-17B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
Commercial
dairies
Commercial
parking lots
Community
centers
Dental offices
and clinics
Eating and
drinking
establishments
Financial offices
Firehouses
Fraternal
organizations
Halfway house
(except in PC
District)
Hospitals
Hotels and
motels
Lodges
Medical offices
and clinics
Motion picture
theatres
Municipal office
buildings
Museums
Newspaper
publishing
Opticians and
optical goods
§ 175-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:661
Table 3
C-2 Uses
(§ 175-17B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
Parish houses
and convents
Photographic
studios
Professional
offices
Public and
private garages
for the storage
and maintenance
of motor vehicles
Public and
private
institutions of
higher education
Public libraries
Public utility
facilities
Radio and
television
studios
Reading rooms
Rehabilitation
center
Skating rinks
Solar energy
systems
Studios for
instruction in
music and the
performing arts
Taxi and
limousine
service
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17
169:662
Table 3
C-2 Uses
(§ 175-17B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
Telecommunications
facilities
Tourist homes
Veterinary
offices
NOTES:
1 There are no conditional uses, special exceptions or
specifically prohibited uses in this zoning district.
Table 4
C-2 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-17D)
Minimum
Lot Size
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width at
Front Lot
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width at
Street Line
Maximum
Lot Coverage
3 150 n/a (See at
front lot line)
30%
(structures)
§ 175-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17
169:663
§ 175-17.1. OB Office Buffer District. [Added 10-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-369; amended 1-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-465; 5-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-496; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-548]
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
Building: 50 Less than 3 acres:
75%
Greater than or
equal to 3 acres:
65%
(70% with enhanced
stormwater
management)
Front: 25
Side: based on adjacent
zoning
Rural and Residential:
90
Planned Community,
University and Planned
Airport: 25
Natural Resource: 15
Commercial and
Industrial: 10
Rear: same as side
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to achieve the following:
(1) To allow office development to occur in appropriate locations
within the Township.
(2) To establish a zoning district which will serve as a buffer between
major highway corridors and established residential
neighborhoods.
(3) To avoid the problems associated with highway-oriented
development by encouraging professional office development to
occur in a manner which implements sound highway corridor
planning approaches.
(4) To minimize access points to collector and arterial roads.
B. Use regulations. [Amended 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-570]
(1) Uses by right. In any OB District, land and structures may be used
only for the uses shown in Table 1.
(2) Accessory uses. The uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted as
accessory uses within the Office Buffer District.
§ 175-17 PATTON CODE § 175-17.1
169:664
(3) Conditional uses. The uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted as
conditional uses within the Office Buffer District. The procedures
outlined in § 175-42 shall be followed in the review of any
conditional use application by Patton Township.
C. Prerequisites for review and approval. All uses shall comply with the
provisions of § 175-48, Site plan requirements and procedures, and
Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, prior to the issuance of a
permit to occupy or use any lot located within this district.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 1 shall be
observed. In addition, the following regulations shall also apply:
(1) Parking areas and driveways are prohibited from the side and rear
setback areas adjacent to R-l, R-2, or A-l Zoning Districts.
(2) (Reserved).
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%. The developer may utilize up
to 60% of the property for impervious coverage, provided that an
enhanced plan for stormwater management meeting the following
standards is provided and approved by the Township:
(a) Detain the one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm using the
SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made to ensure
the one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from
the facility from a point where the maximum volume of water
from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water
can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the
facility shall consider and minimize the chances of clogging
and sedimentation potential.
(b) To accomplish the above, the land developer may submit
original and innovative designs to the Township Engineer for
review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water
quality objectives through a combination of Best Management
Practices (BMPs).
(c) Where appropriate, BMPs should encourage infiltration to
reduce detention volumes and recharge groundwater. A
geologic evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation
shall be performed by a qualified geologist and/or soil scientist,
and, at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation and subgrade
stability. The design of all facilities over limestone formations
shall include measures to prevent groundwater contamination
and sinkhole formation.
§ 175-17.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.1
169:665
(d) In selecting the appropriate BMPs, the land developer shall
consider the following:
[1] Total contributing area.
[2] Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
[3] Slope and depth to bedrock.
[4] Seasonal high-water table.
[5] Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
[6] Erodibility of soils.
[7] Land availability and configuration of the topography.
E. Off-street parking regulations. The off-street parking regulations
contained in § 153-38 of the Patton Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall apply to all developments within the
Office Buffer District. In addition, the following requirements will apply:
(1) In calculating the number of parking spaces required for uses
within the Office Buffer District, all interior areas used for
stairways, elevators and any unfinished space used for storage
shall be excluded from the gross floor area calculation.
(2) The following regulations will apply to loading and unloading areas
in the Office Buffer District:
(a) Loading and unloading space for one vehicle shall be at least
12 feet wide, 45 feet long and shall have at least a fourteen-foot
vertical clearance.
(b) Loading and unloading spaces shall have paved surfaces to
provide safe and convenient access during all seasons.
(c) Loading spaces shall not be constructed within an area
bounded by a triangle 25 feet on each side, measured from the
joining point of street lines, in such a manner as to obstruct
vision.
(d) Required off-street parking spaces shall not be used for loading
and unloading purposes except during hours when business
operations are suspended.
(e) Loading and unloading shall occur only between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
F. Conduct of business within the Office Buffer District. [Amended
5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-570]
(1) Businesses within the Office Buffer District may be open to the
public between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 175-17.1 PATTON CODE § 175-17.1
169:666
(2) A health/fitness center may open to the public beginning at 5:30
a.m. for scheduled appointments, including exercise classes that
require pre-registration, for no more than 30 patrons. Additionally,
to be eligible to open at 5:30 a.m., the building and parking field
must be sited such that the building is located between the parking
field and adjacent residential uses outside the Office Buffer
District.
(3) All business activity within the Office Buffer District shall be
conducted within the building on the site. Any outdoor storage of
business materials or supplies is prohibited.
G. Design and landscaping controls.
(1) The buffer yard requirements contained in § 175-40A, Tables 3, 4
and 5, shall apply to all developments within the Office Buffer
District, with the exception that Buffer Yard C shall be implemented
when the Office Buffer District is adjacent to any residential use or
zoning district.
(2) At least 50% of required tree plantings within the buffer yard area
be conifers to ensure an effective all-season buffer.
(3) The off-street parking landscaping requirements contained in
§ 153-38 shall apply to all developments within the Office Buffer
District.
(4) Existing trees, hedgerows and other community assets and
landmarks shall be preserved and incorporated into the design of
the development. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
demonstrate to the Township the need for existing trees,
hedgerows and other community assets to be removed during
development.
(5) Development plans shall be designed to minimize grading and
other changes to the natural terrain. All graded slopes shall blend
with the surrounding terrain and development.
(6) Any development which exceeds 110% of the minimum number of
parking spaces required by the Township ordinance must provide a
satisfactory plan to the Township which employs enhanced
landscaping and architectural features. These enhancements shall
include two or more developer-selected items from the list of
approved enhancements maintained by the Township. At least one
enhancement shall be taken from each of the two categories,
Landscaping and Architectural/Other, on the list.
(7) To ensure that the goals of the Office Buffer District are addressed,
access to properties shall be provided as follows:
§ 175-17.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.1
169:667
(a) Nonresidential uses shall only be permitted access from
arterial streets or streets of lesser classification which
intersect with arterial streets.
(b) Access to parcels shall be provided according to the following
hierarchy:
[1] To streets of lesser classification which intersect with the
arterial street.
[2] Directly to the arterial via a driveway shared with an
adjacent property.
[3] Directly to the arterial with the specific location and
design determined by best engineering practices.
(8) If more than 50% but less than 75% of the required off-street
parking is located at the rear of the building, Buffer Yard D will be
required. If more than 75% of the required off-street parking is
located at the rear of the building, Buffer Yard E will be required.
(9) All portions and sides of buildings located within the office district
that have sides and walls visible from the arterial corridor and
adjacent residential properties shall utilize the same materials that
are used on the designated front of the building.
§ 175-17.1 PATTON CODE § 175-17.1
169:668
Table 1
OBD Uses
(§ 175-17.1B)
[Amended 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-570]
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions
Prohibited
Uses
Professional
offices
Churches and
other places of
worship
Parish houses
and convents
Medical offices
Dental offices
Opticians and
optical goods
Public
libraries and
museums
Art galleries
Reading rooms
Single-family
dwellings
consistent
with allowable
density in
adjacent
zoning district
Coffee
house,
juice bar or
other
similar
retail
service
intended to
serve the
patrons of
the primary
use(s) in a
building
Community
centers
Photographic
studios
Veterinary
offices
Duplexes
and
townhouses
consistent
with
allowable
density in
adjacent
zoning
district
Dance
studios
Health/
fitness
centers
Outside
kennels
§ 175-17.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.1
169:669
OBD Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-17.1D)
Setbacks
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Right-of-
Way Line
(feet)
Adjacent
Zoning District Front Side Rear
n/a 300
150 if
access is
provided
by means
of a
driveway
with an
adjacent
property
A1 (Rural), R1
(Rural
Residential)
All Commercial,
Office Buffer, and
Industrial
All other districts
251
45
45
50
15
35
70
35
35
Maximum Lot Coverage
n/a
Maximum Impervious
55%; 60% with enhanced stormwater
Maximum Height
45 feet except where building is within 90 feet of an adjacent R-1,
R-2, or A-1 Zoning District, in which instance the maximum
building height shall be equal to the permitted maximum building
height of the adjacent R-1, R-2, or A-1 Zoning District
Maximum Length of Any Building in Any Direction
Shall not exceed 1/2 of the depth of the lot from the front yard
property line to the rear yard property line bordering public
rights-of-way
Minimum Distance Between Any Two Buildings on Any Lot
Shall be not less than twice the height of the tallest of the two
buildings or 30 feet, whichever is greater
NOTE:
1 The twenty-five-foot setback shall be applied when the rear of
an OB parcel is adjacent to the A1 or R1 Zoning District.
§ 175-17.1 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:670
§ 175-17.2. OBD2 Officer Buffer District 2. [Added 9-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 438; amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496; 3-27-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-548]
A. Intent. The intent of the Office Buffer District 2 is to:
(1) Establish a zoning district for larger tracts of land along
interchanges and major highways to serve as a buffer to residential
neighborhoods.
(2) Avoid problems associated with highway-oriented development by
encouraging office development to occur in a manner compatible
with the nature of the interchange area.
(3) Mitigate the traffic, noise and other impacts from interchanges on
immediately adjacent neighborhoods.
(4) Mitigate impact of nonresidential development along highways on
residential neighborhoods.
(5) Control access points to collector and arterial roads.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any OB2 District, land and structures may be used
only for the uses shown in Table 1.
(2) Conditional uses. The uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted as a
conditional use within the Office Buffer District 2 as per § 175-42 of
the Code.
(3) Prerequisites for review and approval. All uses shall comply with
the provisions of § 175-48, Site plan requirements and procedures,
and Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, prior to the issuance
of a permit to occupy or use any lot located within this district.
C. Master plan approval. All development within the Office Buffer District
2 must be done pursuant to approval of a master plan in accordance
with the procedure that follows. Master plans for the Office Buffer
District 2 shall be reviewed by the Patton Township Planning
Commission and the Centre Regional Planning Commission and shall be
approved or denied by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
procedures specified herein.
(1) Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is recommended
but shall not be mandatory, nor shall it be regarded as a formal
application for development, in the Office Buffer District 2. The
purpose of the meeting is to provide for an informational exchange
at the municipal staff level where the major elements of a proposed
master plan can be reviewed and evaluated. The filing of any
report, sketch plan, plat or map prior to or at such meeting shall
not constitute submission of a plan or application for Office Buffer
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:671
District 2 development, nor shall such materials be binding on
subsequent submissions by the applicant.
(2) Sketch plan submission. The applicant is encouraged to submit a
sketch plan, in both paper and digital (in a form acceptable to the
Township) format, of the proposed Office Buffer District 2
development. The purpose is to discuss a conceptual sketch of the
proposed development with the municipal staff, the Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors prior to final submission.
(3) Master plan application and review. Application for Township
approval of an Office Buffer District 2 development shall commence
with the official submission of a complete set of plans and all
required supplementary data and information to the Township. At
any time during the review process, the applicant may amend the
originally submitted plan solely for the purpose of correcting minor
deficiencies in the original plan to the extent necessary to meet the
requirements of this section.
(a) A master plan shall be deemed to have been submitted for
review when the applicant has furnished to the Township the
following documents:
[1] Twelve copies of a master plan prepared by a registered
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or similarly
qualified person, which shall fully comply with the
requirements of this chapter. One additional copy shall be
submitted in a digital format acceptable to Patton
Township.
[2] Three copies of a narrative, which shall fully comply with
the requirement of this chapter.
[3] Three copies of a transportation impact analysis, which
shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Upon receipt of the above, the Township Zoning Officer shall
forward copies of the master plan and accompanying
documentation to the Township Engineer, Centre Regional
Planning Commission, Centre County Planning Commission
and other appropriate agencies.
(c) Review by the Township Planning Commission.
[1] At its next regular meeting following the receipt of the
application for Master Plan approval, provided that such
application was made at least 30 days prior to the meeting,
the Planning Commission shall review the plan to
determine its conformance with the provisions contained
in these regulations.
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:672
[2] The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board
of Supervisors of any recommended action, changes or
modifications to the plan after such decision is made,
provided that the Planning Commission shall make such
recommendations within 70 days after the date the
application for approval was filed. The Planning
Commission shall make no recommendation on such
application until reports from the Centre County and
Centre Regional Planning Commissions are received, or
until expiration of 30 days from the date the plan was
forwarded to these agencies, whichever comes first.
[3] If review by the Township Planning Commission results in
an unfavorable recommendation because the
requirements of this chapter have not been met,
notification to the Township Board of Supervisors should
specify the defects found in the plan, describe the
requirements that have not been met, and cite the
provisions of this chapter from which such defects or
requirements originate.
(d) Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of
the recommendation from the Planning Commission or upon
failure to receive said recommendations 70 days after
submittal, the Board of Supervisors shall review the
application for master plan approval.
[1] The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the
written reports of the Township Planning Commission, the
Centre County Planning Commission, the Centre Regional
Planning Commission, the Township Engineer and the
other reviewing agencies to determine if the plan meets all
applicable regulations. Prior to approval of a master plan,
the Board of Supervisors shall require a public hearing.
[2] The Township shall place a notice of the time and place of
the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation as
set forth by the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
(e) Approval or denial. The Board of Supervisors, within 50 days
following the Planning Commission action or inaction, shall by
official written communication to the applicant either:
[1] Grant approval of the master plan as submitted.
[2] Grant approval subject to the applicant meeting specified
modifications to the master plan as submitted.
[3] Deny approval of the plan, including a list of reasons and/
or plan deficiencies.
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:673
(f) Where an Office Buffer District 2 development may occur over
a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize
development in phases subject to such requirements or
guaranties as to improvements in future phases of the
development that it finds essential for the protection of any
approved phase. In such case, a schedule showing the
proposed times within which applications for final approval of
land development plans of all phases of the development are
intended to be filed shall be included with the master plan. The
schedule may be revised by the Board of Supervisors if
requested to do so by the landowner or developer.
(g) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the
master plan in terms as presented, unless the applicant has
agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation or communication of the
decision, in which case failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of presentation of communication shall have
like effect.
(h) In the event that approval is granted subject to conditions, the
owner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the governing body, notify the Board
of Supervisors of his or her refusal to accept all of said
conditions, in which case, the Board of Supervisors shall be
deemed to have denied approval of the master plan. In the
event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify
the Board of Supervisors of his or her acceptance of all of said
conditions, approval of the master plan shall be deemed to
have been denied.
(i) An approved master plan shall be recorded by the developer in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County within 90
days of approval.
(j) Approval of a master plan shall not authorize construction or
the issuance of any building permit. Such authorization or
issuance shall not occur until a land development plan is
approved for the applicable area.
(4) Required master plan content. Proposed master plans shall be
drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger (e.g., one inch
equals 30 feet) and shall contain the following information:
(a) General data.
[1] Name of proposed Office Buffer District 2 development.
[2] North point.
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:674
[3] Graphic scale and legend describing all symbols shown on
the plan.
[4] Day, month and year the plan was prepared and date and
description of revisions to the plan occurring after formal
submission.
[5] Name and address of the owner and deed book and page
numbers of the deeds conveying the property to the owner.
Name of the developer and his or her billing address (if
different).
[6] Name, address and seal of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
[7] Names of abutting property owners, tax parcel numbers
and their deed book and page numbers.
[8] Key map showing the location of proposed Office Buffer
District 2 development and all roads within 5,000 feet
therefrom.
[9] Centre County tax parcel number of parcel where the
Office Buffer District 2 development is proposed.
[10] A certification of ownership and plan acknowledgment
signature block.
[11] An offer of dedication signature block.
[12] Township approval signature block.
[13] Recorder of Deeds signature block.
(b) Existing features.
[1] Perimeter boundaries of the total property, showing
bearings to the nearest minute and distances to the
nearest hundredth of a foot.
[2] Total acreage of the tract and total square feet within each
lot of the development.
[3] Natural features:
[a] Sinkholes, watercourses, tree masses and unique
vegetation or natural features.
[b] Floodplain, steep slopes and critical groundwater
recharge areas.
[c] Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of 10
feet.
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:675
[4] Approximate location of man-made features in or within
100 feet of the property, including:
[a] Sewer lines and laterals.
[b] Water mains and fire hydrants.
[c] Electrical lines and poles.
[d] Culverts and bridges.
[e] Railroads.
[f] Buildings.
[g] Streets, including right-of-way and cartway widths
and approximate grades.
[h] Development of abutting properties, including
location and types of uses.
(c) Proposed development.
[1] The approximate location and use of buildings and other
structures. (All area dimensions shall be indicated in
square feet.)
[2] The approximate location and area of driveways and
parking and loading areas.
[3] The approximate property lines of lots to be subdivided,
measured to the nearest foot.
[4] The approximate location of sidewalks and bike paths.
[5] The approximate location of utility and drainage
easements.
[6] The approximate location and pipe diameter of sewer and
water mains.
[7] The approximate location of fire hydrants.
[8] Perimeter setbacks and required buffer yards.
[9] Street information, including:
[a] Location and width of right-of-way and cartway.
[b] Proposed street names.
[c] Approximate road profiles along the center line of
each proposed street, showing finished grade at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one
inch equals five feet vertical.
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:676
[10] A conceptual landscaping plan indicating the treatment of
materials and landscaping concepts used for private and
common open space.
[11] A general grading plan showing any major alterations to
the topography of the site.
[12] The location and area of proposed open space.
[13] A table shall be included on the plan describing each
phase or section with quantitative data, including the
following:
[a] The total area of the development and approximate
area of each phase.
[b] The area of streets, parking, sidewalks, and walkways
and the total area paved and percent of area paved or
covered by the structures in the development and
each phase or section.
[c] The total acreage and percent of acreage in open
space in the development.
[d] The calculation of impervious surface in the
development and in each phase.
(d) Narrative statement. The following information should be
included with a narrative statement submitted with the master
plan:
[1] A statement of the ownership of all of the land included
within the master plan.
[2] An explanation of the design pattern of the Office Buffer
District 2 development.
[3] The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions that will be imposed on the use of land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public use or utilities. The covenants should
specifically indicate that any land proposed for open space
shall be used for such purposes in perpetuity.
[4] A description of the form of organization proposed to own
and maintain the designated open space or other common
facilities.
[5] A description of proposals to preserve natural features and
existing amenities and a statement of conceptual
landscaping designs.
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:677
[6] A preliminary stormwater management plan illustrating
drainage patterns and detention pond areas. The plan
should include preliminary pond sizing calculations.
(e) Development schedule. When it is anticipated that
development pursuant to an approved master plan will occur in
phases over a period of years, the following shall be included
with the application for master plan approval:
[1] The phases in which the land development will be
submitted for final land development approval and the
approximate date when each phase will be submitted for
final plan approval. Any phase of development pursuant to
an approved master plan shall be able to function
independently of the undeveloped phases while being
compatible with adjacent or neighboring land uses.
[2] The approximate date when each phase will be completed.
(f) Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis shall be
submitted with all master plan submissions and shall be
prepared by a qualified professional. Land development plans
that deviate from the master plan analysis shall submit a
revised traffic impact analysis.
[1] Access:
[a] For tracts that are not subdivided or are subdivided
into two or three lots, access point(s) shall be as
determined by the traffic impact analysis and may
utilize a shared driveway or an internal public road.
[b] For tracts subdivided into four or more lots, access to
lots shall be from an internal public roadway.
[2] The TIA shall include the following:
[a] Analysis and description of existing conditions and
traffic volumes for the external road network serving
the site. The external road network to be studied shall
be determined by the municipality prior to the master
plan review.
[b] A base condition analysis shall be prepared to
establish existing levels of service followed by analysis
and description of projected traffic conditions based
on the land uses proposed within the development.
Trip generation rates for morning and evening peak
hours of the project shall be prepared, as well as the
internal/external trip distribution and intersection
analysis.
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:678
[c] The analysis shall address the traffic impacts of the
proposed development along with surrounding trafficgenerating
land uses in the area, including land use
changes. The analysis will evaluate the adequacy of
the area road network and identify the need for road
and access and traffic control measure improvements
generated by the proposed development and
surrounding land uses.
[d] The analysis shall contain recommended internal and
off-site road improvements. These recommended
improvements should be specific as to location and
scope of work required along with a phased schedule
for implementation. Examples of additional items that
should be included in this section are:
[i] Typical sections for each category of street.
[ii] A phasing plan which delineates the street
improvements that will be provided
simultaneously with the construction of each
development phase.
[e] Utilization of alternate modes of transportation shall
be a component of the traffic impact analysis.
Evaluation of traffic mitigation measures as it relates
to public transportation and future site development
should also be addressed.
[f] Revision of the traffic impact analysis based on major
changes (as defined in this article) to the approved
master plan shall be required. This shall occur prior to
the filing of an application to amend the master plan.
(5) Amendments to an approved master plan. Any major changes
requested to an approved master plan must meet the procedural
and content requirements presented in § 175-17.2. A major change
to an approved master plan is represented by any of the following:
(a) Any decrease in the approved open space area percentage.
(b) A change in the location of external vehicular access points or
interior roadway locations.
(c) Any other change determined by the Township to be
significant.
D. Procedure for development.
(1) After approval of a master plan, all subsequent subdivision and
land development plans within the master plan area must be
submitted in accordance with and meet the applicable
requirements of Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:679
this chapter and Chapter 147, Streets and Sidewalks, in addition to
the requirements of this article. In the event of a conflict between
the requirements contained in this article and any other ordinance,
the requirements of this article will apply.
(2) Any major change proposed to an approved master plan will
require an amendment of the master plan. If the major change is
contained within a proposed subdivision or land development plan,
the Board of Supervisors shall not grant approval of the plan until
an amendment of the master plan occurs. In the event of such
denial, the landowner may refile the final plan without the major
changes identified in such written notice or file an application to
amend the master plan, following the procedures required herein
for approval.
(3) A minor change to an approved master plan shall not require an
amendment of the master plan. If the minor change is proposed as
part of a subdivision or land development plan, then the change will
be approved through the normal review process for subdivision and
land development plans.
E. Area, bulk, open space, setbacks and parking regulations are shown in
Table 1. The following additional regulations shall also apply.
(1) A tract is defined as a contiguous single parcel of land to start with
for a master plan. Tracts that are located on either side of a public
road must have the minimum 40 acres on each side of the public
road.
(2) Setbacks:
(a) Parking lots. In this zoning district (OBD2), structures and
parking lots shall be prohibited in setback areas.
(b) Stormwater ponds. Stormwater ponds may be permitted only
in the setback area adjacent to right-of-way. Stormwater ponds
shall not be permitted in other setback areas.
(c) Driveways and access roads. Driveways or access roads shall
be permitted in setback areas only to provide access to or
connect to roadways on adjacent parcels.
(3) Conduct of business within the Office Buffer District 2.
(a) Businesses within the Office Buffer District 2 may be open for
business between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. This
requirement is intended to mitigate impacts on adjacent
residential neighborhoods. If longer hours of operation are
desired, additional enhancements shall be provided. The
enhancements shall include two or more developer-selected
items from the list of approved enhancements maintained by
the Township. At least one enhancement shall be taken from
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:680
each of the two categories, landscaping and architectural/
other, on the list.
(b) All business activity within the Office Buffer District 2 shall be
conducted within the building on the site. Any outdoor storage
of business materials or supplies is prohibited.
(4) Lighting shall be as required by § 175-48.2 of this chapter.
(5) Storage shall be as required by § 175-44B of this chapter.
(6) Landscaping shall be as required by § 175-44C of this chapter.
(7) Utilities.
(a) Water supply. Each property shall connect with an approved
public water system.
(b) Sanitary sewage disposal.
[1] Each tract shall connect with an approved public sewer
system if the tract is within the sewer service area
established in the Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan.
[2] The developer shall provide on-lot sewage disposal
systems if the tract is outside the sewer service area
established in the Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan. The onlot
sewer systems installed by the developer shall conform
to all Township and DEP requirements.
[3] If the tract is added to the sewer service area established
in the Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan after development,
the tract shall connect to the public sewer system if within
150 feet of nearest property line.
(c) All other utilities servicing the Office Buffer District 2 shall be
provided underground.
(8) Parking and sidewalk requirements.
(a) Motor vehicle access and parking shall be provided as required
in Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development. If the
number of parking spaces exceeds the minimum required by
110%, additional enhancements shall be required. But in no
case shall the number of parking spaces provided be greater
than 120% of the minimum number of allowable spaces.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets or the developer
may provide alternate pedestrian access appropriate to the site
at the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
F. Design and landscaping controls.
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:681
(1) Landscaping.
(a) The buffer yard requirements contained in § 175-40A, Table 5,
shall apply to all developments within the Office Buffer District
2. Buffer Yard D shall be implemented when the Office Buffer
District 2 is adjacent to any residential/agriculture use or
zoning district. For all other adjacent uses or zoning districts,
Buffer Yard C shall be used. A minimum of Buffer Yard C shall
be provided within a single tract along interior lots.
(b) Following completion of a tree inventory, existing vegetation
can be used to meet the buffer yard requirements. To allow
flexibility in meeting buffer yard requirements the following
exchange ratios may be used:
Substitution Equal To
2 understory 1 canopy
1 canopy 2 understory
2 evergreen 1 canopy
1 evergreen 5 shrubs
1 understory 3 shrubs
(c) Wooded setback areas designated as open space shall remain
in their natural state. Existing trees within other setback areas,
particularly adjacent to lands designated for residential or
agricultural use, should be preserved.
(2) Hedgerows, waterways, historic sites, scenic points, views, and
vistas and other community assets and landmarks should be
preserved.
(3) To ensure that the goals of the Office Buffer District 2 are
addressed, access to properties shall be provided as follows:
(a) Access to the tract shall be permitted only from arterial or
collector streets.
(b) The minimum distance between access points shall be 300 feet
or shall be established based on a traffic impact analysis.
(c) Inter-parcel access to adjacent nonresidential lands and
between lots within the tract shall be provided.
(4) Interior circulation shall be as required by § 175-44E of this
chapter.
(5) Stream and wetland buffers.
(a) All improvements or land disturbances within the district shall
be set back at least 100 feet from the top of any stream bank or
edge of any wetland in a rural area and 65 feet from the top of
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:682
any stream bank or edge of any wetland in an urban area.
The urban or rural location shall be determined by the location
of the Regional Growth Boundary in the Centre Region
Comprehensive Plan. This setback shall apply to all streams
delineated on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for the
Township and all streams depicted on the Township's Official
Zoning Map with drainage areas greater than 100 acres.
Where no well-defined top of bank exists for an intermittent
stream, the setback shall be measured from the line defined by
the water surface elevation for the two-year storm.
(b) All existing vegetation within the setback established in
Subsection F(5)(a) above shall be preserved.
(c) Where stream crossings are approved pursuant to applicable
federal and state stream encroachment regulations, the
setback established in Subsection F(5)(a) above shall be
waived as to the approved crossing; provided, however, the
natural channel shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(6) Slope restrictions.
(a) For the purpose of this section, the slope(s) of a site shall be
determined by utilizing topographic surveys following written
guidelines prepared by the Township Engineer and approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) In areas of steep slopes within the district, the following
standards shall apply to all grading and development:
[1] For slopes averaging 15% to 25%, no more than 40% of
naturally occurring slopes shall be developed, graded,
deforested, and/or stripped of vegetation. An additional
30% of such naturally occurring slope may be developed
upon submission of a report by a qualified professional
engineer certifying that the sloped areas may be
developed and inclusion of two of the following mitigation
measures when the disturbed area exceeds 55% of such
naturally occurring slope:
[a] Preserve other undisturbed land with less than 15%
slope equal to 1.0 times the additional area disturbed.
[b] Provide for the recharge of stormwater for an amount
of impervious area equal to 1.2 times the additional
area disturbed. The minimum required recharge
volume is equal to 1.5 inches' runoff for the area
defined.
[c] Provide additional landscaping equivalent to a twentyfoot-
wide Buffer Yard D for an area equal to 1.2 times
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:683
the additional area disturbed. The "required plant
units/100" are required for each 2,000 square feet
required to be landscaped. The landscaping may be
provided on nonwooded, undisturbed ground or in
developed areas. Substitutions between types of
plantings may be made at the exchange ratios
established for setback landscaping.
[2] For slopes averaging greater than 25%, no development
shall be allowed, except upon submission of a report by a
professional engineer certifying that the steep slope may
be safely developed. Furthermore, the owner and/or
developer shall agree, as a condition to approval of the
development plan, to hold the municipality harmless from
and against any and all claims or damages due to approval
of such plan. If development is allowed to occur under this
subsection, no more than 15% of such naturally occurring
slopes shall be developed, graded, deforested, and/or
stripped of vegetation.
(7) Open space.
(a) For the purpose of this district only, the following definition of
open space shall apply:
OPEN SPACE — A wooded area, meadow or land in its natural
state within the boundaries of a master plan intended to
preserve natural amenities such as woodlands, wetlands/
natural drainage areas and wildlife in perpetuity where no
development is permitted. Hiking/biking trails shall be
permitted in the open space area if deemed necessary to
connect to trails on adjacent parcels. Areas excluded from
open space calculations shall include public and private streets
and drives except when providing inter-parcel access, parking
lots, pipeline and/or power easements and private spaces such
as lawn and patio areas not available for common and/or public
use.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the tract shall remain in open space.
Open space areas shall be set aside as a single lot or an area
preserved through conservation easements and shall be a
minimum of 100 feet wide. The open space area(s) shall be
contiguous to open space on adjoining properties and shall
provide for future connections to adjacent properties. The
open space area may include wetlands, steep slopes, natural
drainageways and floodplains. Setback areas equal to or
greater than 100 feet deep may be designated as open space
areas if a conservation easement is provided on the setback
area.
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.2
169:684
(8) Pedestrian and bike paths. Provide bicycle/pedestrian connections
from the ends of cul-de-sac and other midblock locations, as
appropriate, to permit circulation between adjacent tracts.
Bikeways and shared use paths shall be provided where the link on
the subject tract is a portion of a larger planned bicycle circulation
system. Bike racks shall be provided close to building entrances
and at appropriate locations on the site.
(9) Signs. Signage shall be provided as required by Chapter 140,
Signs.
Table 1
OBD2 Uses
(§ 175-17.2B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Medical
offices
Dental
offices
Clinics
Professional
offices
Opticians
Schools
Libraries
Museums
Membership
organizations
Churches
Customary
office
accessory
uses
Day-care
center
Fitness
center
Pharmacy,
including
drive-up
window
Pharmacy,
including
drive-up
window as
part of
medical
facilities
Eyeglass
sales
Hospitals
Community
centers
Veterinary
offices
Public
recreation
Public
recreational
facilities
Public and
semipublic
uses
NOTE:
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically prohibited uses
in this zoning district.
§ 175-17.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.2
169:685
§ 175-17.3. C-T Commercial Transitional District. [Added 6-20-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-482; amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496;
3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-548]
OBD Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-17.2E)
Minimum1
Tract Size
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Size
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
40 Average: 4 200 Building: 45 50% of tract
Individual:
2
Maximum Building Coverage
25% of tract
Setbacks Adjacent To4
Right-of-way: 45 feet unless a greater setback is required by the
I-99 Overlay District regulations
Residential or Rural District or use: 100 feet unless adjacent to
permanently preserved open space outside the tract, in which
case the setback shall be 30 feet
Industrial or Commercial District: 30 feet
Any Office Buffer District: 30 feet
Designated open space within the tract: 5 feet
NOTE:
1 See full text of § 175-17.2.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to provide opportunities for commercial
development; to transition between established residential
neighborhoods and major commercial corridors with either buffering or
an appropriate mix of uses; to potentially supply new housing within
close proximity of employment, retail, and public transit opportunities;
and to offer a mechanism to address Patton Township's need for
housing that is affordable to households with incomes no greater than
120% of the Centre County annual median income (AMI) through the
aid of private sector commercial development.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. All uses permitted in the C-1 District except
commercial parking lots, automobile service stations, fueling or
§ 175-17.2 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:686
gasoline stations, dry cleaning, mortuaries, bus passenger stations,
businesses that house animals overnight, and warehousing
operations.
(2) Conditional uses. Single-family homes, duplexes, and townhouses/
apartments, subject to the requirements of § 175-17.3H.
(3) The uses of this section are also noted in Table 4.
C. Prerequisites for review and approval of use. All uses shall comply with
the provisions of § 175-48, Site plan requirements and procedures, and
Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, prior to issuance of a permit to
occupy or use the lot.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 5 shall be
observed for development as a use by right (§ 175-17.3H sets different
area and bulk regulations for conditional uses); in addition, the
following regulations shall also apply:
(1) Open space. In order to properly buffer existing residential
neighborhoods from commercial development, open space shall be
provided as follows:
(a) Minimum 25% of tract.
(b) To be adjacent to residential uses and between residential uses
and commercial corridors and/or commercial uses.
(c) Landscaped with trees, shrubs, and/or fences to fully screen
residential uses from commercial corridor or uses. Screening
may also be accomplished by preservation of existing trees or
enhancement of existing tree stands.
(d) To be protected from any future change of use by donation of
all of this open space to Patton Township or a qualified
conservancy, to be placed under a conservation easement to be
held by a qualified conservancy, and to be endowed to provide
funds for maintenance and monitoring of the conservation
easement in perpetuity.
(2) Front setback. The minimum required front yard setback in the C-T
Zoning District shall be 25 feet. In this zoning district (C-T), in
addition to the general prohibition against structures in the yard
areas, development improvements such as parking lots and lighting
standards shall only be permitted in the front yard area when the
requirements of Subsection D(5)(a) are satisfied. Stormwater
basins shall only be permitted in the front yard area when the
requirements of Subsection D(5)(b) are satisfied. This prohibition
shall not include driveways and walkways providing ingress and
egress to the lot.
(a) The front yard setback may be reduced to 10 feet where a plan
for architectural, landscaping and earth-mounding features
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:687
acceptable to the Township provides enhanced screening of
such and aesthetic improvements to the property as a whole.
A property owner shall be authorized to place architectural
features and lighting standards, which might otherwise be
prohibited structures, in the reduced ten-foot setback as part
of the plan for enhanced screening. The Township reserves
the right to determine the level and type of architectural
enhancements which will be necessary to achieve the
reduction in the front setback area.
(b) A property owner shall be authorized to place stormwater
management facilities within the front yard setback where a
plan for enhanced landscaping and/or architectural features is
provided. The plan for enhanced landscaping and/or
architectural features shall meet the following standards:
[1] All perimeter basin walls shall be landscaped with
evergreen and deciduous shrubs and ornamental grasses
to form a continuous landscaping area.
[2] All internal basin walls which are visible from the public
right-of-way or parking lot shall be landscaped with
shrubs, ornamental grasses and, where appropriate,
understory trees.
[3] Architectural features may be substituted for landscape
enhancements if the plan to do so is acceptable to the
Township.
(3) Side yards. The minimum required side yard setback in the C-T
Zoning District shall be based on the zoning of the adjacent
property as shown in Table 5.
(a) In this zoning district (C-T), in addition to the general
prohibition against structures in the yard areas, no
development improvements, such as parking lots, lighting
standards and stormwater basins, shall be permitted in the
rear or side yard areas, except that stormwater basins may be
permitted between the commercial and residential portions of
a conditional use development. (See § 175-17.3H.) This
prohibition shall not include driveways and walkways
providing ingress and egress to the lot or driveways along a
property line when adjacent to a nonresidential district,
provided that the driveway is at least five feet from the
property line.
(b) If a plan acceptable to the Township is presented which
provides a combination of landscaping, mounds and sound
attenuation barriers to buffer the adjacent rural or residential
district, this setback shall be reduced to 75 feet. The Township
reserves the right to determine the level and type of
landscaping, mounds and sound attenuation barriers which
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:688
will be necessary to achieve the reduction in the setbacks. The
landscaping requirements shall be as provided in Subsection
G(1).
(c) Stormwater facilities shall be permitted in rear or side yards
adjacent to nonresidential districts or adjacent to identified
nonresidential areas within planned community, university and
planned airport districts.
(4) Rear yards. The minimum required rear yard setback in the C-T
Zoning District shall be based on the zoning of the adjacent
property as shown in Table 5.
(5) Screening shall be provided at the rear yard, along a ten-foot buffer
strip measured from the rear property line.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 70% of area outside the required
open space. A developer shall be entitled to achieve impervious
coverage of 70% of area outside the required open space. If the
setbacks established in Subsection D(5) and D(6) make it
impossible to achieve this coverage, because of the size or
configuration of the property, the setbacks shall be proportionately
lessened to permit such impervious coverage at the limit
established by this subsection.
E. Off-street parking requirements: See § 153-38.
F. Off-street loading regulations: See § 175-47.
G. Design standards. The following shall be applicable in all C-T
Commercial Districts.
(1) Screening.
(a) In all front yard areas, canopy shade trees shall be planted at
thirty-foot intervals on average. Shrubs shall be planted
between the canopy trees.
(b) Screening in side and rear yards shall be based on the zoning
of the adjacent property according to the following
requirements:
Table 1
Adjacent Zoning
District
Required Plantings
Per
100 Linear Feet of
Buffer Amount
Rural and residential
districts1
Canopy trees 4
Understory trees 6
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:689
Table 1
Adjacent Zoning
District
Required Plantings
Per
100 Linear Feet of
Buffer Amount
Shrubs 24
Evergreens 12
All planned community,
university and planned
airport districts
Use appropriate twenty-five-foot
buffer yard standard from Tables 3,
4 and 5
All natural resources
districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
Shrubs 6
All commercial and
industrial districts
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
Shrubs 6
NOTES:
1 The enhanced landscaping required to reduce the side and
rear setback to 75 feet as provided in Subsection D(5)
and (6) shall include 120% of the required plantings listed
herein.
(c) Applicants are encouraged to utilize existing vegetation to
meet the screening requirements. Following the completion of
a tree inventory, existing woodland areas may be used to
address the landscaping/screening requirements for setback
areas.
(d) To allow flexibility in the preparation of screening plans, the
exchange ratios in the following table may be utilized by the
applicant:
Table 2
Substitution Equal To
2 understory 1 canopy
1 canopy 2 understory
2 evergreen 1 canopy
1 evergreen 5 shrubs
1 understory 3 shrubs
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:690
(e) Where differing requirements are imposed by this subsection
on screening and by other sections requiring landscaping, the
requirements of this subsection shall take precedence.
(2) Storage, landscaping, access and traffic control, interior
circulation, lighting and shopping cart storage shall be as required
by § 175-44B through G.
(3) Telecommunications facilities shall comply with the specific
provisions of § 175-48.1.
(4) Sidewalk at front of store.
(a) A suitable sidewalk shall be provided in front of the
entranceway of each retail store. The following scale shall be
used to determine the minimum width of the sidewalk between
the storefront and any area accessible by vehicle (driveway,
parking lot, etc.):
Table 3
Store Size
(square feet)
Minimum Sidewalk Width
(feet)
Less than 50,000 8
50,000 to 99,999 10
100,000 to 149,999 12
150,000 or more 14
(b) The minimum length of this sidewalk across the front of the
store shall be the same as the distance across the entranceway
plus the amount of the minimum sidewalk width (as
determined above) on each side of the entranceway. The
sidewalk fronting the remainder of the store shall be a
minimum of five feet in width.
H. Conditional use: Tracts within the C-T District may include residential
units with conformance to the following requirements:
(1) Offer of donation of a minimum of 16% of the tract area to a
community land trust as defined in § 175-6B of the Patton Township
Code for development as affordable housing. The donated tract
area shall fulfill the open space requirement that would be required
of a use by right.
(2) The tract area to be donated shall be located such that the
affordable housing area is adjacent to existing residential use(s) or
fronts on a roadway that has residential use(s) opposite. The
commercial portion shall be located between the residential use
and the commercial corridor(s).
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:691
(3) The tract area to be donated shall have separate vehicular and
pedestrian access from the access to the commercial areas of the
tract.
(4) Acceptance of the land donation by the involved community land
trust in accordance with a signed and recorded agreement between
the property owner(s)/developer(s), the community land trust, and
any other parties involved in providing the affordable housing
units. The approval of a conditional use plan shall indicate
Township approval of the terms of the agreement. The agreement
shall address, but shall not be limited to, the following items:
(a) The number of affordable housing units that will be built.
(b) The type of residential units to be built and the overall layout of
the site.
(c) The type of resident groups to live in these units (e.g., income
levels, the elderly, special needs groups).
(d) The time frame within which these units will be constructed
and occupied.
(e) The initial price range of these units.
(f) How these units will remain affordable in perpetuity.
(g) The screening/buffering that will be provided between the
affordable housing units and the commercial portions of the
site.
[1] The screening required at § 175-17.3G(1) (i.e., as a use by
right) does not apply to the residential portion of the C-T
tract or to the buffer between the commercial portion and
the residential portion of the C-T District tract.
[2] This screening shall include a solid, all-weather, durablematerial,
functionally opaque privacy fence at least eight
feet in height.
[3] The developer may propose an alternative screening/
buffering plan that may make use of trees, shrubs, or other
plant materials. The Board of Supervisors may accept the
developer-proposed alternative in lieu of opaque privacy
fencing.
(h) In lieu of concurrent approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans for the commercial and the residential
portion of the C-T tract, the property owner(s)/developer(s)
and the community land trust may jointly request permission
from the Board to defer submission for not more than one year
from date of conditional approval of the commercial portion of
the C-T tract of a plan for the residential portion that is in
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:692
compliance with the C-T District requirements. Deferral is only
available with approval of the Board of Supervisors through
approval of the conditional use plan and agreement by the
developer and land trust to the following conditions:
[1] Execution of an agreement, to be recorded, between the
Board of Supervisors, the property owner(s)/developer(s),
and the community land trust assigning, in the event the
community land trust fails to proceed with development of
the residential portion in accordance with the terms
herein, all rights and responsibilities of the community
land trust contained in the agreement referenced in
Subsection H(4) to the Board of Supervisors of Patton
Township. Existence of agreement shall be noted on plan.
[2] Execution on the plan of an offer of dedication for the
residential portion to the Board of Supervisors of Patton
Township in the event the land trust fails to proceed with
development of the residential portion in accordance with
the terms herein. Offer shall note that the land is
dedicated for the provision of affordable housing and the
Township may convey said land to another organization for
those purposes.
[3] Submission at time of application for plan approval for
residential portion (within time period noted above) of the
information required by Subsection H(4)(a) through (g).
[4] Deposit with the Township of financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements
or common amenities as delineated in Section 509(a) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(i) Water, sewer and electrical service will be provided by the
developer.
(j) Sidewalks will be provided by the developer.
(5) The conditional use shall comply with the area and bulk regulations
shown in Table 6 in lieu of § 175-17.3D. In addition, the following
regulations shall also apply:
(a) Setbacks for commercial portion.
[1] Front yard: as required by Table 6.
[2] Side and rear yard not adjacent to residential portion: as
required by Table 6.
[3] Side and/or rear yard adjacent to residential portion are as
required by Table 6, in addition to the following
regulations.
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:693
[a] Twenty feet minimum for structures, dumpsters and
noise producing equipment.
[b] One foot minimum for other development
improvements (e.g., driveways, lighting, stormwater
facilities) except a screening fence that shall be placed
on the commercial portion and immediately adjacent
to the property line.
[c] The separation distance between commercial
structures, including appurtenances, and residential
structures, shall be equal to the height of the
commercial structure but in no instance be less than
35 feet.
(b) Setbacks for residential portion as required by Table 6 in
addition to the following regulations.
[1] Front yard: five feet minimum.
[2] Side and rear yard not adjacent to commercial portion: five
feet minimum, excepting the common wall of duplexes. A
zero-setback arrangement is permissible for single-family
detached units when the opposite side yard is a minimum
of 10 feet.
[3] Side and/or rear yard adjacent to commercial portion: five
feet minimum. The separation distance between
commercial structures, including appurtenances, and
residential structures shall be equal to the height of the
commercial structure but in no instance be less than 35
feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage.
[1] Commercial portion: 84%.
[a] An additional 1% of impervious coverage may be used
with donation of an additional 5,000 square feet of
land for affordable housing.
[b] A developer shall be entitled to achieve impervious
coverage of area. If the setbacks established in
Subsection H(5)(b)[1] and [2] make it impossible to
achieve this coverage, because of the size or
configuration of the property, the setbacks shall be
proportionately lessened to permit such impervious
coverage at the limit established by this subsection.
The setback adjacent to the residential portion of the
C-T District shall not be reduced.
[2] Residential portion: 50% for multifamily uses (townhomes
and apartments).
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:694
(6) Shared driveways are permitted at adjacent residential units.
(7) HVAC and other noise-producing utilities shall be placed on the
commercial structures or commercial portion of the site so that any
noise spillover to the residential units is minimized and shall be
screened on the residential side. Any dumpsters for the commercial
portion of the site shall be situated as far away from the residential
units as is feasible.
(8) Parkland.
(a) The parkland dedication addressed in § 153-34 of the Patton
Township Code will be waived where all of the involved
affordable housing units will be priced to be affordable to
households making less than 80% of the most recently
published Centre County AMI.
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:695
Table 4
CT Uses
(§ 175-17.3B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
All retail
establishments
for the sale,
service and
rental of
goods
Customary
uses
accessory
to
permitted
uses
Singlefamily
homes
Duplexes
Townhouses
Apartments
Commercial
parking lots
Automobile
service
stations
Fueling
stations
Gasoline
stations
Dry cleaning
Mortuaries
Bus
passenger
stations
Businesses
that house
animals
overnight
Warehousing
operations
All service
establishments,
including, but
not limited to:
Barbers and
beauticians
Health clubs
Tailors
Ambulance
services
Amusement
enterprises,
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:696
Table 4
CT Uses
(§ 175-17.3B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
Animal
hospitals
Art galleries
Billiard
parlors
Bowling alleys
Business
offices
Churches and
other places
of worship
Clubs
Commercial
dairies
Community
centers
Dental offices
and clinics
Eating and
drinking
establishments
Financial
offices
Firehouses
Fraternal
organizations
Halfway house
(except in PC
District)
Hotels and
motels
Lodges
Medical
offices and
clinics
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:697
Table 4
CT Uses
(§ 175-17.3B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
Motionpicture
theaters
Municipal
office
buildings
Museums
Newspaper
publishing
Opticians and
optical goods
Parish houses
and convents
Photographic
studios
Professional
offices
Public and
private
garages for
the storage
and
maintenance
of motor
vehicles
Public and
private
institutions of
higher
education
Public
libraries
Public utility
facilities
Radio and
television
studios
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:698
Table 4
CT Uses
(§ 175-17.3B)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses
Reading
rooms
Rehabilitation
center
Skating rinks
Studios for
instruction in
music and the
performing
arts
Taxi and
limousine
service
Telecommunications
facilities
Tourist homes
Veterinary
offices
NOTE:
1 There are no special exceptions in this zoning district.
Table 5
CT Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-17.3D)
Minimum
Tract Size
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width2
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage1
Maximum
Height
10 150 Structures:
30%
70% of the
area
outside
required
open space
Building:
50
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:699
NOTES:
1 See full text of § 175-17.3.
2 See definition for "lot width" (when not specified, lot width
is measured at lot line).
Minimum Setbacks1
(feet)
Front1: 25 feet
Adjacent zoning
district
Side Rear
Rural and Residential 90 90
All PC, University and
PAD
25 25
All Natural Resource 15 15
All Commercial and
Industrial
10 10
Minimum1 Open Space
25% of tract
NOTES:
1 See full text of § 175-17.3.
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:700
Table 6
Area and Bulk Regulations: Conditional Uses
[§ 175-17.3H(5)]
Minimum
Tract Size
(acres)
Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Lot Coverage
(structures)
10 Townhomes and
apartments:
greater than or
equal to 3,500,
but less than or
equal to 5,000
Commercial
portion: 150
Commercial
portion: 30%
Single-family
and duplex:
Minimum: 4,000/
unit
Average: less
than or equal to
6,000/unit
Residential
uses: 40
Single-family
and Duplex:
35% for
primary
structure
NOTE:
1 See definition for "lot width" (when not specified, lot width
is measured at lot line).
Maximum Height
(feet)
Minimum Setbacks1
(feet)
Commercial structures: 50 Commercial Portion
Residential structures1 Front2: 25 feet
Single-family detached or
semidetached: 35
Not adjacent to residential
portion of:
Multiple units: 2 to 4 units
per structure, detached or
semidetached: 35
Side Rear
(feet)
Multiple units: 5 to 12
units per structure: 35
All PC,
University and
PAD
25 25
Multiple units: 13 or more
units per structure: 60
All Natural
Resource
15 15
§ 175-17.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-17.3
169:701
Maximum Height
(feet)
Minimum Setbacks1
(feet)
Multiple units: group
dwellings (townhouses);
see R3, nothing provided
All Commercial
and Industrial
10 10
Maximum Impervious
Coverage1
Adjacent to any
residential
portion:
Commercial portion: 84% 20
Residential portion: 50%
for multifamily uses
(townhomes and
apartments)
Structures
dumpsters and
noise-producing
equipment
20
Other
development
improvements
1 1
Residential Portion
(feet)
Front: 5
For side and rear, see full
text.
NOTES:
1 See full text of § 175-17.3.
2 There are no special exceptions in this zoning district.
§ 175-17.3 PATTON CODE § 175-17.3
169:702
ARTICLE IV
Planned Community District
[Amended 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-300; 8-12-1998 by Ord. No.
98-357; 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-446; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-464; 5-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-551]
§ 175-18. Intent.
The Planned Community Zoning District is implemented through a master
plan process which provides flexibility in land use planning by providing
criteria that allow a mix of uses in a growth area to be served by public
utilities. In addition, the district achieves the following purposes:
§ 175-19. Establishment.
The area of Patton Township designated on the Zoning Map of the Township
as "Planned Community District" is hereby established as the Planned
Community District.
§ 175-20. Use regulations.
A. Provision of a means for determination, review and mitigation of
potential community and environmental impacts.
B. Provision of adequate and well-designed open space for the use of all
residents and general public.
C. Provision for an orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with
respect to each other within the development, those on adjoining
properties and to the entire community.
D. Assurance that, to the maximum extent possible, the community is
afforded the opportunity to participate in the review of master plans for
proposed development in the district.
E. Provision for innovative design and the use of density zoning that allows
the clustering of buildings, structures and open space which preserves
natural features, woodlands and prevents soil erosion.
F. Encouragement of innovative strategies to reduce transportation
impacts from proposed development that will improve safety, reduce
congestion, provide adequate access and promote the use of
transportation demand management strategies.
A. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the Toftrees and
Oakwood Planned Communities:
(1) The uses are shown in Table 1 included at the end of this section.
(2) Additional restrictions pertaining to accessory uses are as follows:
§ 175-18 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-20
169:703
(a) Swimming pools: provided that it is located in the rear yard or
side yard of the dwelling to which it is accessory, 25 feet from
any lot line and enclosed by a continuous barrier not less than
four feet high.
(3) Exceptions to occupancy limits for unrelated individuals in
residential dwelling units in the Toftrees Planned Community.
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-583]
(a) The maximum number of unrelated individuals permitted to
occupy a dwelling unit may be increased as follows:
[1] Maximum occupancy of dwelling units shall not exceed
five unrelated individuals or one unrelated individual per
bedroom, whichever is more restrictive.
[2] If the occupancy of any dwelling unit proposed is to exceed
three unrelated individuals, then the occupancy for each
type of dwelling unit shall be stated on the land
development plan and approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
[3] The occupancy limit may not be increased in group living
facilities such as group homes, halfway houses, personal
care facilities, nursing homes, or rehabilitation centers.
[4] All units shall be sized and occupied in accordance with
Chapter 63, Uniform Construction Codes, and Chapter
127, Property Maintenance and Fire Code. In instances of
conflict, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
(b) The following additional requirements shall apply to
developments which are subject to increased occupancy:
[1] Fire protection. All units or subunits intended for human
occupancy shall have automatic fire sprinkler systems
installed.
[2] Lot size. The property shall be at least 15 acres, but no
more than 35 acres.
[3] Location and dwelling unit composition.
[a] The property shall be in an area that is intended for
residential use as specified by § 175-23.2B(2)(e).
[b] The property must be located in areas with a
permitted density of no greater than 9.00 units per
acre, as specified in § 175-23.2B and no more than
35% of the total number of units are permitted to be
five-bedroom units.
§ 175-20 PATTON CODE § 175-20
169:704
§ 175-21. Master Plan approval.
All development within the Planned Community District must be done
pursuant to approval of a master plan in accordance with the procedure that
follows. Master plans for the Planned Community District shall be reviewed
[i] The exception shall be that such developments
are permitted in areas with a permitted density of
9.01 to 15.00 units per net acre if the total
number of five-bedroom units does not exceed
25% of the total number of units.
[4] Ownership. All buildings within the development shall be
owned by a single owner.
[5] Rentals. All rental dwelling units shall be rented by the
bedroom.
[6] Style of development. The site must be developed as a
cottage-style community consisting of numerous buildings
with a varying number of units in each building and having
a variety of facades. No single building shall contain more
than 10% of the total number of units in the development.
B. All other Planned Community Districts permit the same uses as shown
above and in Table 1 for Toftrees and Oakwood, except that shopping
centers shall be limited to 75,000 square feet in building area.
C. In order to minimize required daily trips, a town center shall be
provided within a planned community that contains a total of 150 acres
or more unless it is deemed by the Township that the location of a town
center is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan. A town center
should be designed so that it is easily distinguishable from the
surrounding planned community residential and open space areas.
Planned communities of less than 150 acres are not required to provide
for a town center concept; however, nonresidential uses should be
clustered where feasible.
D. The concern for protection of the potential future source of
groundwater is embodied within Schedule A,196 which prohibits certain
activities from being conducted in the critical groundwater recharge
areas shown on the master plans that could contaminate the potential
water supply. In addition, a buffer of at least 150 feet shall be required
from all designated well sites. This buffer shall be measured from the
perimeter of the designated site(s). Vegetation and/or a combination of
low-maintenance trees, shrubs and ground cover plantings shall be
provided within the buffer. All buildings, structures, parking or other
impervious surfaces shall be prohibited from locating in the buffer yard.
The designated well sites shall be identified on the Master Plan.
196. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-20 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-21
169:705
by the Patton Township Planning Commission and the Centre Regional
Planning Commission and shall be approved or denied by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the procedures specified herein. Parcels
smaller than 100 acres existing on the date of enactment of this chapter are
exempt from the master plan requirement.
A. Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is recommended but
shall not be mandatory nor shall it be regarded as a formal application
for development in the Planned Community District. The purpose of the
meeting is to provide for an informational exchange at the municipal
staff level or Planning Commission level where the major elements of a
proposed master plan can be reviewed and evaluated. The Planning
Commission may make recommendations as a result of the
preapplication conference. The filing of any report, sketch plan, plat or
map prior to or at such meeting shall not constitute submission of a
plan or application for Planned Community District development nor
shall such materials be binding on subsequent submissions by the
applicant. Any recommendations made by the Planning Commission
shall not be binding upon the applicant or the Planning Commission in
its review of the plan after formal application.
B. Master plan application and review. Application for Township approval
of a Planned Community District development shall commence with the
official submission of a complete set of plans and all required
supplementary data and information to the Township. At any time
during the review process, the applicant may amend the originally
submitted plan solely for the purpose of correcting minor deficiencies in
the original plan to the extent necessary to meet the requirements of
this section.
(1) A master plan shall be deemed to have been submitted for review
when the applicant has furnished to the Township the following
documents:
(a) Fifteen copies of a master plan prepared by a registered
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or similarly qualified
person, which shall fully comply with the requirements of
§ 175-21C of this chapter. One additional copy shall be
submitted in a digital format acceptable to Patton Township.
(b) Fifteen copies of a narrative which shall fully comply with the
requirement of § 175-21C(4) of this chapter.
(c) Fifteen copies of a Transportation Impact Report, which shall
comply with the requirements of § 175-21C(6) of this chapter.
(2) Upon receipt of the above, the Township Zoning Officer shall
forward copies of the Master Plan and accompanying
documentation to the Township Engineer, Centre Regional
Planning Commission, Centre County Planning Commission and
other appropriate agencies.
§ 175-21 PATTON CODE § 175-21
169:706
(3) Review by the Township Planning Commission.
(a) At its next regular meeting following the receipt of the
application for master plan approval, provided that such
application was made at least 30 days prior to the meeting, the
Planning Commission shall review the plan to determine its
conformance with the provisions contained in these
regulations.
(b) The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board of
Supervisors of any recommended action, changes or
modifications to the plan after such decision is made, provided
that the Planning Commission shall make such
recommendations within 70 days after the date the application
for approval was filed. The Planning Commission shall make no
recommendation on such application until reports from the
Centre County and Centre Regional Planning Commissions are
received or until expiration of 30 days from the date the plan
was forwarded to these agencies, whichever comes first.
(c) If review by the Township Planning Commission results in an
unfavorable recommendation because the requirements of this
chapter have not been met, notification to the Township Board
of Supervisors should specify the defects found in the plan and
describe the requirements which have not been met and
should cite the provisions of this chapter from which such
defects or requirements originate.
(4) Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning Commission or upon failure to
receive said recommendations 70 days after submittal, the Board of
Supervisors shall review the application for master plan approval.
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the written
reports of the Township Planning Commission, the Centre
County Planning Commission, the Centre Regional Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer and the other reviewing
agencies to determine if the plan meets all applicable
regulations. Prior to approval of a master plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall require a public hearing. The Board of
Supervisors shall require, as a condition of approval, that the
applicant furnish written confirmation from the appropriate
bodies that off-site water and sewer service is and will be made
available to the Planned Community District.
(b) The Township shall place a notice of the time and place of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation as set
forth by the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 175-21 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-21
169:707
(5) Approval or denial. The Board of Supervisors, within 50 days
following the Planning Commission action, or inaction, shall, by
official written communication to the applicant, either:
(a) Grant approval of the Master Plan as submitted.
(b) Grant approval subject to the applicant meeting specified
modifications to the Master Plan as submitted.
(c) Deny approval of the plan, including a list of reasons and/or
plan deficiencies.
(6) Where a Planned Community District development may occur over
a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize
development in phases, subject to such requirements or guaranties
as to improvements in future phases of the development that it
finds essential for the protection of any approved phase. In such
case, a schedule showing the proposed times within which
applications for final approval of land development plans of all
phases of the development are intended to be filed shall be
included with the Master Plan. The schedule may be revised by the
Board of Supervisors if requested to do so by the landowner or
developer.
(7) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the Master Plan in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation or communication of the decision, in which case
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(8) In the event that approval is granted subject to conditions, the
owner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the governing body, notify the Board of
Supervisors of his or her refusal to accept all of said conditions, in
which case the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have
denied approval of the Master Plan. In the event that the landowner
does not, within said period, notify the Board of Supervisors of his
or her acceptance of all of said conditions, approval of the Master
Plan shall be deemed to have been denied.
(9) An approved master plan shall be recorded by the developer in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County within 90 days of
approval.
(10) Approval of a master plan shall not authorize construction or the
issuance of any building permit. Such authorization or issuance
shall not occur until a land development plan is approved for the
applicable area.
§ 175-21 PATTON CODE § 175-21
169:708
C. Required master plan content. Proposed master plans shall be drawn to
a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger (e.g., one inch equals 30
feet) and shall contain the following information:
(1) General data.
(a) Name of proposed Planned Community District development.
(b) North point.
(c) Graphic scale and legend describing all symbols shown on the
plan.
(d) Day, month and year the plan was prepared and date and
description of revisions to the plan occurring after formal
submission.
(e) Name and address of the owner and deed book and page
numbers of the deeds conveying the property to the owner.
Name of the developer and his or her billing address (if
different).
(f) Name, address and seal of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(g) Names of abutting property owners, tax parcel numbers and
their deed book and page numbers.
(h) Key map showing the location of the proposed Planned
Community District development and all roads within 5,000
feet therefrom.
(i) Centre County tax parcel numbers of all parcels included in the
Planned Community District development.
(j) A certification of ownership and plan acknowledgment
signature block.
(k) An offer of dedication signature block.
(l) Township approval signature block.
(m) Recorder of Deeds signature block.
(2) Existing features.
(a) Perimeter boundaries of the total property, showing bearings
to the nearest minute and distances to the nearest hundredth
of a foot.
(b) Total acreage of the property and total square feet within each
lot of the development.
(c) Natural features.
§ 175-21 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-21
169:709
[1] Sinkholes, watercourses, tree masses and unique
vegetation or natural features.
[2] Floodplain, steep slopes and critical groundwater
recharge areas.
[3] Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of 10 feet.
(d) Approximate location of man-made features in or within 100
feet of the property, including:
[1] Sewer lines and laterals.
[2] Water mains and fire hydrants.
[3] Electrical lines and poles.
[4] Culverts and bridges.
[5] Railroads.
[6] Buildings.
[7] Streets, including right-of-way and cartway widths and
approximate grades.
[8] Development of abutting properties, including location
and types of uses.
(3) Proposed development. The Planned Community District is
envisioned as an area in which an integrated development will
occur which incorporates a variety of land uses permitted within
the district. The respective areas of the Master Plan devoted to
specific residential, commercial and industrial uses should be
shown, and within each area the following should be included:
(a) The approximate location and use of buildings and other
structures (all area dimensions shall be indicated in square
feet).
(b) The approximate location and area of driveways and parking
and loading areas.
(c) The approximate property lines of lots to be subdivided,
measured to the nearest foot.
(d) The approximate location of sidewalks and bike paths.
(e) The approximate location of utility and drainage easements.
(f) The approximate location and pipe diameter of sewer and
water mains.
(g) The approximate location of fire hydrants.
(h) Perimeter setbacks and required buffer yards.
§ 175-21 PATTON CODE § 175-21
169:710
(i) Street information, including:
[1] Location and width of right-of-way and cartway.
[2] Proposed street names.
[3] Approximate road profiles along the center line of each
proposed street, showing finished grade at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(j) A conceptual landscaping plan indicating the treatment of
materials and landscaping concepts used for private and
common open space.
(k) A general grading plan showing any major alterations to the
topography of the site.
(l) The approximate location and area of proposed common open
space, including:
[1] The proposed use and improvements of common open
space.
[2] The approximate location and use of common recreational
facilities.
[3] The approximate location and area of land to be dedicated
for public purposes.
(m) A table shall be included on the plan describing each phase or
section with quantitative data, including the following:
[1] The total area of the development and approximate area of
each phase.
[2] The total area devoted to each use, the number of
residential units, the percentage of each type of use and
the total floor area in the development and in each phase.
[3] Floor area ratio (FAR) in the development and each phase.
[4] The area of streets, parking, sidewalks, and walkways and
the total area paved and percent of area paved or covered
by the structures in the development and each phase or
section.
[5] The total acreage and percent of acreage in common open
space in the development and each phase.
[6] The total area devoted to planned recreational use
throughout the entire development and in each phase.
[7] The calculation of impervious surface in the development
and in each phase.
§ 175-21 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-21
169:711
(4) Narrative statement. The following information should be included
with a narrative statement submitted with the Master Plan:
(a) A statement of the ownership of all of the land included within
the Master Plan.
(b) An explanation of the design pattern of the Planned
Community District development.
(c) A statement describing any proposed innovative design
concepts included in the plan.
(d) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed on the use of land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public use or utilities. The covenants should
specifically indicate that any land proposed for parks,
recreation or open space shall be used for such purposes in
perpetuity.
(e) A description of the form of organization proposed to own and
maintain the common open space, recreational facilities or
other common facilities.
(f) A statement of the proposed use and improvement of common
open space and recreational facilities.
(g) A description of proposals to preserve natural features and
existing amenities and a statement of conceptual landscaping
designs.
(h) A preliminary stormwater management plan illustrating
drainage patterns and detention pond areas. The plan should
include preliminary pond sizing calculations.
(5) Development schedule. When it is anticipated that development
pursuant to an approved master plan will occur in phases over a
period of years, the following shall be included with the application
for Master Plan approval:
(a) The phases in which the land development will be submitted
for final land development approval and the approximate date
when each phase will be submitted for final plan approval.
(b) The approximate date when each phase will be completed.
[1] Any phase of development pursuant to an approved master
plan shall be able to function independently of the
undeveloped phases while being compatible with adjacent
or neighboring land uses.
[2] If development pursuant to a master plan is to be done in
phases, over a period of years and according to an
§ 175-21 PATTON CODE § 175-21
169:712
approved schedule, the gross density of any phase, or
in combination with previously developed phases, shall
be in general proportion to residential and nonresidential
density requirements.
(6) Transportation impact report. A transportation impact report shall
be prepared by a qualified professional and include the following:
(a) Analysis and description of existing conditions and traffic
volumes for the external road network serving the site. The
external road network to be studied shall be determined by the
municipality prior to the Master Plan review.
(b) A base condition analysis shall be prepared to establish
existing levels of service followed by analysis and description
of projected traffic conditions based on the land uses proposed
within the development. Trip generation rates for morning and
evening peak hours of the project shall be prepared, as well as
the internal/external trip distribution and intersection analysis.
(c) The analysis shall address the traffic impacts of the proposed
development, along with surrounding traffic-generating land
uses in the area including land use changes. The analyses will
evaluate the adequacy of the area road network and identify
the need for road and access and traffic control measure
improvements generated by the proposed development and
surrounding land uses.
(d) The analysis shall contain recommended internal and off-site
road improvements. These recommended improvements
should be specific as to location and scope of work required
along with a phased schedule for implementation. Examples of
additional items that should be included in this section are:
[1] Typical sections for each category of street.
[2] A phasing plan which delineates the street improvements
that will be provided simultaneously with the construction
of each development phase.
(e) Utilization of alternate modes of transportation shall be a
component of the traffic impact analysis. Evaluation of traffic
mitigation measures as it relates to public transportation and
future site development should also be addressed.
(f) Revision of the traffic impact study based on major changes (as
defined in this article) to the approved Master Plan shall be
required. This shall occur prior to the filing of an application to
amend the Master Plan.
D. Amendments to an approved master plan. Any major changes requested
to an approved master plan must meet the procedural and content
§ 175-21 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-21
169:713
§ 175-22. Procedure for development.
§ 175-23. Area, bulk, open space and parking requirements for
Oakwood Planned Community.
Area, bulk, open space and parking requirements for Oakwood Planned
Community are shown in Table 2. In addition, the following regulations shall
also apply.
requirements presented in § 175-21B and C. A major change to an
approved master plan is represented by any of the following:
(1) Any increase in the approved residential or commercial area
percentage.
(2) Any significant changes in the approved densities for residential
areas.
(3) Any significant changes in the commercial or industrial floor area
ratios.
(4) Any decrease in the approved open space area percentage.
(5) A change in the location of external vehicular access points or
interior roadway locations.
(6) Any other change determined by the Township to be significant.
A. After approval of a master plan, all subsequent subdivision and land
development plans within the master planning area must be submitted
in accordance with and meet the applicable requirements of Chapter
153, Subdivision and Land Development, this chapter and Chapter 147,
Streets and Sidewalks, in addition to the requirements of this article. In
the event of a conflict between the requirements contained in this
article and any other ordinance, the requirements of this article will
apply.
B. Any major change proposed to an approved master plan will require an
amendment of the master plan. If the major change is contained within
a proposed subdivision or land development plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall not grant approval of the plan until an amendment of
the Master Plan occurs. In the event of such denial, the landowner may
refile the final plan without the major changes identified in such written
notice or file an application to amend the Master Plan, following the
procedures required herein for approval.
C. A minor change to an approved master plan shall not require an
amendment of the master plan. If the minor change is proposed as part
of a subdivision or land development plan, then the change will be
approved through the normal review process for subdivision and land
development plans.
§ 175-21 PATTON CODE § 175-23
169:714
A. Height requirements. The height of any buildings or structures within
the Planned Community District shall not exceed the applicable
limitations in this chapter for the respective type of residential,
commercial or industrial construction being undertaken.
B. Setback requirements. Setback requirements are shown in Table 2. In
addition, the following regulations shall also apply.
(1) Required setbacks from Master Plan property boundaries are 30
feet for structures and 30 feet for parking. [Amended 4-8-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-566]
(a) Such setbacks will be established by the Board of Supervisors
for each subdivision or land development plan submitted
pursuant to an approved master plan and taking into account
the impacts on the adjacent properties. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimal
setbacks are proposed.
(b) Setbacks established by reference. In some cases, the exterior
setbacks for parcels in the Oakwood Planned Community have
been established that do not conform to the setbacks
established above and in Table 2. In these instances, the
setbacks noted on the approved land development plans will
take precedence. These plans include:
[1] Oakwood Planned Community Parcel 2 (Oakwood Centre)
— Recorded October 12, 2006.
[2] Oakwood Planned Community Parcel 8 (Heritage Village)
— Recorded September 19, 2007.
[3] Oakwood Planned Community Parcel 15 (Pickwick Avenue)
— Recorded February 9, 1981.
(2) No minimum setbacks for interior streets or internal lot lines are
established herein. Such setbacks will be established by the Board
of Supervisors for each subdivision or land development plan
submitted pursuant to an approved master plan. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimal setbacks are
proposed.
C. Open space requirements. Open space requirements are shown in Table
2. In addition, the following regulations shall also apply.
(1) The Township Supervisors may require dedication of part of the
open space shown on the plan in one or several locations according
to the following standards:
§ 175-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23
169:715
(a) The land so dedicated meets the acreage requirements of
Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) The land so dedicated is large enough to support active and
passive recreation facilities for the proposed population
densities and housing characteristics.
(c) The land is accessible to the public and is viewable from a
public street.
(2) If part of a planned community, golf courses should be located away
from the town center area. Up to 25% of the total area of a golf
course may be applied towards the minimum open space land area
requirement. As an incentive, up to 50% of the total area of a golf
course may be applied towards the minimum open space land area
requirement if a suitable area within the open space is utilized for
the treatment of wastewater effluent (i.e., spray irrigation, etc.).
[Amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-566]
Planned Community and Conservation District Regulations
Table 2
Oakwood PC Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-23)
Maximum Density
Minimum
Gross
Acreage Lot Size New PC
Existing
Oakwood
PC Nonresidential
100 acres Established
on
subdivision
and land
development
plans
pursuant to
approved
master
plans
3.5 units
per gross
acre of total
land area
encompassed
by a master
plan
430 units on
117 acres
Maximum
impervious
coverage:
60% of the
lot area.
Limits for
the
commercial
area of the
Oakwood
Community
are
established
per the
approved
master
plan, July 9,
1986.
§ 175-23 PATTON CODE § 175-23
169:716
Height
(Buildings
and
Structures) Setbacks Open Space2
From public rights-ofway
abutting master
plan boundaries:
Structures: 30 feet;
Parking areas: 30 feet
40% of gross land area
of the PC district plan
shall be devoted to
public and/or common
open space.
From master plan
property boundaries that
do not abut public
rights-of-way:1
Structures: 30 feet;
Parking areas: 30 feet
Interior streets and
internal lot lines:1
Setback established with
subdivision/land
development plan
Within the existing
Oakwood Planned
Community: No use may
be denied solely because
a particular lot or lots do
not meet the perimeter
setback regulations of
this chapter as long as
the intent of the Planned
Community is
maintained.
50% of open space must
remain as natural areas.
NOTES:
1 See full text of § 175-23. Setbacks are established for each
subdivision and land development.
2 See full text of § 175-23. Additional regulations and
incentives may apply.
D. Parking and sidewalk requirements. Motor vehicle access and parking
shall be provided as required in Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, with the exception of the following requirements.
(1) Parking lots and areas should be located at the side or rear of
buildings whenever feasible and shall be adequately screened.
§ 175-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23
169:717
§ 175-23.1. Area, bulk, open space and parking requirements for
Gray's Woods Planned Community and other planned communities
except Oakwood and Toftrees Planned Communities.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided where required by Chapter 149,
Streets and Sidewalks.
(3) In town centers:
(a) Off-street parking lots shall be prohibited at street
intersections.
(b) Street-side parallel parking should be encouraged where
commercial uses are predominant.
(c) Required off-street parking may be on the same lot or premises
with the use served or on an off-site lot separated no more than
150 feet for residential uses and no farther than the defined
town center perimeters for any other nonresidential uses.
Where the provision of off-site parking is applied, the applicant
shall submit, with his or her zoning permit application, an
agreement with the owner(s) of the off-site parking lot. This
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds. In no such case shall the off-site parking be less than
the required amount for the principal use unless the remaining
portion of the parking lot is provided on site.
(d) Large, expansive parking lots (more than 50 spaces) shall be
prohibited.
(e) All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land
within the defined town center and shall provide connections
to existing or proposed adjoining land uses where feasible.
(4) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of streets within the
defined town center perimeters.
A. Area requirements.
(1) A planned community shall encompass at least 100 acres and shall
have a single master plan prepared for the entire community.
(2) Lot sizes shall be established on subdivision plans pursuant to
approved master plans.
B. Density, land use and coverage requirements.
(1) Density.
(a) The residential density shall not exceed 3.00 units per acre for
the entire tract encompassed by the master plan.
§ 175-23 PATTON CODE § 175-23.1
169:718
(b) Of the total number of residential units allowed, 3.5 units per
acre shall be assigned to areas designated on the master plan
for nonresidential and mixed uses.
(c) The acreage used to calculate the number of dwelling units
assigned to areas designated on the master plan for
nonresidential and mixed uses shall be the net acreage
designated for nonresidential or mixed-use exclusive of rightsof-
way, open space, parkland or other land designated for
public use (e.g., sewerage pump stations).
(2) Land use.
(a) The master plan shall include an area or areas for each land
use designated below.
(b) The percentage of land area or the percentage of dwelling
units of the planned community for each designated use shall
equal or exceed the required minimum.
(c) The land area for each use, and the corresponding percentage
of the master plan area, shall not include lands designated for
public rights-of-way for roadways. Rights-of-way designated for
pedestrian walkways and bikeways outside of road rights-ofway
shall be deemed "open space."
(d) No lot designated for single-family residential use shall be
greater than 2.00 acres.
Use
Minimum Percentage
Required in Master Plan
Residential
Large lot single-family (0.5 to
2.00 units per acre)
0% of total dwelling units
Medium lot single-family (2.01
to 5.00 units per acre)
25% of total dwelling units
Small single-family or mediumdensity
multifamily (5.01 to
9.00 units per acre)
25% of total dwelling units
High-density multifamily (9.01
to 15.00 units per acre) and
mixed-use area dwelling units
(minimum 3.5 units per acre
for all nonresidential and
mixed-use areas)
25% of total dwelling units
Area for nonresidential or
mixed use
5% of total tract area
Open space 30% of total tract area
§ 175-23.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23.1
169:719
(e) A town center area shall be specifically delineated on the
master plan.
(f) Mixed-use structures shall include a minimum of 1/3 of the
floor area for residential use.
(g) Construction of nonresidential uses in the town center area
shall conform to the following schedule:
Number of Units
Constructed
Percentage of
Nonresidential to be Built
in the Town Center
900 20%
1,200 40%
1,500 60%
1,800 100%
(3) Building and impervious coverage. The following building and
impervious coverage limits shall not be exceeded:
Use Building
Coverage
Impervious
Coverage
Residential
Less than 2.00 units
per acre
25% 35%
2.01 to 5.00 units per
acre
30% 40%
5.01 to 9.00 units per
acre
35% 45%
Greater than 9.01 units
per acre
35% 65%
Mixed Use
Mixed use (i.e.,
residential and
nonresidential)
35% 80%
Nonresidential
Nonresidential in Town
Center (i.e.,
commercial, office,
school, church, utility,
etc.)
35% 80%
Nonresidential outside
Town Center (i.e.,
commercial, office,
school, church, utility,
etc.)
35% 60%
§ 175-23.1 PATTON CODE § 175-23.1
169:720
Use Building
Coverage
Impervious
Coverage
Parkland 15% 35%
Open space 5% 10%
Right-of-way N/A 75%
Other 25% 50%
C. Building heights. The height of any building or structure shall not
exceed the following limits:
Use
Building Height
(feet)
Residential
Less than 2.00 units per acre 35
2.01 to 5.00 units per acre 35
5.01 to 9.00 units per acre 45
Greater than 9.01 units per acre 60
Nonresidential and Mixed Use
Nonresidential or mixed use in Town
Center
60
Nonresidential or mixed use outside
Town Center
45
Parkland 30
Open space 30
Right-of-way N/A
Other 30
D. Setback requirements.
(1) Required setbacks from public rights-of-way abutting master plan
boundaries shall be 100 feet for structures and 50 feet for parking
areas.
(2) Required setbacks from Master Plan property boundaries that do
not abut public rights-of-way shall be 75 feet for structures and 25
feet for parking areas. Such setbacks will be established by the
Board of Supervisors for each subdivision or land development plan
submitted pursuant to an approved master plan and taking into
account the impacts on the adjacent properties. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimal setbacks are
proposed.
§ 175-23.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23.1
169:721
(3) No minimum setbacks for interior streets or internal lot lines are
established herein. Such setbacks will be established by the Board
of Supervisors for each subdivision or land development plan
submitted pursuant to an approved master plan. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimal setbacks are
proposed.
E. Open space requirements.
(1) A minimum of 30% of the gross land area of a master plan shall be
designated as parkland or common open space.
(2) A minimum of 20% of the open space must remain as natural areas.
(3) The Township Supervisors may require dedication of part of the
open space shown on the plan in one or several locations according
to the following standards:
(a) The land so dedicated meets the acreage requirements of
Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) The land so dedicated is large enough to support active and
passive recreation facilities for the proposed population
densities and housing characteristics.
(c) The land is accessible to the public and is viewable from a
public street.
(4) Permitted uses on open space. The following uses shall be
permitted upon lands designated by a master plan as open space,
and the use shall not exceed the following limits of the total open
space required:
Use
Maximum Permitted Use of
Open Space
Golf course 35%
Parkland 25%
Stormwater management
facilities
20%
F. Parking and sidewalk requirements. Motor vehicle access and parking
shall be provided as required in Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, with the exception of the following requirements.
(1) Parking lots and areas should be located at the side or rear of
buildings, whenever feasible, and shall be adequately screened.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided where required by Chapter 149,
Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 175-23.1 PATTON CODE § 175-23.1
169:722
§ 175-23.2. Area, bulk, open space and parking requirements for
Toftrees Planned Community.
(3) In town centers:
(a) Off-street parking lots shall be prohibited at street
intersections.
(b) Street-side parallel parking should be encouraged where
commercial uses are predominant.
(c) Required off-street parking may be on the same lot or premises
with the use served or on an off-site lot separated no more than
150 feet for residential uses and no farther than the defined
town center perimeters for any other nonresidential uses.
Where the provision of off-site parking is applied, the applicant
shall submit with his or her zoning permit application an
agreement with the owner(s) of the off-site parking lot. This
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds. In no such case shall the off-site parking be less than
the required amount for the principal use unless the remaining
portion of the parking lot is provided on site.
(d) Large, expansive parking lots (more than 50 spaces) shall be
prohibited.
(e) All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land
within the defined town center and shall provide connections
to existing or proposed adjoining land uses where feasible.
(4) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of streets within the
defined town center perimeters.
A. Area requirements.
(1) A planned community shall encompass at least 100 acres and shall
have a single master plan prepared for the entire community.
(2) Lot sizes shall be established on subdivision plans pursuant to
approved master plans.
B. Density, land use and coverage requirements.
(1) Density. The total number of dwelling units in Toftrees shall not
exceed 4,690 units.
(2) Land use.
(a) The master plan shall include an area or areas for each land
use designated below.
(b) The percentage of land area or the percentage of dwelling
units of the planned community for each designated use shall
equal or exceed the required minimum.
§ 175-23.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23.2
169:723
(c) The land area for each use, and the corresponding percentage
of the master plan area, shall not include lands designated for
public rights-of-way for roadways. Rights-of-way designated for
pedestrian walkways and bikeways outside of road rights-ofway
shall be deemed "open space."
(d) No lot designated for single-family residential use shall be
greater than 2.00 acres.
(e) The acreage used to calculate the density of dwelling units
assigned to specific use areas designated on the Master Plan
shall be the net acreage designated for residential,
nonresidential, or mixed-use, exclusive of rights-of-way, open
space, parkland or other land designated for public use (e.g.,
sewerage pump stations).
Use
Minimum Percentage
Required in Master Plan
Residential
Large lot single-family (0.5 to
2.00 units per net acre)
0% of total dwelling units
Medium lot single-family (2.01
to 5.00 units per net acre)
20% of total dwelling units
Small single-family or mediumdensity
multifamily (5.01 to
9.00 units per net acre)
15% of total dwelling units
High-density multifamily (9.01
to 15.00 units per net acre) and
mixed-use area dwelling units
25% of total dwelling units
Nonresidential and Mixed
Use
Area for nonresidential or
mixed use (net area)
5% of total tract area
Open space 30% of total tract area
(f) A town center area shall be specifically delineated on the
Master Plan.
(g) Mixed-use structures shall include 25% to 75% of the floor area
for residential use.
(h) Construction of nonresidential uses in the town center area
shall conform to the following schedule: [Amended
1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-563]
§ 175-23.2 PATTON CODE § 175-23.2
169:724
Number of Units
Constructed
Percentage of Nonresidential
Acreage
to be Built in the Town
Center
2,700 20%
3,500 40%
4,100 60%
4,600 100%
(3) Building and impervious coverage. The following building and
impervious coverage limits shall not be exceeded:
Use
Building
Coverage
Impervious
Coverage
Residential
Less than 2.00 units per
net acre
25% 35%
2.01 to 5.00 units per net
acre
30% 40%
5.01 to 9.00 units per net
acre
None applied 50%
Greater than 9.01 units
per net acre
None applied 65%
Mixed Use and Town
Center
Mixed use outside town
center (i.e., residential
and nonresidential)
35% 80%
Town center None applied None applied
Nonresidential
Nonresidential outside
town center (i.e.,
commercial, office, school,
church, utility, etc.)
30% 70%
Parkland 15% 35%
Open space 5% 10%
Right-of-way outside town
center
Not applicable 76%
Other 25% 50%
C. Building heights. The height of any building or structure shall not
exceed the following limits:
§ 175-23.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23.2
169:725
Use
Building Height
(feet)
Residential
Less than 2.00 units per acre 35
2.01 to 5.00 units per acre 35
5.01 to 9.00 units per acre 45
Greater than 9.01 units per acre 60
Nonresidential or mixed use in town
center
60
Nonresidential or mixed use outside
town center
50
Parkland 30
Open space 30
Right-of-way Not applicable
Other 30
D. Setback requirements.
(1) Required setbacks from public rights-of-way abutting Master Plan
boundaries shall be 100 feet for structures and 50 feet for parking
areas.
(2) Required setbacks from master plan property boundaries that do
not abut public rights-of-way shall be 75 feet for structures and 25
feet for parking areas.
(3) No minimum setbacks for interior streets or internal lot lines are
established herein. Such setbacks will be established by the Board
of Supervisors for each subdivision or land development plan
submitted pursuant to an approved master plan. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimal setbacks are
proposed.
(4) Within Toftrees Planned Community, no use may be denied solely
because a particular lot or lots do not meet the perimeter setback
regulations of this chapter so long as the intent of the planned
community is maintained.
E. Open space requirements.
(1) A minimum of 30% of the gross land area of a master plan shall be
designated as parkland or common open space.
(2) A minimum of 20% of the open space must remain as natural areas.
§ 175-23.2 PATTON CODE § 175-23.2
169:726
(3) The Township Supervisors may require dedication of part of the
open space as Township parkland in one or several locations
according to the following standards:
(a) The land so dedicated meets the acreage requirements of
Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) The land so dedicated is large enough to support active and
passive recreation facilities for the proposed population
densities and housing characteristics.
(c) The land is accessible to the public and is viewable from a
public street.
(d) Parkland shall contain improvements. Improvements may
include facilities such as, but not limited to, playing fields,
playground equipment, hard-surfaced courts, walkways,
bikeways, and drinking fountains. The plan for the parkland
improvements shall be included on the master plan.
(4) Permitted uses on open space. The following uses shall be
permitted upon lands designated by a master plan as open space
and the use shall not exceed the following limits of the total open
space required:
Use
Maximum Permitted Use of
Open Space
Golf course 35%
Parkland 25%
Stormwater management
facilities
20%
F. Parking and sidewalk requirements. Motor vehicle access and parking
shall be provided as required in Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land
Development), with the exception of the following requirements:
(1) Parking lots and areas should be located at the side or rear of
buildings, whenever feasible, and shall be adequately screened.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided where required by Chapter 149
(Streets and Sidewalks).
(3) In town centers:
(a) Off-street parking lots shall be prohibited at street
intersections unless an alternate location is approved.
(b) Street-side parallel parking should be encouraged where
commercial uses are predominant unless an alternate location
is approved.
§ 175-23.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-23.2
169:727
§ 175-24. Design and improvement standards.
(c) Required off-street parking may be on the same lot or premises
with the use served or on an off-site lot separated no more than
150 feet for residential uses and no farther than the defined
town center perimeters for any other nonresidential uses.
Where the provision of off-site parking is applied, the applicant
shall submit with his or her zoning permit application an
agreement with the owner(s) of the off-site parking lot. This
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds. In no such case shall the off-site parking be less than
the required amount for the principal use unless the remaining
portion of the parking lot is provided on site.
(d) Large expansive parking lots shall be discouraged.
(e) All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land
within the defined town center and shall provide connections
to existing or proposed adjoining land uses where feasible.
(4) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of streets within the
defined town center perimeters. Alternate pedestrian circulation
may be considered by the Township in appropriate locations.
A. Environmental design. Development in the Planned Community District
should be based on an environmentally harmonious and aesthetically
pleasing design. Consideration should be given to the overall character
of the development and its visual effect on adjacent uses as well as the
tenants of the development, residents of the Township and Centre
Region at large. The following factors should be taken into account in
the design and presented on all plans submitted pursuant to an
approved master plan.
(1) Existing trees should be preserved whenever possible. Existing
stands of mature healthy trees, hedgerows, waterways, historic
sites, scenic points, views and vistas and other community assets
and landmarks should be preserved.
(2) The development plan should be designed to minimize grading and
other changes to the natural terrain. All graded slopes should blend
with the surrounding terrain and development.
(3) All landscaping shall be in conformance with an overall
landscaping plan and unifying concept for the development.
(4) Buffer yards and landscaping.
(a) Buffer yards are required, as applicable, on each lot (or lease
area) or land development area, independent of adjoining uses
or adjoining buffers.
§ 175-23.2 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:728
(b) If a developed use increases in intensity or changes, increases
in the buffer yards may be required by the Board of
Supervisors.
(c) Consideration should be given to utilizing existing vegetation
as an element in the application of buffer yards.
(d) Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or
structures. All except side buffer yards of interior lots may be
crossed by access driveways and utility easements, provided
that such are not more than 25 feet in width at the point
intersection.
(e) Where a required buffer yard is wider than the setback(s)
required in the district, the wider dimension will govern.
(f) All plantings shall be selected to be compatible with the
environmental conditions they will be exposed to.
[1] Any plant material that does not survive must be replaced
within one year.
[2] The determination of the buffer yards shall be made
through the use of Tables 3, 4 and 5 as provided in
§ 175-40A, Environmental design. All uses within each use
classification would be considered to have an equal impact
on neighboring uses.
[3] Impacts resulting from greater intensity uses on adjacent
parcels would include noise, dust, lighting glare, heat,
traffic, building bulk and height, storage areas and
impervious surface areas.
[4] The intensity of adjoining uses must also be determined
from the classification system.
[5] Once the land use classifications are determined, the
appropriate buffer yard can then be applied to the land
development.
B. Town centers.
(1) Town center (except for Toftrees and Oakwood Planned
Communities). The Master Plan shall include a town center area
that incorporates the following design standards:
(a) Buildings in the town center shall be located next to the
sidewalk along a primary street (i.e., Grays Wood Boulevard) to
create a main street environment.
(b) Parking shall be located at the rear of the buildings, out of view
from the primary street (i.e., Grays Wood Boulevard). For the
purpose of this section, the side of the building immediately
§ 175-24 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-24
169:729
adjacent and facing the primary street shall be considered the
front of the building.
(c) Buildings shall be constructed with materials that distinguish
this area from other sections of the development by using
architectural treatments such as brickwork and awnings.
Renderings shall be submitted to the Township illustrating the
view of the buildings from the streetscape.
(d) The town center shall contain an area dedicated as a parklet or
community space that can be counted towards the total
parkland required for the planned community.
(2) Town center for Toftrees Planned Community. The master plan shall
include a town center area that incorporates the following design
standards:
(a) Building layout and orientation in the town center should
provide an atmosphere and environment that is walkable and
provides a pedestrian scale. This may be accomplished by
locating buildings along sidewalks along primary streets.
(b) Parking in the town center should be provided in a variety of
locations, including on street and off street. The overall design
should be cohesive and allow for an optimum mix and usability
of all the spaces in such a way to promote viable retail interests
while maintaining a pedestrian scale and public spaces. Offstreet
parking is encouraged at the rear of the buildings to
minimize large areas for specific uses (such as parking) in the
public viewshed.
(c) Building facades are an integral component of the streetscape.
The architectural treatments in the town center shall be
distinctive and distinguish this area from other sections of the
development. This may be achieved by using treatments such
as brickwork, awnings, and varying rooflines. Renderings shall
be submitted to the Township illustrating the view of the
buildings from the streetscape.
(d) The town center shall contain an area dedicated as a parklet or
community space that can be counted towards the total
parkland required for the planned community.
(e) The town center shall create an environment that encourages
active human engagement and is pedestrian, child, and family
friendly. Amenities in the town center will include pedestrian
lighting, a central public space where people may gather,
street trees, areas designated for shrubs, seasonal plantings,
and planters. Other elements that may be included, such as
sculpture or water features that are in harmony with the
architecture and the Toftrees community, are encouraged. The
town center should also use increased sidewalk widths, bicycle
§ 175-24 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:730
facilities, and similar techniques to promote pedestrian
movements.
C. Signs. Signage shall be provided as required by Chapter 140, Signs,
with the following exceptions:
(1) Maximum height shall be 10 feet above grade for all ground-pole
signs in a planned community.
(2) No roof signs shall be permitted.
D. Utilities.
(1) Sewage disposal. Development within the Planned Community
District shall utilize public sewer service or an approved package
treatment system. Upon adoption of this district, all existing septic
systems in this area shall comply with the three-year frequency
pumping requirement of the Patton Township Sewage Management
Program, until such time as public sewer service is available to the
property and is required by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Water supply. Development within the Planned Community District
shall utilize public water service. All water mains constructed shall
meet the design and installation specifications of the public water
supplier.
(3) Other utilities. All other utilities servicing the Planned Community
District shall be provided underground.
§ 175-24 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-24
169:731
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
All retail
establishments
for the sale,
service and
rental of goods
All service
establishments,
including, but not
limited to:
Automobile
service stations
Barbers and
beauticians
Dry cleaning
Health clubs
Mortuaries
Tailors
Customary
uses
accessory to
permitted
uses
Swimming
pool
Private
greenhouse
Home
occupations
Restaurant,
cafeteria or
recreational
facilities for
employees
Philanthropic or
religious
institutions
Public and
private schools
Public uses
Semipublic uses
Any retail sale or
distribution of
products related
to permitted
uses of IRD
district
Slaughterhouses
Commercial
sanitary landfills
Administrative
activities and
offices
Ambulance
services
§ 175-24 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:732
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Amusement
enterprises
Animal hospitals
Apartments
Arenas, stadiums
and commercial
auditoriums
Art galleries
Assembly from
components,
including the
assembly of
radios, television
and similar
electronic
products
Billiard parlors
Bowling alleys
Bus passenger
stations
Business offices
Churches and
other places of
worship
Clinics
§ 175-24 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-24
169:733
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Clubs
Commercial
cemeteries
Commercial
dairies
Commercial
parking lots
Community
centers
Dental offices
and clinics
Eating and
drinking
establishments
Essential
services
Fabrication of
models or test
equipment used
in research
Financial offices
Firehouses
Fraternal
organizations
Group dwellings
§ 175-24 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:734
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Group homes
Halfway house
(except in PC
District)
Hospitals
Hotels and
motels
Interior storage
of I-RD products
(completely
enclosed)
Lodges
Medical offices
and clinics
Motion-picture
theatres
Municipal office
buildings
Museums
Newspaper
publishing
Nursing homes
Opticians and
optical goods
§ 175-24 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-24
169:735
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Optical
instrument
systems
development
Parish houses
and convents
Personal care
facilities
Pharmaceutical
research and
production
Photographic
studios
Plastics assembly
Professional
offices
Public and
private garages
for the storage
and maintenance
of motor vehicles
Public and
private
institutions of
higher education
Public libraries
§ 175-24 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:736
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Public utility
facilities
Public utility
installations and
public service
structures
Radio and
television studios
Reading rooms
Research,
engineering or
testing
laboratories
Rehabilitation
center
Single-family
dwellings
Skating rinks
Solar energy
systems
Studios for
instruction in
music and the
performing arts
Taxi and
limousine service
§ 175-24 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-24
169:737
Table 1
PC Uses
Toftrees and Oakwood
(§ 175-20A)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
OTHER PLANNED COMMUNITIES: All other Planned
Community Districts permit the same uses as shown in
this table, except that shopping centers shall be limited to
75,000 square feet in building area.
All uses permitted by right or as conditional uses in the
R2, R3, C1, C2 and IRD districts, as well as personal care
facilities, nursing homes and group homes.
Special exceptions: See § 175-41, General regulations.
Permitted Uses Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
Telecommunications
facilities
Tourist homes
Two-family
semidetached
house or duplex
Veterinary offices
§ 175-24 PATTON CODE § 175-24
169:738
ARTICLE V
Conservation Districts
§ 175-25. Intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, the districts established in
this regulation are intended to achieve the following:
§ 175-26. A-1 Rural District. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 139;
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 143; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274;
1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-297; 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-334;
12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354; 6-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-368;
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-486;
5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496; 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-518;
9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-531; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-551]
A. To provide for the preservation of the Township's natural recharge
areas.
B. To preserve areas of natural resources such as forests, rock
outcropping, areas of geological significance and areas of natural flora.
C. To preserve and protect land most suitable for agricultural and related
activities from urban encroachment.
D. To blend rural and suburban design elements where public sewer is
available. [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-486]
A. Statement of intent.
(1) Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it
is the purpose of this section to encourage the pursuance of
existing agricultural uses and to maintain the rural character of the
area. In this manner, sufficient open land will be retained for future
use as stream, valley, parks and watershed control, conservation
and natural wilderness areas or game preserves. Areas within the
Regional Growth Boundary and Sewer Service Area can provide
transitional residential areas between higher-density zoning and
lower-density development outside the Sewer Service Area.
(2) Furthermore, the rural preservation design standards established
herein are intended to achieve the following:
(a) To encourage innovative residential development and design
resulting in a coherent overall development pattern and
streetscape.
(b) To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land.
(c) To conserve and efficiently use open land in rural areas by
maintaining permanent open land through the use of rural
preservation techniques and ensuring that this open land is
§ 175-25 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:739
incorporated as an integral component of community and
neighborhood design.
(d) To encourage new woodlands through natural succession,
reforestation and landscaping, where appropriate, and
encourage the preservation and improvement of habitat for
various forms of wildlife.
(e) To preserve and enhance the rural appearance and serenity of
outlying portions of the Township.
(f) To preserve environmentally sensitive features and historically
significant elements.
(g) To implement the environmental protection policies of the
Centre Region Comprehensive Plan by requiring open land.
(h) To promote land development beneficial to maintaining the
High Quality Cold Water Fishery designation for Buffalo Run
and the related watershed areas.
(i) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the
pursuits of limited agricultural, horticulture and forestry
activities.
(j) Within the Regional Growth Boundary, to provide for the
efficient utilization of public water and sewer services.
B. Use regulations. Uses by right. Land, buildings and premises shall be
used by right for the uses shown in Table 1.
(1) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as a conditional use subject to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42
and in conjunction with the specific requirements of each use as
identified in Table 1.1. If a conditional use approval is granted for
any of these uses by the Board of Supervisors, the buffer yard
requirements of § 175-40A must be addressed for all uses within
this district. [Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-557]
(a) Community-supported agriculture. Developments within the
A-1 District that propose to incorporate within them a
community-supported agriculture (CSA) enterprise shall be
permitted as a conditional use. In addition to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in
§ 175-42 and the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A, the
following conditions shall also apply.
[1] All CSA developments shall be subject to all of the
following conditions:
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:740
[a] The developer must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the Township, that the on-site soils to be utilized in the
CSA are suitable to sustain an agricultural operation.
[b] At least 35% of the open land shall be utilized as a CSA
enterprise that produces consumer-ready crops which
are made available to the residents of the
development and to other community residents on a
subscription basis.
[c] A homeowners' association (HOA) shall be created in
accordance with terms and conditions to be
determined during the plan review process.
[d] Lands dedicated to the CSA shall be controlled by a
conservation easement to be held by the Township.
The conservation easement may include, but shall not
be limited to:
[i] Restrictions and/or conditions of use placed upon
the subject lands.
[ii] Protections for and the preservation of
agricultural lands, streams, wetlands, riparian
buffers, steep slopes, woodlands, wildlife habitat
and scenic resources.
[2] In addition to the conditions set forth in § 175-26B(1)(a)[1]
above, all CSA developments must meet the conditions of
one or more of the following development options and may
exercise any benefits permitted by the option(s) chosen.
[a] Option 1: development on steep slopes. Steep slopes
may be developed in conformance with the following
conditions:
[i] The CSA may be operated as a for-profit
enterprise.
[ii] The CSA or HOA shall reimburse the Township for
costs associated with monitoring the conservation
easement.
[iii] Development shall not be allowed on slopes
averaging greater than 25% except upon
submission of a report by a professional engineer
certifying that the steep slopes may be safely
developed. When a professional engineer has
submitted such a report, no more than 5% of the
total slope area averaging greater than 25% may
be developed. In addition, the following
conditions shall apply:
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:741
[A] The owner and/or developer shall agree to
hold the municipality harmless from and
against any and all claims or damages
associated with any improvements or
construction completed in accordance with
an approved development plan.
[iv] Forested open lands situated on slopes exceeding
15% shall be included in a forest stewardship plan
prepared under the guidelines of the PA DCNR.
[b] Option 2: As part of a CSA, a retail operation may be
conducted in conformance with the following
conditions:
[i] The CSA may be operated as a for-profit
enterprise.
[ii] The CSA or HOA shall reimburse the Township for
costs associated with monitoring the conservation
easement.
[iii] In addition to subscription sales, the CSA may
include a retail use. The retail use shall not
exceed 2,500 square feet in size and shall be
limited to:
[A] Sale of goods produced by the CSA;
[B] Other consumer-ready crops produced within
Pennsylvania;
[C] Food products produced by Pennsylvania
producers; and
[D] Other products not to exceed 20% of the total
sales of the retail operation.
(b) Farm cafes. Farm cafes shall be permitted as a conditional use
in the A-1 District. In addition to meeting the procedures and
criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42, the
following conditions shall also apply. [Added 11-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-573]
[1] The farm associated with the farm cafe must operate as an
active agricultural use, as defined in § 175-6, Definitions;
interpretations of regulations.
[2] The site must comply with Chapter 147, Stormwater
Management, and meet the following additional
regulations:
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:742
[a] The use of innovative best management practices
(BMP) and low-impact development (LID) techniques
are required to reduce the generation of stormwater
runoff and effectively treat pollutants transported in
stormwater.
[b] The use of curbing with inlets and piping shall be
avoided. Stormwater flow from parking areas shall be
conveyed to LID BMPs.
[c] Downspouts shall either be directed to sumps or
disconnected from storm pipes and encouraged to
flow to LID BMPs.
[3] The farm cafe need not be subordinate to the active
agricultural use in terms of revenue, but shall be
subordinate in terms of overall land use (e.g., land area,
structures utilized) in order to maintain the intent of the
farm cafe, which is to augment, support, and highlight
local agriculture.
[4] The total gross floor area specific to the farm cafe use shall
not exceed 3% of the total lot area. This provision shall
apply to the entirety of the farm cafe in the case of a
freestanding structure or, in the case of an attached
structure, the portion of the structure that shall be used
for the farm cafe.
[5] The property shall adhere to the open land requirements
specified in Table 2 (§ 153-34.1D, rural preservation
design standards) and shall be controlled by a
conservation easement to be held by the Township.
[6] To reduce traffic impacts, only on-site dining and takeout
ordering is permitted. No drive-through service is allowed.
[7] Farm cafes shall be limited to a maximum of 150 seats.
[8] Adequate parking shall be provided on site according to
the standards for eating and drinking establishments as
specified in § 153-38, Off-street parking regulations. In
addition, all driveways and parking areas must be
constructed of a material that will maintain a mud-free
surface.
[9] Retail sales of agricultural products shall be limited to
those produced in whole or in part within Pennsylvania,
and the sale of merchandise shall be limited to items that
promote the farm cafe. Retail sales shall only be permitted
in conjunction with an eating establishment that meets the
principal objective of farm cafe, as defined in § 175-6,
Definitions; interpretations of regulations.
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:743
C. Area and bulk regulations. The regulations shown in Table 1 shall be
observed.
D. Developments within the Regional Growth Boundary and Sewer Service
Area using public sewer and water. In addition to the use and area/bulk
regulations contained in § 175-26B, Table 1 and Table 2, the design
standards in Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development, apply.
E. Rural preservation design standards. In addition to the use and area/
bulk regulations contained in § 175-26B and C, the design standards in
Chapter 153, Table 1 and Table 2, Subdivision and Land Development,
apply to rural preservation developments.
F. Exemptions for one or two lots. All parcels that are 10 acres or larger in
area at the time of enactment of this chapter will be entitled to
subdivide up to two lots from the parent tract without having to comply
with rural preservation design standards. Each subdivided lot shall
meet the applicable use regulations contained in § 175-26B, Table 1,
and the applicable area and bulk regulations contained in Table 2.
G. Ownership and maintenance of rural preservation open land.
(1) At the time an application is made to the Township for preliminary
plan approval, the applicant shall supply a written agreement to the
Township, in a manner and form acceptable for recording by the
Recorder of Deeds, Centre County, Pennsylvania, stipulating the
means by which said open land shall be preserved for the uses
permitted by this subsection. Such means shall be determined
according to the following provisions or other acceptable provision
that creates a permanent easement. All open land shall be
permanently restricted from future development.
(a) Retention of land by the owner or its successor at the time of
rural preservation development with covenants that the open
land portion of the tract shall be limited to the uses allowed in
§ 175-26D, in perpetuity;
(b) Establishments of a corporate ownership of the open land by
the homeowners (homeowners' association or condominium
association) of the developed portion of the tract;
incorporating into the deeds of the homeowners any interest in
such open land;
(c) Disposition of such open land to a private or nonprofit
corporation chartered under the laws of Pennsylvania to
administer and maintain the facilities, subject to an acceptable
deed restriction limiting eventual disposition of said open land
for one or more of the uses permitted above and stated in the
Articles of Incorporation. Maintenance and other
responsibilities for land reserved for open land intended to be
between private ownership shall be set forth in an agreement
between the owners or, where land is to be retained by a single
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:744
owner, shall be set forth in a formal, written document which
shall be binding to the owner(s), referenced by note on the
subdivision plan, and recorded with Centre County; or
(d) Estate lot ownership for private use but restricted from further
subdivision by permanent deed restriction.
(2) The open land may be dedicated to the Township or other public
entity if the Board of Supervisors determines that such dedication
is in the best interests of the Township and that none of the
provisions in Subsection G(1)(a) through (d) are possible.
H. Telecommunications facilities shall comply with the specific provisions
of § 175-48.1.
Table 1
A-1 Uses
(§ 175-26B)
[Amended 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-573; 7-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-586]
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Essential
services
Single-family
Group homes
Telecommunications
facilities
Customary
related
accessory
uses3
Swimming
pools2,4
Private
greenhouses
Churches*
Sanitariums*
Cemeteries
Schools,
public or
private*
Public
recreational*
Public uses*
Sawmills*
Greenhouses,
commercial*
Fish
hatcheries*
Solar energy
systems
On parcels of
10 acres or
more
On parcels of
10 acres or
more
On parcels of
10 acres or
more
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:745
Table 1
A-1 Uses
(§ 175-26B)
[Amended 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-573; 7-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-586]
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Exceptions1
Prohibited
Uses1
Agricultural
uses
Agricultural
farm buildings
and structures
Customary
agricultural
accessory
storage and
sale of farm
products
produced on
the farm 1
additional
single-family
dwelling, or 1
additional
dwelling unit
within or
attached to
principal
structure
Penal or
corrective
institutions*
Golf courses
Game
reserves*
Private
hunting
lodges*
Communitysupported
agriculture**
Farm cafes**
NOTES:
* See Table 1.1 for area and bulk regulations.
** See full text of § 175-26A.
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically prohibited uses in this
zoning district.
2 See full text of § 175-26A.
3 Accessory structures are permitted in the rear yard setback area
provided they are a minimum of 40 feet from the rear property line.
4 A swimming pool may be located in the rear yard setback area
provided that the water’s edge is a minimum of 25 feet from the rear
property line.
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:746
Table 1 (continued)
A-1 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-26C)
Minimum Lot Width At
Minimum Lot
Size
Building
Line
(feet)
Street Line
(feet)
When meeting RPD
standards: 1/3 acre
For property on
which agricultural
uses, farm
buildings and farm
structures are
located
300 200
For preexisting
parcels less than
10 acres not to be
developed under
RPD standards: 1
acre
For rural
preservation
developments
80 50
For lots created
under 175-26E: 1
acre
For other
developments
150 100
For developments within RGB/SSA using public water/sewer
11,000 square feet
minimum; 33,000
square feet
maximum
80 feet at building
line
50 feet: frontage on interior
street
Maximum density:
1.6 dwelling units
per acre
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Impervious Area
Maximum Height
(feet)
Building Structure
20% in all areas 40% 35 100
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:747
Minimum Setbacks
Development Type
Front
(feet)
Front on
Collector
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
For property on
which agricultural
uses, farm buildings
and farm structures
are located
75 100 75 75
Rural preservation/
lot accessed by
interior public
street
30 10 25
Rural preservation/
lot accessed by
shared driveway
20 20 20
Other 30 40 30 75
Within RGB/SSA
using public water/
sewer
30 10 25
Tract boundaries Adjacent to
existing public
right-of-way
Rural preservation 75 feet 100 feet
Within RGB/SSA
using public water/
sewer
Greatest of: 75 feet
1) Track boundary
setback of adjacent
development or
zoning district
2) Rear yard setback
of adjacent
property or zoning
if no tract
boundary setback
is required
3) 50 feet
Additional Setbacks
No new single-family dwelling shall be located closer than 200 feet to
any existing barn on a separate lot or parcel of land.
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:748
Minimum Setbacks
Development Type
Front
(feet)
Front on
Collector
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
No new farm building or structure shall be located within 200 feet of
an existing residence on a separate lot or parcel of land.
Table 2
Other Design Standards
Rural Preservation Design Standards
The rural preservation design standards are contained in § 153-34.1.
The information provided in this table is not a complete set of design
standards. These standards contain those with specific parameters.
Section 153-34.1 contains other general standards pertaining to site
design. See § 153-34.1 for full text.
(§ 153-34.1; See also § 175-26)
Open Land
Section Description See Also
§ 153-34.1D 50% of tract must remain as
open land
§ 175-6, Definitions
Allowable Uses of Open Land
1. Agricultural uses on a minimum area of 10 acres.
2. The conservation of water, soil, forest and wildlife resources, areas
for potable water well use and areas for treatment/disposal for
wastewater discharges. Protection easements with required
separation distances as required by the PADEP shall be provided for
water wells and wastewater discharge areas.
3. An estate lot for one single-family dwelling. The estate lot shall
be restricted from further subdivision by permanent deed restriction.
An estate lot of 10 acres or more is entitled to accessory uses and
additional uses by right as described in § 175-26B.
4. Parks and recreational uses.
5. Stormwater management areas.
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:749
Stream, Wetland and Environmental Buffers
Section
Streams
(feet)
Wetlands
(feet)
Surface
Waters
(feet)
Planting
Requirement
§ 153-34.1H 100 100 100 n/a (existing
natural
vegetation)
§ 153-34.1P,
alternate
standards
50, with
plantings
50, with
stormwater
BMPs
50, with
plantings
For streams,
surface
waters
See § 153-34.1P for full regulations of the alternate standards.
Riparian Buffers (§ 153-34.6)
See also § 153-34.1H, P: The stricter standard applies where conflict
exists between these regulations.
Buffer Width Planting Requirements
StreamsThe greater of 65 feet or
extent of 100-year floodplain
Plantings to be installed in
first 35 feet of buffer, each
side
Wetlandsa) Greater than or equal to
5,000 square feet: 50 feet
b) Greater than 2,500 square
feet but less than 5,000: 25
feet
No plantings required.
Existing vegetation to be
preserved.
For full requirements pertaining to riparian buffers, see § 153-34.6.
Table 1.1 Conditional Uses; Area and Bulk Requirements
§ 175-26B(1)
[Amended 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-573]
Unless otherwise specifically identified, the following area and bulk
regulations will pertain to conditional uses.
Lot size 1 acre minimum
Lot width at building setback line 150 feet, minimum
Lot Coverage (impervious surface) 20% maximum
Setback 30 foot minimum, 40 feet on
collector streets
Side yards 30 feet minimum per side
Rear yards 75 feet minimum
Maximum building heights 35 feet building, 50 feet structure
Lot width at street line 100 feet minimum
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-26
169:750
Conditional
Use
Minimum
Lot Size
(aces)
Minimum
Setback
(feet) Other
Churches 5 75, all sides
Sanitariums 5 75, all sides
Penal or
corrective
institutions
10 100, all sides Cannot be adjacent to
a property where a
residence is the
primary use
Golf Courses 150 Maximum impervious
coverage of 5%
Schools,
public or
private
5 75, all sides No more than 50
students may be
enrolled at any one
time
Public
recreation
5 Maximum impervious
coverage of 5%
Private
recreation
10 100, all sides Hours of operation
shall be between 7:00
a.m. and 1/2 hour after
sunset
Public Uses 5
Sawmills 5 75, all sides (a) All operations must
occur inside of a
structure or structures
(b) Hours of operation
shall be between 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Greenhouses,
commercial
5 75, all sides Hours of operation
shall be between 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Fish
hatcheries
5 75, all sides Retail sales are
prohibited on-site
Game
reserves
100 100, all sides Maximum impervious
coverage of 5%
Private
hunting
lodges
50 acres; also
see "Other"
column
100, all sides If located directly
adjacent to public
hunting lands such as
State Gamelands or
State Forest; then
minimum lot size shall
be 5 acres
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-26
169:751
§ 175-27. NR-1 Natural Resource District. [Amended 12-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-354; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384; 1-6-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-551]
Conditional
Use
Minimum
Lot Size
(aces)
Minimum
Setback
(feet) Other
Farm cafes 10 75, all sides Hours of operation
shall be between 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Statement of intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it
is the purpose of this section to preserve all types of natural resources
from rural or urban development except for specific unique uses that
would be compatible with the natural resources.
B. Use regulations are shown in Table 1. In addition, the following
regulations shall also apply.
(1) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to meeting the
procedures and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42.
If a conditional use approval is granted for any of these uses by the
Board of Supervisors, the bufferyard requirements of § 175-40A
must be addressed for all uses within this district.
C. Area and bulk requirement: none.
D. Telecommunications facilities shall comply with the specific provisions
of § 175-48.1.
§ 175-26 PATTON CODE § 175-27
169:752
§ 175-27.1. NR-2 Natural Resource and Recycling District. [Added
7-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-471; amended 1-28-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-505; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-551]
Table 1
NR-1 Uses
(§ 175-27B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses Accessory Uses
Conditional
Uses
Prohibited
Uses
All structures
and buildings
not approved by
the Pennsylvania
Department of
Environmental
Protection and/
or other
applicable
agency as listed
under permitted
uses
Woodland
preserve
Wildlife
sanctuary
Forests and the
keeping of land
Flora and other
resources
Telecommunications
facilities
Retaining walls,
flood retention
dams, culverts
and bridges as
approved by the
PA DEP and/or
other applicable
agencies
None Private or public
recreation use
Game farm
Fish hatchery
Hunting and
fishing reserves
Utility
transmission
lines
Agricultural
uses and
harvesting of
crops
Pasture
Grazing land
Orchard
Outdoor plant
nursery
Solar energy
systems
The filling in of
the area or
removal of
topsoil or
damming or
relocation of any
watercourse
Sanitary
landfills
Dumps
Junkyards
Outdoor storage
of vehicles and/
or material
§ 175-27 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-27.1
169:753
A. Statement of intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2,
General intent, it is the purpose of this section to provide for limited
reuse of a portion of impaired properties along with preservation of the
wooded character of the Township.
B. Use regulations are shown in Table 1. In addition, the following
regulations shall also apply.
(1) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The uses shown in Table 1
shall be permitted as conditional uses, subject to meeting the
standards and criteria in § 175-42, Procedures and criteria for
conditional uses, and approval of Township Supervisors.
C. Area, bulk and development requirements are shown in Table 2. In
addition, the following regulations also apply. [Amended 8-15-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-594]
(1) Minimum setbacks for all improvements are in effect except
entranceways and bufferyard plantings.
(2) Grandfathered uses: Operations that were permitted as
nonconforming uses prior to the creation of the NR-2 Zoning
District and became conforming uses with creation of the NR-2
Zoning District, and where the occupied area of said use
encroaches into one (or more) of the setback area(s) required in the
NR-2 Zoning District, shall be prohibited from encroaching any
further into the setback area.
(3) Bufferyards: Refer to Tables 3, 4 and 5 at the end of this chapter.
(a) Bufferyard notes:
[1] All existing plantings within the depth of the setback may
be counted towards meeting the bufferyard planting
requirement.
[2] Where setbacks for a preexisting operation are
grandfathered as noted above, the use shall maintain the
bufferyard planting and width in place at the time of
creation of the NR-2 Zoning District.
(4) Access and traffic.
(a) Parking: Provide sufficient paved parking for routine needs.
Seasonal and overflow parking may be provided in unpaved
parking areas.
D. Telecommunications facilities shall comply with the specific provisions
of § 175-48.1, Telecommunications facilities.
§ 175-27.1 PATTON CODE § 175-27.1
169:754
Table 1
NR-2 Uses
(§ 175-27.1B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses Prohibited Uses
Woodland preserve
Wildlife sanctuary
Forests and the
keeping of land
Flora and other
resources
Telecommunications
facilities
None Private or public
recreation use
Utility
transmission
lines
Orchard
Outdoor plant
nursery
Solar energy
systems
The filling in of
the area or
removal of
topsoil or
damming or
relocation of any
watercourse
Sanitary landfills
Dumps
Junkyards
Outdoor storage
of vehicles and/
or material
Recycling activities
limited to:
1. Production,
storage and sale
of organic
compost and
mulch produced
from leaves,
grass and other
locally
generated
organic wastes
§ 175-27.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-27.1
169:755
Table 1
NR-2 Uses
(§ 175-27.1B)
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses Prohibited Uses
2. Production,
storage and sale
of clean
construction
aggregate
produced from
locally
generated waste
concrete and
asphalt paving
and building
materials
Table 2
NR-2 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-27.1C)
[Amended 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-594]
Minimum
Lot Size
(acres)
Minimum
Open
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Setbacks
Adjacent
To:
(feet)
40 40% 15% 5% Building:
45
Residential
or Planned
Community
Zones or
uses: 100
Structure:
80
Industrial
or
Commercial
Zones or
uses: 50
§ 175-27.1 PATTON CODE § 175-27.1
169:756
§ 175-28. Floodplain Conservation Area. [Amended 9-12-1978 by
Ord. No. 154; 3-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-416; 5-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-506; 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-506; 1-6-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-551]
The limits of the Floodplain Conservation Area are hereby determined to
be areas subject to periodic flooding as delineated by the official Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) of the
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration (FIMA), FEMA, and those
areas containing alluvial soils defined as "floodplain soils" by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
All maps and data used to set the limits of the Flood District are available
in the Township Building and in the offices of the Centre County Planning
Commission, Willowbank Office Building, 420 Holmes Street, Bellefonte,
Pennsylvania, and the Centre Regional Planning Commission, Municipal
Building, 2643 Gateway Drive, State College, Pennsylvania. No modification
or revision of any flood-prone area designated by FEMA shall be made
Table 2
NR-2 Area and Bulk Regulations
(§ 175-27.1C)
[Amended 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-594]
Minimum
Lot Size
(acres)
Minimum
Open
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Setbacks
Adjacent
To:
(feet)
Public or
private
road rightof-
way: 100
Other use:
100
Buffer Yard Regulations
(§ 175-27C, Tables 3, 4 and 5)
Adjacent To: Buffer Yard
Residential or Planned Community
Zones or uses
E
Industrial or Commercial Zones or uses C
Public or private road right-of-way D
Other uses E
§ 175-27.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-28
169:757
without review and approval by the Federal Insurance and Mitigation
Administration.
A. Declaration of legislative intent. In the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare, the regulations of the Floodplain District are
intended to protect areas of floodplain subject to and necessary for
floodwaters and to permit and encourage the retention of open land
uses which will be so located and designed as to constitute a
harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of the
municipality as provided for in the Comprehensive Plan. In advancing
these principles and the general purposes of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan, the specific intent of this district is to:
(1) Combine with present zoning requirements certain restrictions
made necessary for the floodplains to promote the general health,
welfare and safety of the community.
(2) Prevent the erection of structures in areas unfit for human usage
by reason of danger from flooding, unsanitary conditions or other
hazard.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply
and promoting safe and sanitary drainage.
(4) Reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units and its individuals by frequent and periodic
floods and overflow of lands.
(5) Permit certain uses which can be appropriately located in the
floodplain as herein defined and which will not impede the flow of
floodwaters or otherwise cause danger to life and property at or
above or below their locations along the floodway.
(6) Permit only those uses in the floodplain compatible to the
preservation of natural conditions which are conducive to the
maintenance of constant rates of water flow throughout the year
by:
(a) Withholding rapid water runoff contributing to downstream
flooding.
(b) Providing area for groundwater absorption for maintenance of
the subsurface water supply.
(7) Provide sufficient drainage courses to carry abnormal flows of
stormwater in periods of heavy precipitation.
B. The Floodplain Conservation Area shall include all lands designated by
the following:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS).
§ 175-28 PATTON CODE § 175-28
169:758
(2) Alluvial soils delineated by Soils Report of the Soil Conservation
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, on map sheets
(47, 48, 55, 56, 63) of USDA Soil Survey, 1981:
Name Symbol
1. Chagrin Loams Ch
2. Lindside Silt Loam Lx
3. Melvin Silt Loam Mm
4. Dunning Silty Clay Loam Du
5. Wyoming Wy
6. Nolin No
(3) Wyoming (Wy) and Nolin (No) soils, while not displaying all of the
characteristics common to the alluvial soils indicated in the
preceding table, may be subject to periodic overflow or flooding.
For this reason, they shall be considered an integral part of a flood
network. However, they may be exempted from the provisions of
this chapter where it is determined that:
(a) They are not contained within the areas delineated by the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) of the Federal Insurance Administration,
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(b) That such exemption would not have the effect of nullifying the
declaration of legislative intent of this chapter. Those cases in
which either Wyoming or Nolin, local-alluvium, are involved
shall be referred to the Planning Commission, which shall
examine each case and recommend either compliance with or
exemption from the provisions of this chapter and shall attach
any conditions appropriate to meet the declaration of
legislative intent of this chapter.
C. Permitted uses. The uses shown in Table 1 are permitted in the
Floodplain Conservation Area, provided there is strict compliance with
the floodproofing and related provisions in this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
D. Prohibitions and use limitations. The uses permitted in Subsection C,
Table 1, are limited as follows:
(1) All new construction or development is prohibited.
(2) Improvements or modifications to an existing structure shall be
permitted, but they shall be elevated or floodproofed as much as
possible, provided that said improvements or modifications involve
less than 50% of the fair market value and less than 50% of the
square footage as it existed on January 6, 2014.
§ 175-28 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-28
169:759
(3) All other uses, whether temporary or permanent, are prohibited,
including but not limited to the following, which are not interpreted
as customary uses:
(a) All structures and buildings with the exception of retaining
walls, flood retention dams, culverts and bridges as approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) The filling in, removal of topsoil from, any alterations or
damming of any watercourse within the Floodplain
Conservation Area without prior approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection; the applicant must
notify all adjacent communities, the State Coordinating Office
and the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration.
(c) Sanitary landfill or dumping of any kind.
(d) Fences which impede, retard or change the direction of the
flow of water or catch or collect debris carried by such water.
(e) On-site sewage disposal system.
(f) Swimming pools.
(4) Outdoor storage materials which are buoyant, flammable or
explosive or those hazardous materials listed in Section 38.7 of the
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs Flood Plain
Management Regulations.
E. Special exceptions. The uses shown in Table 1 shall be permitted in the
Floodplain Conservation Area upon approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception. Additional regulations for specific uses
are as follows:
(1) Residential front, side and/or rear yards and uses customarily
incidental thereto.
(a) Except that no structures shall be permitted.
(b) Inclusion of floodplain lands within the residential lots in order
to meet minimum lot area or yard requirements is contingent
upon complying with the objectives and standards set forth in
the declaration of legislative intent of this chapter (§ 175-2)
and with any other pertinent municipal regulations. If such
compliance cannot be shown, the land area within the
Floodplain District shall not be calculated for purposes of
determining lot areas or yard requirements.
(2) Front, side and/or rear yards of any other class or district.
(a) Except that an area so utilized shall not be inconsistent with
the objectives and standards set forth in the declaration of
§ 175-28 PATTON CODE § 175-28
169:760
legislative intent of this chapter (§ 175-2) and with any other
pertinent municipal regulations.
F. Approval. All plans for structures within a distance of 100 feet from the
Floodplain District and all plans for the development of a recreational
or utility use within or adjacent to the district shall be approved by the
Township.
G. Appeals. Initial determinations under this chapter, including questions
of the boundaries of the Floodplain District, shall be made by the
Zoning Officer with the advice of the Township Engineer and the
Township Planning Commission. Any party aggrieved by a decision of
the Zoning Officer may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The
boundaries can be validated by detailed on-site surveys approved by the
Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture. In
rendering decisions under this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, in addition to other evidence and standards, the findings and
recommendations of the Soil and Water Conservation District and the
recommendations of the Township Planning Commission and other
appropriate agencies. In any appeal procedure, both the property
owner, at his or her expense, and the Township or any other of its
agencies or agents shall have the right to conduct on-site surveys and
other studies and present testimony and evidence of same to the Zoning
Officer and to the Zoning Hearing Board.
H. Municipal liability. The granting of a zoning permit or approval of a
subdivision plan in any floodplain district shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township or
by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of any
structure, use or other plan proposed and shall create no liability upon
or a cause of action against such public body, official or employee for
any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 175-28 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-28
169:761
Table 1
Floodplain Conservation Uses
(§ 175-28)1
Special Exceptions
Prohibited
Uses
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses Other
See full text
of § 175-28
Customarily
incidental to
the permitted
uses
Residential front,
side and/or rear
yards and uses
customarily
incidental
thereto, except
that no structures
shall be permitted
Cultivation and
harvesting of crops
according to
recognized soil
conservation
practices
Pasture and
grazing land
Outdoor plant
nursery
Orchard
Nonpaved
parking lots
where required
by regulations for
any other class or
district
Front, side and/or
rear yards of any
other class or
district
Recreation use
such as (excluding
structures):
Park
Day camp picnic
grove
Golf course
Hunting
Fishing and
boating club
All utilities and
water supply
facilities that are
designed to
minimize and
eliminate flood
damage or
infiltration
Forestry, lumbering
and reforestation,
excluding storage
and mill structures
Harvesting of any
wild crops such as
marsh hay, ferns,
moss, berries and
wild rice
Game farm
§ 175-28 PATTON CODE § 175-28
169:762
Table 1
Floodplain Conservation Uses
(§ 175-28)1
Special Exceptions
Prohibited
Uses
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses Other
See full text
of § 175-28
Fish hatchery
(excluding rearing
structures)
Hunting and
fishing reserves
Public and private
conservation areas
such as:
Wildlife sanctuary
Woodland preserve
and arboretum
Conservation of
open space, water,
soil and wildlife
resources
Outlet installations
for sewage
treatment plants,
sealed public and
private water
supply wells
Utility transmission
lines
Essential services
designed and built
to minimize flood
damage and
promote infiltration
§ 175-28 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-28
169:763
Table 1
Floodplain Conservation Uses
(§ 175-28)1
Special Exceptions
Prohibited
Uses
Permitted Uses
Accessory
Uses Other
See full text
of § 175-28
Essential services
include stormwater
infiltration basins
and other best
management
practices as
defined by the PA
Department of
Environmental
Protection for
handling
stormwater
discharge.
NOTES:
1 See full text of § 175-28 for additional regulations.
§ 175-28 PATTON CODE § 175-28
169:764
ARTICLE VI
Industrial Districts
§ 175-29. Intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, the district established in
this regulation is intended to achieve the following:
§ 175-30. I-1 Industrial District. [Amended 9-25-1984 by Ord. No.
84-191]
A. To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the
anticipated future needs for industrial activity with due allowance for
the needs for a range of choice of sites.
B. To provide that the land most suitable for industrial and related
activities will be available by prohibiting the use of such land for new
residential development and at the same time, to protect residences by
separating them from such activities.
C. To protect industry against congestion by limiting the bulk of buildings
in relation to the land around them and to one another and by providing
sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities for such
developments.
D. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stable
industry, to strengthen the economic base, to protect the character of
particular industrial areas and their peculiar suitability to particular
uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings and to protect local tax
revenues.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to provide industrial locations for plants which
are normally undesirable adjacent to residential and commercial areas,
but which require access to high capacity highways, public sanitary
sewerage and water services and a full range of public utilities.
B. Use regulations. [Amended 3-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-243]
(1) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The following uses shall be
permitted as a conditional use subject to meeting the procedures
and criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42. If a
conditional use approval is granted for any of these uses by the
Board of Supervisors, the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A
must be addressed for all uses within this District. [Amended
4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-340; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-384]
(a) Any production, manufacturing, assembly, processing,
cleaning, testing, repair, storage or distribution of materials,
goods, foodstuffs and other products not involving a retail
§ 175-29 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-30
169:765
activity on the lot. This prohibition on retail activity shall not
apply to an accessory factory outlet limited to sales of products
manufactured or assembled on the premises and occupying
less than 10% of the area of the business to which the sales are
related.
(b) Freight and trucking terminals, moving and storage, wholesale
distribution and warehouses.
(c) Public and private garages for storage and maintenance of
motor vehicles and equipment.
(d) Junkyards.
(e) All uses by right permitted in the I-RD Research, Development
and Light Industry Zoning District.
(f) Telecommunications facilities. [Added 12-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-354]
(g) Solar energy systems. [Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-586]
(2) Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted:
(a) Restaurant, cafeteria or recreational facilities for employees.
(b) Customary accessory uses in manufacturing or industrial
districts, including factory outlets as described in the
conditional uses.
C. Standards. Industrial activities in this section shall be such that noise
measured at the property line shall be 65 dBA or less; the activities
adhere to all pertinent state and federal standards covering air and
water pollution; and are serviced by public off-site sanitary sewage
disposal and public water systems. [Amended 9-25-1984 by Ord. No.
84-191]
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations shall be observed:
(1) Lot size: Minimum determined on the basis of the minimum width,
maximum coverage, yard setback, parking and other requirements
contained in this section and chapter.
(2) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage (structures): 40% maximum.
(4) Lot coverage (impervious): 75% maximum.
(5) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 20 feet minimum.
§ 175-30 PATTON CODE § 175-30
169:766
(7) Rear yards: 40 feet minimum.
(8) Buffer yards: 100 feet minimum from the center line of road or 50
feet minimum from the edge of the public right-of-way, whichever is
greater, on any lot line contiguous to an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MHP, PC,
R-M, UD, A-1, NR-1, FP-1 Zone.
(9) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(10) Height-exempt structure location: 40 feet minimum from any lot
line, except when greater than 40 feet in height, setback to equal
height of exempt structure.
E. Off-street park requirements. As required by § 175-46, and in addition
when an accessory retail factory outlet use is combined with a
permitted primary industrial use, then at least one parking space for
every 250 square feet of retail floor area shall be provided. [Amended
3-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-243]
F. Loading regulations. As required by § 175-47.
G. Design standards. For storage, landscaping, access and traffic control,
interior circulation and lighting, as required by § 175-44. [Amended
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
H. Telecommunication facilities shall comply with the specific provisions of
§ 175-48.1. [Added 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354]
I. Screening shall be provided along all property lines as follows: [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-498]
(1) In all front yard areas, canopy shade trees shall be planted at
thirty-foot intervals on average. Shrubs shall be planted between
the canopy trees.
(2) Screening in side and rear yards shall be based on the zoning of the
adjacent property according to the following requirements:
Adjacent Zoning
District
Required Plantings per 100 Linear
Feet of Buffer
Canopy trees 4
Understory trees 6
Shrubs 24
Agricultural and
residential districts
Evergreens 12
All planned community,
university and planned
airport districts
Use appropriate twenty-five-foot
buffer yard standard from Tables
3, 4 and 5
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
All natural resources
districts
Shrubs 6
§ 175-30 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-30
169:767
§ 175-31. I-RD Research, Development and Light Industry District.
Adjacent Zoning
District
Required Plantings per 100 Linear
Feet of Buffer
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 4
All commercial and
industrial districts
Shrubs 6
(3) Applicants are encouraged to utilize existing vegetation to meet the
screening requirements. Following the completion of a tree
inventory, existing woodland areas may be used to address the
landscaping/screening requirement for setback areas. All trees that
are to be used to meet the requirements of this section (whether
planted or preexisting), however, must have a caliper no less than
2.5 inches measured six inches above the root ball. Invasive
species, as defined by Appendix B197 of the I-99 Overlay District
regulations (Ordinance No. 20014-388),198 may not be planted or
counted towards meeting any landscaping requirements.
(4) To allow flexibility in the preparation of screening plans, the
following exchange ratios may be utilized by the applicant:
(a) Two understory trees may be substituted for one canopy shade
tree.
(b) One canopy shade tree may be substituted for two understory
trees.
(c) Two evergreen trees may be substituted for one canopy shade
tree.
(d) One evergreen tree or canopy tree may be substituted for five
shrubs.
(e) One understory tree may be substituted for three shrubs.
(5) Where differing requirements are imposed by this subsection on
screening and by other sections requiring landscaping, the
requirements of this subsection shall take precedence.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to encourage industrial development which is
free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare, hazards of fire
or other objectionable effects. Industries which can meet the standards
imposed in this section shall be permitted to locate in districts adjacent
to commercial and residential adjoining districts provided that
adequate landscaping and screening are provided.
197. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
198. Editor's Note: See Art. VIIIA of this chapter.
§ 175-30 PATTON CODE § 175-31
169:768
B. Use regulations.
C. Uses by rights. In I-RD Districts, land, buildings or premises shall be
used by right for only one or more of the following: [Amended
12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-249]
(1) Research, engineering or testing laboratories.
(2) Administrative activities and offices.
(3) Public utility installations and public service structures.
(4) Assembly from components including the assembly of radios,
television and similar electronic products.
(5) Fabrication of models or test equipment used in research.
(6) Pharmaceutical research and production.
(7) Plastics assembly.
(8) Optical instrument systems development.
(9) Radio and television studios.
(10) Business and professional offices.
(11) Clinics, medical, dental and optician offices.
(12) Churches and other places of worship.
(13) Completely enclosed (interior) storage of products to the above, or
similar type uses.
(14) Telecommunications facilities. [Added 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-354]
D. Accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Restaurant, cafeteria or recreational facilities for employees.
(2) Customary accessory uses in $TKSLLDIR/images/XX0000/
districts.
E. Uses permitted as a conditional use. The following uses shall be
permitted as a conditional use subject to meeting the procedures and
criteria for conditional uses contained in § 175-42. If a conditional use
approval is granted for any of these uses by the Board of Supervisors,
the buffer yard requirements of § 175-40A must be addressed for all
uses within this District. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
(1) Any retail sale or distribution of products related to the above
permitted uses.
(2) Slaughterhouses.
§ 175-31 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-31
169:769
(3) Commercial sanitary landfills.
F. Standards.
(1) Activities in an I-RD District shall be carried on in completely
enclosed buildings. Only storage and essential services may be
permitted out of doors and only under the following provisions:
(2) Storage shall be effectively screened by an opaque wall or fence
with solid entrance and exit gates. Such wall or fence shall be a
minimum of six feet in height and in no case lower than the
enclosed storage.
G. Uses in any I-RD District shall be such that they adhere to all pertinent
state standards governing air, noise and water pollution; do not engage
in reproduction or storage of any material designed for use as an
explosive or in any way create any other danger to the safety of the
surrounding area; and do not engage in the storage of waste materials
on the lot for any period beyond 30 days.
H. Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations hall be observed:
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum.
(2) Lot width: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage: 75% maximum [Amended 1-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-297]
(4) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(5) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards: 50 feet minimum for each.
(7) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(8) Tower and chimney location: 50 feet minimum from any lot line.
(9) Paved areas: 50% of lot area maximum excluding buildings
I. Off-street parking regulations. (See § 175-46)
J. Loading regulations. (See § 175-47)
K. Design standards. The following shall be applicable in all I-RD Districts:
(1) Landscaping: as required by § 175-44C of this chapter.
(2) Access and traffic control: as required by § 175-44D of this chapter.
(3) Interior circulation: as required by § 175-44E of this chapter.
(4) Telecommunication facilities shall comply with the specific
provisions of § 175-48.1. [Added 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-354]
§ 175-31 PATTON CODE § 175-31
169:770
ARTICLE VII
University Planned District (UPD)
[Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-345; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-354; 5-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-366]
§ 175-32. Purpose and intent.
A. The University Planned District (UPD) is designed to promote the
careful planning and orderly development of the Pennsylvania State
University campus, consistent with the community development goals
of the Centre Region and its member municipalities as described in the
Centre Region Comprehensive Plan.
B. The UPD is designed to be sensitive to both existing and projected
future conditions, to provide a mechanism for determining the
university's appropriate role in community development and to assure
that the ongoing growth and change of its campus environment do not
adversely impact upon the community.
C. The UPD is intended to provide a single zoning mechanism which can
accommodate the university's missions of education, research and
public service, and its expanded roles of technology transfer and
support for the development of the economy of the commonwealth.
D. The UPD is intended to provide flexibility for land development, while
also providing for review and mitigation of potential community and
environmental impacts associated with development.
E. The UPD is intended to provide a unique campus environment
consistent with the goals and objectives of the Centre Region
Comprehensive Plan, the university's development objectives and
Articles V and VI of the Municipalities Planning Code.199
F. The UPD is intended to encourage innovative and sensitive design in
the layout of buildings, structures and open spaces and to encourage
development which preserves natural features.
G. The UPD is intended to encourage more efficient use of land and public
services and to provide an environment of stable character consistent
with surrounding uses.
H. The UPD is intended to encourage innovative strategies for mitigating
transportation impacts, promote the use of transportation demand
management strategies and minimize congestion.
I. The UPD is intended to provide for development which relates to and
complements the community infrastructure and services required to
support the long-term growth of the university and community.
199. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-32 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-32
169:771
§ 175-33. Regulations.
J. The UPD is intended to encourage equitable sharing in the
responsibilities to provide infrastructure systems which are adequate to
support the long-term growth of the university and community.
A. Definitions. The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to this
article:
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incident, subordinate and
directly related to a general or designated use. Accessory uses in the
UPD shall be limited in size by the following standards:
AGRICULTURE — The use of the land for agricultural purposes,
including farming, dairying, pasturage agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the
necessary uses for packing, treating or storing produce; provided,
however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES THAT HOUSE ANIMALS — Structures
which are used for the keeping of cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine
or other farm animals, including feedlots, and manure management
equipment and facilities.
BUSINESS INCUBATOR — Any building that offers office, light industry
and manufacturing and/or laboratory space, common facilities and
shared support services at below-market rates to tenants.
BUSINESS OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, used by any
company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor primarily engaged
in providing services to business establishments on a fee or contract
basis, such as, but not limited to, an advertising agency, credit
reporting agency, employment services, management and consulting
services, news services, protective services, public relations,
commercial research, stenographic services and commercial research,
development and testing.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Any building, or portion thereof, used by
any company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor for such uses
as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, data processing,
equipment rental and leasing, quick-print and photocopying, photo
For buildings of less than 20,000 square feet in size containing
a permitted general or designated principal use, an individual
accessory use is limited to 2,000 square feet.
(1)
For buildings of 20,000 square feet or greater in size containing
a permitted general or designated principal use, an individual
accessory use may not exceed 10% of the gross floor area.
(2)
For permitted general or designated principal use which does not
involve a building or buildings, an individual accessory use may not
exceed 2,500 square feet.
(3)
§ 175-32 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:772
finishing, messenger or courier services and supplying stationery and
other office supplies.
CONTINUOUS CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — Residential uses
with assisted care facilities for retirement living which may include
detached or attached dwellings, duplexes, townhouses, apartments and
other types of residential units, community centers, dining facilities,
nursing home and long-term care facilities, recreational facilities and
incidental retail sales and services for the benefit of residents and
patients. Signs for accessory uses shall be limited to incidental signs.
CORPORATE OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, used as the
place of business by an association of individuals created by law and
existing as an entity with powers and liabilities independent of those of
its members.
DESIGNATED USE REQUIREMENTS — Requirements, restrictions or
limitations applicable to designated uses as contained in this article or
the district plan.
ESSENTIAL UTILITY SERVICES — Public or private utility distribution
systems for gas, water, storm and sanitary sewer, telecommunications,
electricity, compressed air, chilled water, steam, condensate or similar
services, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cable towers and antennas not exceeding the maximum permitted
height in a subdistrict and other similar equipment and accessories
necessary for furnishing such service. Essential utility services shall not
include electric power generating plants, substations, water tanks, gas
transfer stations, water and sewage treatment plants, buildings and lift
stations and water supply wells.
FINANCIAL OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, used by any
company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor for such uses
as banks, savings and loans and trust companies, credit agencies,
investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and
commodities, security and commodity exchanges, mortgage brokers,
insurance agents, brokers, lessees, buyers, sellers, agents and
developers of real estate.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of all buildings in a
subdistrict divided by the subdistrict area.
GOVERNMENT OFFICE — Any building, or a portion thereof, used
as the place of business by any department, commission, independent
agency or instrumentality of the United States or of a state, county,
incorporated or unincorporated municipality, Township, authority,
district or other governmental entity.
MEDICAL OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, used by any
company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor primarily engaged
in furnishing medical, surgical and related services to individuals,
including the offices of physicians, dentists, chiropodists, chiropractors,
ophthalmologists, psychologists, psychiatrists, medical optical,
optometric, osteopathic and other health practitioners, medical and
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:773
dental laboratories, out-patient care facilities, blood banks, oxygen and
miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services and veterinary
offices. Hospitals, whether for profit or not-for-profit, licensed by the
State of Pennsylvania, are excluded from this definition. Animal
hospitals are also excluded from this definition.
NONSTUDENT HOUSING — Housing in the UPD other than that
provided by student residence halls or other student housing units, a
continuous care retirement community or a retirement community. If
permitted in a specific subdistrict by the approved district plan, the
applicable residential zoning district requirements from Chapter 175
(Zoning) will be used to govern development of the nonstudent housing.
PARKING, SPECIAL EVENT — Parking which is used infrequently to
accommodate the needs of special events and not for regular use
by employees, residents or students. Such parking would typically be
provided in grass fields or unimproved lots not otherwise used for
parking as occurs with Pennsylvania State football games, community
Fourth of July celebrations or other similar events.
PARKING, TEMPORARY — Parking which is established for a fixed
period of time to accommodate construction projects, weather
emergencies or other similar limited needs and which will be removed
upon expiration of the time period, unless extended by the Township.
Such parking would not require land development approval, but would
require a zoning permit, and must be constructed at a minimum of
gravel or other crushed stone. For temporary parking facilities greater
than 5,000 square feet in size, a stormwater management plan may be
required at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
PERIMETER SETBACK — A distance extending from the boundary of
the UPD district to a structure within the UPD. The size of a required
perimeter setback shall be measured as the shortest distance between
the structure and the boundary of the UPD district.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any building, or portion thereof, used by any
company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor primarily engaged
in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her
apparel. Personal services usually include the following: laundry,
cleaning and garment services, garment pressing, linen supply, diaper
services, coin-operated laundries, dry-cleaning plants, carpet and
upholstery cleaning, photographic studios, beauty shops, barbershops,
hair salons, shoe repair, hat cleaning, funeral services, steam baths,
reducing salons and health clubs, clothing rental, locker rental and
porter services.
PILOT or PROTOTYPE MANUFACTURING — A facility used for the
production and/or testing of materials, physical layouts, processes,
equipment and other concepts, ideas and costs at a stage between the
research laboratory and frill-scale production.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, used for
the office for attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers, landscape
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:774
architects, clergy, planners, surveyors and all other offices which are
similar to the listed uses in function and traffic generation and
attraction capabilities.
PROJECT AREA — The area for a proposed land development project as
defined by the contract bid specifications of the contracting entity.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — Residential uses and ancillary facilities
for retirement living which may include detached or attached singlefamily
dwellings, duplexes, townhouses or apartments and other types
of residential units, community centers, recreational facilities and
incidental retail sales and services for the benefit of residents.
SIGNS —
SOCIAL, CIVIC or FRATERNAL CLUB — A group of people, excluding
student organizations, formally organized for a common purpose or
interest, usually cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular
meetings, membership requirements, fees and dues and a constitution
and/or bylaws.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign erected along a public road to direct
vehicles or pedestrians to a stated location.
(1)
EVENT SIGNS — A type of directional sign specifically intended to
direct motorists attending an event in the UPD to the site of the
event.
(2)
GROUND POLE SIGN — A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
(3)
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational or regulatory,
that has a purpose secondary to the subdistrict in which it is
located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only,"
"telephone" and other similar directives.
(4)
MONUMENT SIGN — A self-supporting sign with 50% or more of
its horizontal dimension resting on the ground.
(5)
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected and maintained upon or above the
roof of any building or structure.
(6)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign designed or intended to be displayed
for no more than 60 days during the calendar year.
(7)
WALL SIGN — A sign attached parallel to but within 12 inches of
a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within
the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is
supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one
sign face.
(8)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is attached to the exterior or interior
of a window which is intended for viewing from the exterior of the
building.
(9)
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:775
SPRAY IRRIGATION — A method of wastewater disposal and any
necessary appurtenance which, following a minimum of secondary
treatment of the wastewater, involves spray application of the treated
effluent on land determined to have soil characteristics capable of
providing the additional filtration and treatment of the effluent to meet
applicable state water quality standards. A minimum perimeter setback
of 200 feet is required between any area used for such purposes and an
adjoining zoning district.
STADIUMS — Large open or enclosed places used for athletic or other
major events and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for
spectators.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES — Structures such as
transmission towers, antennas, microwave antennas, satellite dish
antennas and other similar equipment exceeding 12 feet in diameter
and for the maximum building height permitted in a subdistrict and
which are not designed, intended or permitted to carry service
distribution lines.
TEST TRACKS — Open or enclosed facilities utilized for the testing of
motorized vehicles, vehicle components or other machinery, which may
include but not be limited to a driving track, and buildings or facilities
for testing engines, transmissions and similar vehicle elements.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES — Public or private facilities which are
necessary for the operation, maintenance and storage of vehicles or
equipment used in providing any type of transportation services. Such
facilities may include a range of facilities such as fleet services, major
transit or transfer terminals and airport facilities.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES — Structures or equipment used
primarily in providing community or university transportation such as
transit shelters or stops, bicycle racks or lockers and rails or other
elements of fixed guideway transportation systems.
UPD DISTRICT PLAN (DISTRICT PLAN) — All documents, including
maps, written narrative and studies, required to be submitted under
this chapter as part of such district plan.
USES —
UTILITY USES, FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES — Public or private
electric power generating plants, substations, water tanks, gas transfer
stations, water and sewage treatment plants, buildings and lift stations,
GENERAL USE — A use which is fundamental to the educational,
research, public service or technology transfer missions of a
university.
(1)
DESIGNATED USE — A use which, by its nature, involves a
substantial degree of public use and/or a level of intensity and
nontraditional relationship to a university which suggests that it
should be limited in some way in a given area.
(2)
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:776
water supply wells, chilled water plants, steam plants, spray irrigation
and other buildings and uses not defined as "essential utility services."
B. Regulation of uses. Land and structures in a University Planned District
may only be used for the following as permitted or restricted in the
district plan:
(1) General uses.
(a) Agriculture.
(b) Agricultural structures that house animals.
(c) Auditoriums and gymnasiums.
(d) Classrooms, laboratories or other facilities for basic,
behavioral or applied research and instruction.
(e) Dining halls principally for students, faculty and staff.
(f) Essential utility services.
(g) Instructional food service facilities.
(h) Laboratories and other facilities for basic and/or applied
research.
(i) Libraries.
(j) Museums and art galleries.
(k) Natatoriums and swimming pools.
(l) Observatories.
(m) Parking lots.
(n) Parking structures.
(o) Passive open space.
(p) Playing fields and courts.
(q) Radio and television studios for instructional purposes.
(r) Student residence halls and other student housing units.
(s) Student unions.
(t) Studios for instruction in music and other performing arts.
(u) Transportation services.
(v) University offices.
(2) Designated uses.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:777
(a) Airport.
(b) Business offices.
(c) Business incubators.
(d) Business services.
(e) Child-care facilities.
(f) Clubhouses and community centers.
(g) Commercial laboratories.
(h) Conference facilities.
(i) Continuous care retirement community.
(j) Convocation/events centers and arenas.
(k) Financial offices.
(l) Fire training sites and facilities.
(m) Fraternity and sorority houses.
(n) Golf courses, including driving ranges with lighting.
(o) Heliport.
(p) Hospitals/medical clinics.
(q) Hotels, inns, motels and other similar public lodging facilities.
(r) Medical offices.
(s) Nonstudent housing.
(t) Personal services.
(u) Pilot or prototype manufacturing.
(v) Places of worship.
(w) Professional, corporate or government offices.
(x) Radio and television studios for broadcast to the public.
(y) Restaurants open to the public.
(z) Retail sales.
(aa) Retirement community.
(bb) Social or civic clubs.
(cc) Solar energy systems. [Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-586]
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:778
(dd) Stadiums with a seating capacity of 1,000 or less.
(ee) Stadiums with a seating capacity of more than 1,000.
(ff) Transportation facilities.
(gg) Telecommunications structures.
(hh) Test tracks.
(ii) Utility uses, facilities and structures.
(jj) Visitor center.
(3) Accessory uses. Accessory uses are permitted as defined in
Subsection A(1).
C. Minimum district size. A University Planned District shall consist of not
less than 50 acres. A contiguous parcel of any size may be added to an
existing UPD subject to the provisions of this section, and upon
rezoning by the Township.
D. Subdistricts. Lands within a University Planned District shall be
apportioned into subdistricts as designated on an approved district
plan. A subdistrict shall consist of not less than 10 acres.
E. Density, dimensional, coverage and open space requirements.
(1) The following requirements for structures and improvements
within a University Planned District shall be specified for each
subdistrict in an approved UPD District Plan and narrative, subject
to the standards hereinafter set forth.
(a) Maximum permitted density, based upon the FAR specified for
the subdistrict.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage.
(c) Maximum building height.
(d) Perimeter setback, where the subdistrict includes a district
boundary.
(e) Landscaping and buffering within the perimeter setback.
(f) Open space requirements for the subdistrict.
(2) Standards contained in the district plan with respect to the
requirements set forth in Subsection E(1) above shall conform to
the following:
(a) The perimeter setback shall not be less than the largest front
yard setback of the adjoining zoning district. If a single
development lies in both the UPD District and Toftrees Planned
Community, a twenty-five-foot setback from the Toftrees
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:779
Planned Community perimeter shall be required. [Amended
1-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-373]
(b) Surface parking areas may be located within perimeter
setbacks subject to the requirements of Chapter 153
(Subdivision and Land Development), § 153-50D(4) (Parking
area landscaping and buffering).
(c) The maximum height of all structures within 250 feet of the
boundary of the UPD District shall be the maximum height
permitted in the adjoining zoning district. Height in the
remaining area of each subdistrict shall be established in
district plan. Beyond 250 feet from the boundary of the UPD,
the maximum height requirement shall not apply to barns,
silos, penthouses, chimneys, steeples, flagpoles, masts and
aerials, monuments, radio and television transmission towers,
smoke stacks, utility poles and towers, ventilators, water
tanks, windmills, elevator shafts and other similar structures.
(d) No less than 40% of the total UPD District shall be maintained
as open space. One or more subdistricts may contain a smaller
percentage of open space, so long as the total open space
throughout the district conforms to the amount specified
herein, and provided that no subdistrict shall have less than
20% open space. Each subdistrict narrative shall specify the
minimum open space for that subdistrict. Open space may
consist of the following.
[1] All areas covered with vegetation.
[2] Plazas, fountains, recreational areas, memorials,
pedestrian walkways and similar impervious areas that are
open to the sky.
[3] Parking lots shall not be considered open space.
(e) Landscaping and buffering within a perimeter setback shall
comply with requirements of Chapter 153 (Subdivision and
Land Development), § 153-50E (Landscaping and buffering).
(3) Compliance with Federal Aviation regulations. All development in
the UPD shall comply with all applicable dimensional and land use
requirements of Federal Aviation regulations governing objects and
land use affecting navigable airspace and runway safety zones.
F. Allocation of permitted uses.
(1) General and designated uses shall be permitted subject to the
requirements of this article, the approved district plan and all
designated use requirements.
(2) Transitional areas. When additional limitations on uses are deemed
necessary in transitional areas adjacent to a residentially zoned
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:780
area which does not permit multifamily residential uses, such use
limitations shall be as set forth in the applicable subdistrict
narrative in the district plan.
(3) Areas of special significance. When additional limitations on uses
are deemed necessary to protect areas of special significance such
as historic or natural resources or community landmarks, such use
limitations shall be set forth in the applicable subdistrict narrative
in the district plan.
G. Parking.
(1) Location. Parking for all uses within a UPD shall be permitted at
any location within the UPD. The location of parking areas shall
accommodate the needs of users as specified in a parking
projections report and district plan transportation study.
(2) Parking users. Parking shall be provided for the following
categories of parking users: students residing within the district,
students who commute from a residence outside the district,
employees and visitors.
(3) Number of parking spaces. Standards for the number of parking
spaces to be provided shall be determined by historical demand for
each category of parking users and computed utilizing a formula
which specifies the number of parking spaces to be provided for the
number of persons within each category.
(4) Parking projections report. The applicant shall furnish a parking
projections report with the application for district plan approval
which shall show the manner in which the parking standards in this
section have been derived and applied. The parking projections
report shall indicate the current numbers of parking spaces for
each category of parking users, a three-year projection of the
number of parking spaces for each category of parking users, the
methodology utilized to determine the number of spaces required
(based upon demand history) and a narrative description of the
assumptions and rationale upon which the methodology and
current and projected number of parking spaces are based.
(5) Parking projections report updates. Every year following the
approval of the district plan, the applicant shall submit an updated
parking projections report in accordance with this subsection for
review by the Centre Regional Planning Commission. The parking
standards set forth therein shall then become applicable to the
district plan and narrative.
(6) Parking for third party development. Notwithstanding Subsections
G(1) through (5) above, independent third party land development
in the UPD shall provide on-site parking in accordance with
Township requirements.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:781
H. District plan transportation study. A District transportation study shall
be submitted with the application for approval of the district plan and
every 10th year following approval of the district plan. The purpose of
the transportation study is to generally identify the transportation
impacts likely to result from projected development and activities
within the district for a ten-year period. The transportation study shall
include the following:
(1) Parking area identification and projections. Transportation impacts
within the UPD will principally arise from the location and size of
parking areas within the district. The transportation study,
therefore, must identify existing parking areas and the general size
and location of areas within each subdistrict which are projected
for use as parking areas within a ten-year period.
(2) Traffic analysis. The study shall identify the transportation study
area and the transportation systems to be studied. Existing
transportation conditions for highway links and intersections
serving the UPD must be described and the existing level of use
analyzed. Potential transportation impacts of future parking
development must be assessed for a ten-year period.
Recommendations for potential system or service improvements in
order to accommodate the projected transportation impacts of UPD
development shall be included. When feasible, the study shall
identify specific recommendations designed to reduce or avoid
impacts created by campus development on existing and future
residential neighborhoods.
(3) Internal circulation and facilities. The study shall describe existing
and proposed internal roads for vehicular traffic; existing and
proposed connections to the public street network; plans for street
openings and closings and possible impacts on the adjoining
transportation system and adjoining zoning districts; and existing
and proposed facilities and accommodations for public
transportation, pedestrian circulation, bicycle paths and other
transportation methods.
(4) Travel demand management. The study shall include a travel
demand management analysis addressing the manner in which
various methods, such as promotion of ridesharing, pedestrian/
bicycle improvements and changes to on-campus and public
transportation systems, will be utilized to reduce the number of
single occupancy vehicle trips associated with existing or future
development under the district plan.
I. Sign regulations.
(1) Except as provided for in Subsections I(3), (5) and (6), the following
regulations shall apply to signs located within 50 feet of the edge of
the right-of-way along a public road corridor or within the
perimeter setback in other areas.
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:782
(a) Types of signs permitted include monument, wall, directional,
traffic regulatory and warning and other incidental signs.
Ground pole (except when used as directional or traffic
regulatory and warning signs) and roof signs are prohibited.
Commercial advertising is prohibited on signs within 50 feet of
the edge of the right-of-way along a public road or within the
perimeter setback in other areas.
(b) Monument signs:
[1] Shall not exceed 10 feet in height measured from grade
beneath the center of the sign to the top of the sign face,
supporting structure or lights, whichever is greater.
[2] Shall be limited to 30 square feet per sign face.
[3] May be internally or externally illuminated, provided that
external illumination is directed upon the sign face and is
not directly visible to motorists using the public road or
visible over adjacent property boundaries.
[4] May be designed such that individual letters or the entire
sign face may be changed to announce events occurring at
the building or other facility designated on the sign.
(c) Wall signs:
[1] No portion of any wall sign may extend above vertically or
beyond horizontally the wall upon which it is affixed.
[2] May be internally or externally illuminated, provided that
external illumination be directed upon the sign face and
not be directly visible to motorists using the public road or
visible over adjacent property boundaries.
[3] May be designed so that individual letters or the entire
sign face may be changed to announce events occurring at
the building or other facility designated on the sign.
[4] Shall be limited to two square feet of sign face per foot of
building frontage to a maximum of 200 square feet.
(d) Directional signs:
[1] Shall not exceed 10 feet in height measured from grade
beneath the center of the sign to the top of the sign face or
supporting structure, whichever is greater.
[2] Shall be limited to 24 square feet per sign face.
[3] May be internally or externally illuminated, provided that
external illumination be directed upon the sign face and
not be directly visible to motorists using the public road or
visible over adjacent property boundaries.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:783
(e) Traffic regulatory or warning signs:
[1] Shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices or successor standards approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
[2] May not be illuminated unless so required by the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or successor standards
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(f) Incidental signs:
[1] Shall be limited to eight square feet per sign face.
[2] May not be internally illuminated.
[3] May be located only on the site, parking lot, structure or
other facility about which information is being provided.
(g) Event signs.
[1] Event signs containing moving copy may only operate for
three hours prior to the event through one hour after the
completion of the event.
[2] Event signs may be located:
[a] Within 50 feet of the following public rights-of-way
within the UPD: US 322 and US 322 Business; PA 26;
University Drive; and Park Avenue.
[b] On structures owned by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation located above the cartway on US
322 and US 322 Business; PA 26; and Park Avenue
east of Shortlidge Road used to support traffic
information and directional signals.
[3] Event signs are prohibited in transitional areas and areas
of special significance.
[4] Event signs, whether permanently affixed to the ground or
portable, shall not exceed 10 feet in height measured from
grade beneath the center of the sign to the top of the sign
face or supporting structure, whichever is greater.
[5] Event signs shall be limited to 40 square feet per sign face.
[6] Event signs are limited to messages containing alpha and
numeric characters and directional arrows. The content of
any message on an event sign shall be limited to the name
of the event, the time and location of the event and
information directing motorists to the event's location.
Commercial advertising of any type, including logos, and
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:784
advertising future events at any facility in the UPD is
expressly prohibited.
[7] A sign permit must be obtained for an event sign prior to
its placement. Portable event signs must be permitted
prior to their initial placement; thereafter, no permit is
required for reuse of said portable event sign if placed in
the same location.
(2) Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from these
regulations:
(a) Historical markers.
(b) Construction project signs for a period not to exceed one
month before commencement of the project to one month after
its completion.
(c) Banners, provided that such banners are approved by the
appropriate university official.
(d) Temporary signs, except event signs as defined herein,
announcing a special event or activity, unless prohibited under
Subsection I(5), and provided that such temporary signs are
approved by the appropriate university official.
(e) Scoreboards which are erected at facilities permitted under
the provisions of this section.
(3) Permits.
(a) A sign permit must be issued by the Patton Township Sign
Officer prior to the erection of any monument, wall, event or
directional sign located within 50 feet of the edge of the rightof-
way along a public road or within the perimeter setback in
other areas.
(b) Applications for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided
by the Patton Township Sign Officer.
(c) Sign permits are valid until the sign is replaced, remodeled or
structurally altered, in which case a new permit shall be
required.
(d) A fee shall be required for each sign permit based on the
current Patton Township fee schedule.200
(e) The applicant is responsible for obtaining any electrical,
building or other permit required by Centre Region Code
Administration, the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or other regulatory agency.
200. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:785
(4) Special exceptions and variances.
(a) Requests for a special exception or variance to the
requirements of this section shall follow the procedures and
standards set forth in Chapter 140 (Signs).
(5) Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in the UPD:
(a) Beacons or searchlights (except when used in conjunction with
operations at University Park Airport).
(b) Signs which incorporate any continuously flashing or moving
illumination or message boards or with illumination which
varies in intensity or which varies in color, and signs which
have any visible moving part, revolving parts or visible
mechanical movement or other apparent visible continuous
movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by actions of
normal wind currents, except when not visible from motor
vehicles traveling on any public roads or event signs as
permitted under Subsection I(1)(g)[7].
(c) Inflatable signs or movable signs, except when not visible from
motor vehicles traveling on any public road.
(d) Tethered balloons or other tethered signs, except when not
visible from motor vehicles traveling on any public road, and
provided that such tethered balloons or signs do not create any
hazard for the operation of any aircraft, hot air balloon or
dirigible.
(e) Signs which, by reason of size, location or illumination,
obstruct the vision of drivers either when leaving a public road
or when entering a public road from any other street or
driveway or obstructs or detracts from the visibility or
effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on a public
road.
(6) Signs for third party development.
(a) Notwithstanding Subsection I(1) through (5) above,
independent third party land development and uses in the UPD
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 140 (Signs).
J. Submission, review and approval of the district plan.
(1) Content of application. An application for approval of a UPD
District Plan shall consist of the following:
(a) A UPD subdistrict map, delineating proposed subdistricts, in
both paper and digital forms (the digital map shall be in a
format acceptable to the Township). [Amended 5-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-496]
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:786
(b) A written narrative, specifying the standards required by
Subsections E (Density, dimensional, coverage and open space
requirements) and F (Allocation of permitted uses) of this
section.
(c) The parking projections report required by Subsection G(4) of
the section.
(d) The district plan transportation study required by Subsection
H of this section.
(e) University street and parking standards as required by
Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land Development), §§ 153-50A
(Streets, sidewalks, and bikeways) and 153-50D (Design
standards).
(2) The preapplication phase. In order to provide an opportunity for an
exchange of information and collaboration in the design and
development of a UPD District Plan, proposed versions of the
information specified in Subsection J(1) above shall be submitted to
the Township and Centre Regional Planning Commission (CRPC) at
least 60 days prior to the filing of an application for approval of a
UPD District Plan. Documents submitted by the applicant and any
comments or recommendations by the Township or CRPC shall be
deemed advisory and shall not be binding upon the applicant,
Township or CRPC. Additions, revisions or modifications to the
documents during the preapplication phase may be included in a
subsequent application for approval of a UPD District Plan without
further review under this section.
(3) Application for approval of UPD District Plan.
(a) Fourteen copies of an application for approval of a UPD District
Plan shall be submitted to the Township subject to payment of
any fees, if applicable. One additional copy shall be submitted
in a digital format acceptable to the Township. Upon receipt of
the application, one copy of the application shall be submitted
to the CRPC. [Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
(b) The application shall be referred to the Planning Commission
for review and recommendation.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing, after
public notice on the application, and shall approve, approve
subject to conditions or deny the application within 45 days of
the close of the hearing on the application, unless the time for
such actions is extended by approval of the applicant. If the
Board of Supervisors approves the application subject to
conditions, the Board of Supervisors shall send notice of such
approval with conditions to the applicant by certified mail
within 15 days of action by the Board of Supervisors. The
applicant shall give written notice of acceptance or rejection of
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:787
the conditions within 30 days of the date of such approval.
If the applicant rejects the conditions, the applications shall
be deemed to be denied as of the date of the rejection of
conditions.
(d) An application for approval of the UPD District Plan may be
denied if:
[1] It is inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this article.
[2] It does not meet the requirements of this article.
[3] It is inconsistent with the Centre Region Comprehensive
Plan.
(4) Effect of approval of the UPD District Plan.
(a) An approved UPD District Plan shall govern the use and
development of land within the UPD District. The terms of such
approved UPD District Plan shall be deemed enforceable to the
same extent as if set forth in the article. The issuance of zoning
permits, building permits, sign permits, temporary use permits
or any other required permits shall be governed by the
requirements of the Code of Patton Township where specific
provisions of the article apply.
(b) Upon approval of the UPD District Plan, a zoning permit shall
be required for:
[1] Any land development plan.
[2] The erection or construction of a new building or structure
larger than 144 square feet in ground floor area or greater
than 10 feet in height or the expansion of the gross floor
area or height of an existing building or structure.
[3] Any new use or change in use that results in the
establishment of a designated use or the establishment of
a general use which is restricted or located in a
transitional or special zone.
[4] The expansion of a designated use.
[5] The opening of a driveway onto a public street.
[6] The installation of lighting on any playfield or court or any
off-street parking area located within 1,000 feet of a
perimeter unless, in the judgment of the Township Zoning
Officer, adequate screening exists to prevent the casting of
direct rays of light upon adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way.
[7] Prior to any change in a nonconforming use.
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:788
(c) Upon approval of the UPD District Plan, a land development
plan shall be required for:
[1] The erection or construction of a new building or structure
larger than 144 square feet in ground floor area or the
expansion by more than 5% of the gross floor area or
height of an existing building or structure.
[2] The construction of any off-street parking area containing
five or more spaces.
[3] The construction or closing of any street; the construction
of any transportation facilities; transportation services;
utility uses, facilities or structures; and stormwater
management structures or facilities.
[4] Any subdivision or resubdivision of land.
K. Amendment of the UPD District Plan.
(1) Landowner amendments. A landowner may request an amendment
to an approved UPD District Plan. Review and action upon a
request for an amendment shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection J above, except that the content of the
application may consist only of those portions of the district plan
included in the application for amendment. The landowner shall
give notice of such application to any other municipality in Centre
County that has approved a UPD District Plan on behalf of the same
landowner.
(2) Municipal amendments.
(a) The Township may amend the district plan upon a finding,
following a public hearing with notice to the landowner and
public notice, that:
[1] An amendment is consistent with the efficient
development and preservation of the entire UPD District;
and
[2] An amendment would not adversely affect the use and
enjoyment of land abutting the UPD District.
(b) A proposed amendment to the district plan shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and the CRPC for review and
recommendation.
(3) Notice to other municipalities. The Township shall give notice of
any application or proposal for amendment to the district plan to
any other municipality within Centre County which has approved a
UPD District Plan on behalf of the same landowner.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-33
169:789
L. Uniform subdivision and land development standards applicable in the
UPD. Land development or subdivision in the UPD shall be subject to
the uniform subdivision and land development standards established in
Article VIII (Subdivision and Land Development in the University
Planned District) of Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land Development).
§ 175-33 PATTON CODE § 175-33
169:790
ARTICLE VIII
Planned Airport District
[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-261]
§ 175-34. Intent.
A. Since its inception in the early 1950's, the University Park Airport has
continually expanded its size and services. This airport growth creates
potential impacts on the surrounding community, including but not
limited to the areas of transportation, noise, air and water pollution,
safety hazards, need for public infrastructure and emergency services.
Future land developments in the Centre Region will place greater
demands on this facility and the neighboring largely undeveloped lands.
B. In order to meet these demands, land use compatibility between the
airport and the neighboring lands is imperative. Prudent planning is
essential and must relate to the development goals of the Centre Region
municipalities as articulated in the Comprehensive Plan. Development
of infrastructure must also be consistent with the impending airport
growth to prevent problems and at the same time, protect the
environment. Recent studies have identified a significant potential
source of groundwater immediately adjacent to the airport. This
valuable source of future water supply for the Centre Region must be
protected from contamination.
C. The Planned Airport District is designed to minimize airport hazards
related to development of lands surrounding the University Park
Airport and to minimize the potential for contamination of the potential
well field located within the district. It is also intended to promote the
careful planning and orderly development of lands impacted by the
airport consistent with the goals and objectives of Patton Township as
described in the Comprehensive Plan. In addition, the district achieves
additional purposes that include:
(1) Provision of flexibility for land development, while also providing
for determination, review and mitigation of potential community
and environmental impacts associated with future airport
development.
(2) Promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants of Patton Township by protecting them from the
adverse effects of aircraft noise and preventing an increase in the
number of people exposed to airport-related hazards.
(3) Prevention of the obstructions and incompatible land uses that
affect navigable airspace.
(4) Prevention of the development of land uses which tend to
concentrate large numbers of people in the airport hazard areas.
§ 175-34 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-34
169:791
§ 175-35. Establishment.
The area of Patton Township designated on the Zoning Map of the Township
as the "Planned Airport District" is hereby established as the "Planned
Airport District".
§ 175-36. Use regulations.
(5) Encouragement of innovative design in the layout of buildings,
structures and open spaces and encouragement of a pattern of
development which preserves trees and natural features, and
prevents soil erosion.
(6) Provision of adequate water supply, sanitary facilities, stormwater
management and other utilities and services.
(7) Encouragement of innovative strategies to reduce transportation
impacts from proposed development that will improve safety,
reduce congestion, provide adequate access and promote the use
of transportation demand management strategies.
(8) Assurance that, to the maximum extent possible, the community is
afforded the opportunity to participate in the development or
amendment of the district.
(9) Provision of criteria that allows a mix of land uses in a growth area
served by public utilities with an emphasis on providing area for
light industrial uses.
A. Uses by right.
(1) The specific uses permitted within different portions of the Planned
Airport District are listed in Table 1.201 These uses are a function of
the noise levels projected to be generated by aircraft using the
airport, the proximity of a given area to the airport runways and
flight approach paths and the desire to protect the nearby potential
groundwater supply from contamination by activities conducted
within the district.
(2) Lines delineating residential, mixed use and nonresidential areas
within the Planned Airport District are to be depicted on and are to
be considered an integral part of the Zoning Map. The location of
these lines are generally based on projected decibel levels
contained in the report prepared by L. Robert Kimball Associates
entitled "Noise Analysis Based on 8,500 Foot Runway and
Corresponding Operations at the University Park Airport," dated
January 5, 1989. The location of these lines is to be considered a
fixed part of the Zoning Map and their location can only be changed
by amendment of the Zoning Map.
201. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-34 PATTON CODE § 175-36
169:792
§ 175-37. Procedure for master plan approval.
All development within the Planned Airport District must be done pursuant
to approval of a master plan in accordance with the procedure that follows.
The minimum area for which a master plan can be prepared is 20 acres.
Master plans for the Planned Airport District shall be reviewed by the
Patton Township Planning Commission and the Centre Regional Planning
Commission and shall be approved or denied by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with the procedures specified herein. Parcels smaller than 20
(3) In order to protect the safety of persons on the ground and within
aircraft, additional safety measures as established by the Federal
Aviation Administration will be made part of this chapter. These
safety measures are identified as the runway protection zone,
runway approach zone and horizontal clearance zone. The runway
and approach areas (based on the Federal Aviation Administration
runway protection zone and runway approach zone respectively)
are to be depicted on and are to be considered an integral part of
the Zoning Map and their location can only be changed by
amendment of the Zoning Map. The entire Planned Airport District
lies within the horizontal clearance zone.
B. The concern for protection of the potential future source of
groundwater identified in the airport area is embodied within Table
2,202 which prohibits certain activities from being conducted in the
Planned Airport District that could contaminate the potential water
supply. In addition, a buffer of at least 150 feet shall be required from
all designated well sites. This buffer shall be measured from the
perimeter of the designated site(s). Vegetation and/or a combination of
low maintenance trees, shrubs and ground cover plantings shall be
provided within the buffer. All buildings, structures, parking or other
impervious surfaces shall be prohibited from locating in the buffer yard.
The designated well sites shall be identified on the Master Plan.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any area established by this chapter in
such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make
it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport and aircraft, make it
difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others,
result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise in any
way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport. All uses by right permitted in the
Planned Airport District must conform to the regulations established by
the Federal Aviation Administration that govern development within the
airport horizontal clearance zone, runway approach zone and runway
protection zones as defined in this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-36 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-37
169:793
acres existing on the date of enactment of this chapter are exempt from the
master plan requirement, but must conform to all other requirements of this
article.
A. Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is recommended but
shall not be mandatory nor shall it be regarded as a formal application
for development in the Planned Airport District. The purpose of the
meeting is to provide for an informational exchange at the municipal
staff level or Planning Commission level where the major elements of a
proposed master plan can be reviewed and evaluated. The Planning
Commission may make recommendations as a result of the
preapplication conference. The filing of any report, sketch plan, plat or
map prior to or at such meeting shall not constitute submission of a
plan or application for Planned Airport District Development nor shall
such materials be binding on subsequent submissions by the applicant.
Any recommendations made by the Planning Commission shall not be
binding upon the applicant or the Planning Commission in its review of
the plan after formal application.
B. Master plan application and review. Application for Township approval
of a Planned Airport District Development shall commence with the
official submission of a complete set of plans and all required
supplementary data and information to the Township. At any time
during the review process, the applicant may amend the originally
submitted plan solely for the purpose of correcting minor deficiencies in
the original plan to the extent necessary to meet the requirements of
this section.
(1) A master plan shall be deemed to have been submitted for review
when the applicant has furnished to the Township the following
documents:
(a) Fifteen copies of a master plan prepared by a registered
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or similarly qualified
person, which shall fully comply with the requirements of §
175-37C of this chapter. One additional copy shall be submitted
in a digital format acceptable to Patton Township. [Amended
5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
(b) Fifteen copies of a narrative which shall fully comply with the
requirement of § 175-37C(4) of this chapter.
(c) Fifteen copies of a transportation impact report which shall
comply with the requirements of § 175-37C(6) of this chapter.
(2) Upon receipt of the above, the Township Zoning Officer shall
forward copies of the Master Plan and accompanying
documentation to the Township Engineer, Centre Regional
Planning Commission, Centre County Planning Commission and
other appropriate agencies.
(3) Review by the Township Planning Commission.
§ 175-37 PATTON CODE § 175-37
169:794
(a) At its next regular meeting following the receipt of the
application for master plan approval, provided that such
application was made at least 30 days prior to the meeting, the
Planning Commission shall review the plan to determine its
conformance to the provisions contained in these regulations.
(b) The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board of
Supervisors of any recommended action, changes or
modifications to the plan after such decision is made, provided
that the Planning Commission shall make such
recommendations within 70 days after the date the application
for approval was filed. The Planning Commission shall make no
recommendation on such application until reports from the
Centre County and Centre Regional Planning commissions are
received or until expiration of 30 days from the date the plan
was forwarded to these agencies, whichever comes first.
(c) If review by the Township Planning Commission results in an
unfavorable recommendation because the requirements of this
chapter have not been met, notification to the Township Board
of Supervisors should specify the defects found in the plan and
describe the requirements which have not been met and
should cite the provisions of this chapter from which such
defects or requirements originate.
(4) Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning Commission or upon failure to
receive said recommendations 70 days after submittal, the Board of
Supervisors shall review the application for master plan Approval.
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the written
reports of the Township Planning Commission, the Centre
County Planning Commission, the Centre Regional Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer and the other reviewing
agencies to determine if the plan meets all applicable
regulations. Prior to approval of a master plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall require a public hearing. The Board of
Supervisors shall require, as a condition of approval, that the
applicant furnish written confirmation from the appropriate
bodies that off-site water and sewer services is and will be
made available to the Planned Airport District.
(b) The Township shall place a notice of the time and place of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation as set
forth by the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. Owners of abutting properties shall
individually be sent written notice of the public hearing by
United States certified mail.
§ 175-37 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-37
169:795
(5) Approval or denial. The Board of Supervisors, within 50 days
following the Planning Commission action or inaction shall, by
official written communication to the applicant, either:
(a) Grant approval of the Master Plan as submitted.
(b) Grant approval subject to the applicant meeting specified
modifications to the Master Plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny approval of the plan, including a list of reasons and/or
plan deficiencies.
(6) Where a Planned Airport District development may occur over a
period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize
development in phases subject to such requirements or guaranties
as to improvements in future phases of the development that it
finds essential for the protection of any approved phase. In such
case, a schedule showing the proposed times within which
applications for final approval of land development plans of all
phases of the development are intended to be filed shall be
included with the Master Plan. The schedule may be revised by the
Board of Supervisors if requested to do so by the landowner or
developer.
(7) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the master plan in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation or communication of the decision, in which case
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(8) In the event that approval is granted subject to conditions, the
owner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the governing body, notify the Board of
Supervisors of their refusal to accept all of said conditions, in which
case the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have denied
approval of the master plan. In the event that the landowner does
not within said period notify the Board of Supervisors of their
acceptance of all of said conditions, approval of the master plan
shall be deemed to have been denied.
(9) An approved master plan shall be recorded by the developer in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County within 90 days of
approval.
(10) Approval of a master plan shall not authorize construction or the
issuance of any building permit. Such authorization or issuance
shall not occur until a land development plan is approved for the
applicable area.
§ 175-37 PATTON CODE § 175-37
169:796
C. Required master plan content. Proposed master plans shall be drawn to
a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger (e.g., one inch equals 30
feet) and shall contain the following information:
(1) General data.
(a) Name of proposed Planned Airport District development.
(b) Northpoint.
(c) Graphic scale and legend describing all symbols shown on the
plan.
(d) Day, month and year the plan was prepared and date and
description of revisions to the plan occurring after formal
submission.
(e) Name and address of the owner and deed book and page
numbers of the deeds conveying the property to the owner.
Name of the developer and their billing address (if different).
(f) Name, address and seal of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(g) Names of abutting property owners, tax parcel numbers and
their deed book and page numbers.
(h) Key map showing the location of proposed Planned Airport
District development and all roads within 5,000 feet therefrom.
(i) Centre County tax parcel numbers of all parcels included in the
Planned Airport District development.
(j) A certification of ownership and plan acknowledgment
signature block.
(k) An offer of dedication signature block.
(l) Township approval signature block.
(m) Recorder of deeds signature block.
(2) Existing features.
(a) Perimeter boundaries of the total property, showing bearings
to the nearest minute and distances to the nearest hundredth
of a foot.
(b) Total acreage of the property and total square feet within each
lot of the development.
(c) Natural features.
[1] Sinkholes, watercourses, tree masses and unique
vegetation or natural features.
§ 175-37 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-37
169:797
[2] Floodplain and steep slopes.
[3] Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of 10 feet.
(d) Approximate location of man-made features in or within 100
feet of the property including:
[1] Sewer lines and laterals.
[2] Water mains and fire hydrants.
[3] Electrical lines and poles.
[4] Culverts and bridges.
[5] Railroads.
[6] Buildings.
[7] Streets, including right-of-way and cartway widths and
approximate grades.
(3) Proposed development. The Planned Airport District is envisioned
as an area in which an integrated development will occur which
incorporates a variety of land uses permitted within the district.
The respective areas of the Master Plan devoted to specific
residential, commercial and general airport area uses should be
shown and within each area the following should be included.
(a) The approximate location and use of buildings and other
structures (all area dimensions shall be indicated in square
feet).
(b) The approximate location and area of driveways and parking
and loading areas.
(c) The approximate property lines of lots to be subdivided,
measured to the nearest foot.
(d) The approximate location of sidewalks and bike paths.
(e) The approximate location of utility and drainage easements.
(f) The approximate location and pipe diameter of sewer and
water mains.
(g) The approximate location of fire hydrants.
(h) Perimeter setbacks and required buffer yards.
(i) Street information, including:
[1] Location and width of right-of-way and cartway.
[2] Proposed street names.
§ 175-37 PATTON CODE § 175-37
169:798
[3] Approximate road profiles along the center line of each
proposed street, showing finished grade at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(j) A conceptual landscaping plan indicating the treatment of
materials and landscaping concepts used for private and
common open space.
(k) A general grading plan showing any major alterations to the
topography of the site.
(l) The approximate location and area of proposed common open
space, including:
[1] The proposed use and improvements of common open
space.
[2] The approximate location and use of common recreational
facilities.
[3] The approximate location and area of land to be dedicated
for public purposes.
(m) A table shall be included on the plan describing each phase or
section with quantitative data, including the following:
[1] The total area of the development and approximate area of
each phase.
[2] The total area devoted to each use, the number of
residential units, the percentage of each type of use and
the total floor area in the development and in each phase.
[3] Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in the development and each
phase.
[4] The area of streets, parking, sidewalks and walkways and
the total area paved and percent of area paved or covered
by the structures in the development and each phase or
section.
[5] The total acreage and percent of acreage in common open
space in the development and each phase.
[6] The total area devoted to planned recreational use
throughout the entire development and in each phase.
[7] The calculation of impervious surface in the development
and in each phase.
(4) Narrative statement. The following information should be included
with a narrative statement submitted with the Master Plan:
§ 175-37 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-37
169:799
(a) A statement of the ownership of all of the land included within
the Master Plan.
(b) An explanation of the design pattern of the Planned Airport
District development.
(c) A statement describing any proposed innovative design
concepts included in the plan.
(d) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed on the use of land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public use or utilities.
(e) A description of the form of organization proposed to own and
maintain the common open space, recreational facilities or
other common facilities.
(f) A statement of the proposed use and improvement of common
open space and recreational facilities.
(g) A description of proposals to preserve natural features and
existing amenities and a statement of conceptual landscaping
designs.
(h) A preliminary stormwater management plan illustrating
drainage patterns and detention pond areas. The plan should
include preliminary pond sizing calculations.
(5) Development schedule.
(a) When it is anticipated that development pursuant to an
approved master plan will occur in phases over a period of
years, the following shall be included with the application for
master plan approval:
[1] The phases in which the land development will be
submitted for final land development approval and the
approximate date when each phase will be submitted for
final plan approval.
[2] The approximate date when each phase will be completed.
(b) Any phase of development pursuant to an approved master
plan shall be able to function independently of the undeveloped
phases while being compatible with adjacent or neighboring
land uses.
(c) If development pursuant to a master plan is to be done in
phases over a period of years and according to an approved
schedule, the gross density of any phase or in combination with
previously developed phases, shall not exceed the maximum
allowed density of the total development.
§ 175-37 PATTON CODE § 175-37
169:800
(d) Where applicable, each phase of development that occurs
pursuant to an approved master plan must have at least 50% of
its land area devoted to the general airport area uses listed in
Table 1 and no more than 20% of its land area devoted to the
commercial uses listed in Table 1.203
(6) Transportation impact report. A transportation impact report shall
be prepared by a qualified professional and include the following:
(a) Analysis and description of existing conditions and traffic
volumes for the external road network serving the site. The
external road network to be studied shall be determined by the
municipality prior to the Master Plan review.
(b) A base condition analysis shall be prepared to establish
existing levels of service followed by analysis and description
of projected traffic conditions based on the land uses proposed
within the development. Trip generation rates for morning and
evening peak hours of the project shall be prepared, as well as
the internal/external trip distribution and intersection analysis.
(c) The analysis shall address the traffic impacts of the proposed
development along with surrounding traffic generated land
uses in the area including land use changes. The analyses will
evaluate the adequacy of the area road network and identify
the need for road and access and traffic control measure
improvements generated by the proposed development and
surrounding land uses.
(d) The analysis shall contain recommended internal and off-site
road improvements. These recommended improvements
should be specific as to location and scope of work required
along with a phased schedule for implementation. Examples of
additional items that should be included in this section are:
typical sections for each category of street and a phasing plan
which delineates the street improvements that will be provided
simultaneously with the construction of each development
phase.
(e) Utilization of alternate modes of transportation shall be a
component of the traffic impact analysis. Evaluation of traffic
mitigation measures as it relates to public transportation and
future site development should also be addressed.
(f) Revision of the traffic impact study based on major changes (as
defined in § 175-37D of this article) to the approved Master
Plan shall be required. The revisions shall be submitted as part
of the filing of an application to amend the Master Plan.
203. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the of this chapter.
§ 175-37 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-37
169:801
§ 175-38. Procedure for development.
§ 175-39. Area bulk and open space requirements.
D. Amendments to an approved master plan. Any major changes requested
to an approved master plan must meet the procedural and content
requirements presented in § 175-37B and C. A major change to an
approved master plan is represented by any of the following:
(1) Any increase in the approved residential or commercial area
percentage.
(2) Any increase in the approved residential density.
(3) Any increase in the nonresidential floor area ratio.
(4) Any decrease in the approved open space area percentage.
(5) A change in the location of vehicular access points.
(6) Any other change determined by the Township to be significant.
A. After approval of a master plan, all subsequent subdivision and land
development plans within the master planning area must be submitted
in accordance with and meet the applicable requirements of Chapter
153, Subdivision and Land Development, this chapter and Chapter 147,
Streets and Sidewalks, in addition to the requirements of this article. In
the event of a conflict between the requirements contained in this
article and any other ordinance, the requirements of this article will
apply.
B. Any major change proposed to an approved master plan will require an
amendment of the Master Plan. If the major change is contained within
a proposed subdivision or land development plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall not grant approval of the plan until an amendment of
the Master Plan occurs. In the event of such denial, the landowner may
refile the final plan without the major changes identified in such written
notice or file an application to amend this Master Plan, following the
procedures required herein for approval.
C. A minor change to an approved master plan shall not require an
amendment of the Master Plan. If the minor change is proposed as part
of a subdivision or land development plan, then the change will be
approved through the normal review process for subdivision and land
development plans.
A. Area requirements.
(1) After enactment of this chapter no property within the Planned
Airport District may be subdivided or replotted into parcels less
than 20 acres except pursuant to an approved master plan.
§ 175-37 PATTON CODE § 175-39
169:802
(2) All master plans within the Planned Airport District must
encompass an area of at least 20 acres. No development within the
Planned Airport District can occur until a master plan has been
approved for the area being developed. The only exception to the
requirement for a master plan is for any parcel of less than 20 acres
existing on the date of enactment of this chapter.
(3) Lot sizes shall be established on subdivision and land development
plans.
B. Density requirements.
(1) Maximum density for areas in which residential uses are permitted.
(a) The maximum density for areas in which residential uses are
permitted shall not exceed the following:
[1] 1.25 dwelling units per acre
for the area of the Planned Airport District within 500 feet
of the district's northwestern boundary line as defined at
the end of Table 1.204
[2] Two and five-tenths dwelling units per residential use acre
for the remaining portion of the Planned Airport District
that permits residential uses.
(b) As an incentive for larger-scale planning, the maximum
densities permitted under Subsection B(1)(a)[1] and [2] can be
doubled for master plan areas encompassing 100 or more
acres. Acreage within the runway area cannot be credited
toward master plan acreage for development occurring outside
of the runway area.
(2) The maximum density for areas to be used for nonresidential uses
shall not exceed a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of two-tenths (0.2). The
acreage to be used in determining the FAR is the nonresidential
acreage within the Master Plan not contained within the runway
area. As an incentive for larger scale planning, the maximum
density for areas to be used for nonresidential uses shall not exceed
a FAR of four-tenths (0.4) for master plan areas encompassing 100
or more acres. Acreage within the runway area cannot be credited
toward master plan acreage for development occurring outside of
the runway area.
(3) Within any phase of a master plan, where applicable, no more than
20% of the nonresidential floor area may be devoted to the
commercial uses listed in Table 1.205
C. Allowable use percentages.
204. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
205. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-39 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-39
169:803
(1) In the mixed use, nonresidential and approach areas, all
development plans must devote at least 50% of their area to
general airport area uses and shall devote no more than 20% of
their area to the commercial uses listed in Table 1.
(2) In the residential area only the uses listed in Table 1 shall be
permitted.
(3) If development done pursuant to an approved master plan is to be
done in phases, the construction within each phase must comply
with the use percentages listed in part of this section.
D. Maximum lot coverage.
(1) Within residential use areas, structures shall not cover more than
25% of the lot area. The maximum impervious coverage in
residential use areas shall not exceed 50% of the Master Plan area
designated for residential uses.
(2) Within nonresidential use areas, the maximum impervious
coverage shall not exceed 60% of the Master Plan area designated
for nonresidential uses.
E. Height requirements.
(1) The height of all buildings within the Planned Airport District shall
not exceed 50 feet or the maximum height limitations imposed by
FAA regulations (Part 77) for horizontal clearance zones, runway
approach zones or runway protection zones, whichever is less.
(2) The height of all structures within the Planned Airport District shall
not exceed 70 feet or the maximum height limitations imposed by
FAA regulations (Part 77) for horizontal clearance zones, runway
approach zones or runway protection zones, whichever is less.
F. Setback requirements.
(1) Required setbacks from public rights-of-way abutting Master Plan
boundaries shall be 100 feet for structures and 50 feet for parking
areas.
(2) Required setbacks from Master Plan property boundaries that do
not abut public rights-of-way shall be 50 feet for structures and 15
feet for parking areas.
(3) No minimum setbacks for interior streets or internal lot lines are
established herein. Such setbacks will be established by the Board
of Supervisors for each subdivision or land development plan
submitted pursuant to an approved Master Plan. This allows the
designer flexibility in the placement of structures. However, a
proposal using minimal setbacks must clearly establish the
sufficiency of the design pattern for which the minimum setbacks
are proposed.
§ 175-39 PATTON CODE § 175-39
169:804
§ 175-40. Design and improvement standards.
G. Open space requirements.
(1) A minimum of 40% of the gross area of the Planned Airport District
plan shall be devoted to open space.
(2) The Township Supervisors may accept dedication of part of the
open space shown on the plan provided that:
(a) The land so dedicated is contiguous.
(b) The land is accessible to the public.
(c) It is viewable from a public street.
(3) No more than 15% of the required open space shall contain
stormwater management facilities, except for large, flat
stormwater detention ponds with a minimum area of 1.0 acres
inside the toe of the interior slopes of the pond. This area must be
capable of being used as an outdoor recreation facility. Such an
area may be added to the 15% maximum as described above upon
review and approval by the Municipal Engineer.
A. Environmental design. Development in the Planned Airport District
should be based on an environmentally harmonious and aesthetically
pleasing design. Consideration should be given to the overall character
of the development and its visual effect on adjacent uses as well as the
tenants of the development, residents of the Township and Centre
Region at large. The following factors should be taken into account in
the design and presented on all plans submitted pursuant to an
approved master plan.
(1) Existing trees should be inventoried and preserved whenever
possible. Existing stands of mature healthy trees, hedgerows,
waterways, historic sites, scenic points, views and vistas and other
community assets and landmarks should be preserved.
(2) The development plan should be designed to minimize grading and
other changes to the natural terrain. All graded slopes should blend
with the surrounding terrain and development.
(3) All landscaping shall be in conformance with an overall
landscaping plan and unifying concept for the development.
(4) Buffer yards. The determination of the buffer yards shall be made
through the use of Tables 3, 4 and 5.206 All uses within each use
classification would be considered to have an equal impact on
neighboring uses. Impacts resulting from greater intensity uses on
adjacent parcels would include: noise, dust, lighting glare, heat,
traffic, building bulk and height, storage areas and impervious
206. Editor's Note: Tables 3, 4 and 5 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-39 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40
169:805
surface areas. The intensity of adjoining uses must also be
determined from the classification system. Once the land use
classifications are determined, the appropriate buffer yard can
then be applied to the land development.
(a) Buffer yards are required, as applicable, on each lot (or lease
area) or land development area independent of adjoining uses
or adjoining buffers.
(b) If a developed use increases in intensity or changes, increases
in the buffer yards may be required by the Board of
Supervisors.
(c) Consideration should be given to utilizing existing vegetation
as an element in the application of buffer yards.
(d) Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or
structures. All except side buffer yards of interior lots may be
crossed by access driveways and utility easements, provided
that such are not more than 25 feet in width at the point of
intersection.
(e) Where a required buffer yard is wider than the setback(s)
required in the district, the wider dimension will govern.
(f) All plantings shall be selected to be compatible with the
environmental conditions they will be exposed to. Any plant
material that does not survive must be replaced within one
year.
B. Utilities.
(1) Sewage disposal. Development within the Planned Airport District
shall utilize public sewer service. Upon adoption of this district, all
existing septic systems in this area shall comply with the threeyear-
frequency pumping requirement of Chapter 143, Sewage and
Sewage Disposal, until such time as public sewer service is
available to the property.
(2) Water supply. Development within the Planned Airport District
shall utilize public water service. All water mains constructed shall
meet the design and installation specifications of the public water
supplier.
(3) Other utilities. All other utilities servicing the Planned Airport
District shall be provided underground.
§ 175-40 PATTON CODE § 175-40
169:806
ARTICLE VIIIA
I-99 Interchange Overlay District
[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-388]
§ 175-40.1. Intent and area of application.
A. The intent of the Interchange Overlay District is to encourage
controlled, sensible interchange development by providing an
additional set of protective measures on top of existing regulations. The
District regulations will:
(1) Provide uniformity and standardization from interchange to
interchange.
(2) Promote safety.
(3) Minimize the impact to the natural environment.
(4) Promote highway beautification in Patton Township.
B. Within the Interchange Overlay District, all existing zoning, land use,
and building regulations now in place continue to apply except where
the regulations contained in the Interchange Overlay District are
stronger or more restrictive.
C. Area of application. The following are the corridors for application of
the Interchange Overlay District at a corridor width of 1/8 mile (660
feet) on both sides, measured from the center line of the right-of-way.
The overlay district corridor is modified to exclude areas as described
in Subsection E below.
(1) The full length of I-99 in Patton Township, both existing and
proposed sections.
(2) Waddle Road extended north into Toftrees to the multifamily parcel
west of the existing golf course and to the south to Clearview
Avenue.
(3) Valley Vista Drive from I-99 west to Carnegie Drive.
(4) North Atherton Street south from I-99 to Douglas Drive and
Hawbaker Industrial Drive.
(5) Scotia Road west from I-99 to the property line between Tax
Parcels 18-3-58B and 18-3-58C.
(6) Existing Route 322 west from the I-99 Interchange to property line
between Tax Parcels 18-3-47A and 18-3-17B, which is
approximately the extension of Sellers Lane.
D. Parcels included. The overlay district requirements shall apply to all
development within the corridor and apply to all development on
§ 175-40.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.1
169:807
§ 175-40.2. Highway access and safety.
parcels on which the overlay district corridor covers at least 50% of the
area of the parcel.207
A. Specific intent. It is the intent of the section to improve safety by
limiting the number of access points which are permitted onto the
interchange access road. The reduction in paving by eliminating the
need for numerous entryways will also create more frontage space for
landscaping or retention of existing trees, thereby promoting highway
beautification and, thus, a more pleasing gateway to the community.
B. Access from highways.
(1) All plans for vehicular access to new development from the
interchange access road shall be submitted to the municipality. If
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) approval is
required, plans must be submitted to the municipality and
PennDOT concurrently for review and approval. All access plans
are subject to the requirements of Subsection C below.
(2) Any new right-of-way providing vehicular access from the
interchange access road shall be located a minimum distance of
300 feet from the point at which the exit/entrance ramp intersects
the interchange access road. This point shall be measured from the
property boundary of the limited access right-of-way. Any new
right-of-way providing vehicular access from the interchange
access road shall be no closer to any other such right-of-way than
800 feet, measured from center line to center line. (Figure 1)
Figure 1. Vehicular access standards for interchange access road
(3) Direct vehicular access to uses fronting on an interchange access
road may be permitted in the following instances:
(a) Where direct access currently exists, shared driveways shall be
utilized except where lot width exceeds 300 feet.
(b) Where phased development is to occur as a single project or as
part of a larger development, whether by one or more
applicants, temporary direct access may be permitted. For
purposes of this subsection, the period of temporary direct
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, pertaining to areas not included in the overlay
district and which originally followed this subsection, was repealed 6-20-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-389.
§ 175-40.1 PATTON CODE § 175-40.2
169:808
access shall not extend, nor be renewed, beyond the lesser
of one year or at such time as construction of the second
phase of development has commenced. Upon termination of
the temporary direct access period, direct access shall no
longer be permitted.
(4) Access easements that connect adjoining properties and land
developments for vehicular and pedestrian access shall be
provided.
C. Traffic studies and transportation improvements.
(1) The municipality may require a traffic impact study for any
proposed development within the Interchange Overlay District.
(2) The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional and shall meet or exceed the requirements set forth in
Appendix A.208
(3) The traffic impact study shall include recommended improvements
mitigating the development's traffic impact and maximizing public
safety. Such recommended improvements shall be taken into
account in any zoning, site plan, or subdivision review of the
proposed development.
D. Intermodal transportation.
(1) All commercial and industrial uses in an Interchange Overlay
District shall provide for on-site bicycle storage for 2.5% of the
total number of required parking spaces.
(2) Any use that does not fully utilize its parking area on weekdays is
encouraged to provide daytime park and ride opportunities.
(3) All uses shall provide for bicycle trails or lanes that connect to all
appropriate adjacent properties and neighborhoods as a means of
providing linkage between lots in the Interchange Overlay District.
Where the bicycle trail can be combined with pedestrian sidewalk
systems, as determined by the municipality, then the combined
pedestrian/bicycle trail shall meet American Association of State
Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.
(4) Public transit amenities shall be provided where appropriate, as
determined by the municipality. The amenities shall include a
transit stop pull-off and pad area, covered shelter, and connecting
walkway(s) to the building(s). The appropriateness, design, and
location of these facilities shall be based on ADA (Americans with
Disabilities Act) standards and the operational requirements of the
transit provider.
208. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-40.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.3
169:809
§ 175-40.3. Setbacks and landscaping.
A. Intent.
(1) Under Pennsylvania zoning and planning enabling legislation, local
governments have the authority to adopt regulations requiring
adequate setbacks and landscaping. The basic approach discussed
here establishes a buffer between the interstate highway right-ofway
and all development and standards for landscaping along the
interchange access road and in and around parking lots.
(2) Concern about the impacts of development on safety, the future
scenic character around the interchanges, and the environment
prompted the creation of this section. Trees and other landscaping
are required within and around parking lots: for highway
beautification as seen from the interstate or interchange access
road; to improve safety by reducing diagonal travel across traffic
patterns; and to minimize environmental impacts by reducing heat
build up and stormwater runoff volume and velocity. Furthermore,
the planting materials section requires that new plantings use at
least 50% vegetation native to central Pennsylvania. Native species
tend to be more tolerant of local environmental conditions and tend
to be healthier, reducing the need for watering, pesticides, and
nutrient applications. On the other hand, the standard still provides
flexibility for other plant selections. Invasive species are excluded
from use because of their nuisance capacity and adverse impact on
other valued plants and animals.
B. Setbacks.
(1) All proposed development to be located within the interstate
highway and interchange access road corridors shall meet the
following setback requirement:
(a) A minimum setback of 75 feet from the edge of the mainline
portion of the right-of-way of the interstate highway. This
setback shall not apply to parcels abutting state-controlled
limited-access right-of-way where the difference in the
bearings of the right-of-way line and the nearest through travel
lane is greater than 45°.
(b) The setback in Subsection B(1) may be reduced to 50 feet,
provided that the requirements of Subsection C(4) are met.
(2) The setback requirements shall apply to all buildings, parking
areas, and service or loading zones.
(3) No provision of this section is intended to contravene the intent or
application of § 175-23D(4) regarding setbacks in the Oakwood and
Toftrees Planned Communities.
C. Setback landscaping.
§ 175-40.3 PATTON CODE § 175-40.3
169:810
(1) All setbacks adjacent to rights-of-way shall be landscaped in
accordance with this subsection.
(2) All lots shall provide a minimum of one tree for each 40 linear feet
of road frontage. Lots less than 40 feet in width shall provide a
minimum of one tree.
(3) All required trees planted within the setback shall be of a shadetype
variety with a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches at planting and
an expected height at maturity of at least 30 feet.
(4) The following enhancements shall be provided to reduce the
minimum setback along the mainline portion of the right-of-way
from 75 feet to 50 feet.
(a) Provide a visual screen of landscaping meeting these minimum
required plantings per 100 lineal feet of mainline right-of-way
frontage:
Canopy trees (minimum four-inch caliper measured 12 inches
above ground: four.
Understory trees (minimum three-inch caliper measured 12
inches above ground: four.
Shrubs: 16.
Evergreens (minimum height eight feet): eight.
(b) The required numbers of trees and shrubs in Subsection
C(4)(a) may be reduced by 25% if a combination of earth
berms, hedges, or architectural walls or fences a minimum of
four feet in height measured from finished grade are provided
as a part of the visual screen along the mainline right-of-way
frontage.
(c) Existing vegetation may be counted toward landscaping
requirements at the discretion of the Township.
(d) At least 75% of the new vegetation on the lot shall be native to
the region. Native vegetation shall include, but not be limited
to, plant materials set forth in Appendix C.209
(e) To allow flexibility in the preparation of screening plans, the
following exchange ratios may be utilized, subject to approval
of the detailed plan by the Township:
[1] Two understory trees may be substituted for one canopy
shade tree.
[2] One canopy shade tree may be substituted for two
understory trees.
209. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-40.3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.3
169:811
§ 175-40.4. Building and site design.
[3] Two evergreen trees may be substituted for one canopy
shade tree.
[4] One evergreen tree or canopy tree may be substituted for
five shrubs.
[5] One understory tree may be substituted for three shrubs.
(f) Where differing requirements are imposed by this section on
screening and by other sections requiring landscaping, the
requirements of this section shall take precedence.
(g) Recharge of stormwater shall be provided for an amount of
impervious area equivalent to 1.5 times the area of the
reduction of the setback from 75 feet to 50 feet. The minimum
required recharge volume is equal to 1.5 inches of runoff from
the area defined above.
D. Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways in setbacks. Developers are
encouraged to respond to topography and vegetation in the design of
sidewalk or walkway layouts.
E. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) Planting islands within parking areas shall be underlain by a
minimum of two feet of suitable planting soil free of construction
debris. Developers are encouraged to reduce curb height, provide
breaks in the curb, or eliminate curbs around planting islands so
that they may be used as infiltration areas for stormwater
reduction. Islands to be used for this purpose would be required to
be at a lower grade to allow for the absorption of water.
F. Planting materials.
(1) All new vegetation on a lot in the Interchange Overlay District,
including street trees, canopy trees, shrubs, bushes, hedges,
flowers, plants, and ground cover shall be of a noninvasive species.
For purposes of this article, those invasive species to be avoided
shall include those set forth in Appendix B.210
(2) At least 50% of the new vegetation on a lot in the Interchange
Overlay District shall be native to the region. For purposes of this
article, native vegetation shall include, but need not be limited to,
plant materials set forth in Appendix C.
(3) New vegetation shall be maintained permanently by the lot owner,
and any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within
one year.
210. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-40.3 PATTON CODE § 175-40.4
169:812
A. Intent. How buildings look, their placement on a site, and their
relationship to the immediate surroundings provide some of the most
significant influences on the character of a community. Community
character, especially along well-traveled routes, is an important
contributor to property values and strong economic development. As
such, these regulations aim to reinforce two of the main intentions of
the Interchange Overlay District: to provide for uniformity of standards
and highway beautification. The standards provided here will be
equitable for all who develop, but more importantly, they will provide a
consistency to the development character thereby enabling the longterm
preservation of property values and the promotion of economic
development, both valid legal rationales for regulation by
municipalities.
For example, expansive blank walls of retail uses facing a street
contribute very little to the life and vitality of that location. Therefore,
the standards here for ground-floor display windows and a primary
entry facing the interchange access road reflect retail building
qualities found in the Township's originally settled crossroads, villages,
and towns. Many zoning codes in other municipalities in Pennsylvania
require that new structures have features similar to those of existing
or historic neighborhood buildings.
B. Specific building and site requirements in Subdivision and Land
Development chapter. The specific requirements for building exteriors
and building placement and site design are found in Chapter 153
(Subdivision and Land Development), § 153-34.2, Design standards,
I-99 Interchange Overlay District.
C. Underground Infrastructure.
(1) After the effective date of this article, all new utility lines serving
uses proposed or developed, including electric, telephone, data,
and CATV, shall be installed underground, except as provided in
Subsection C(3) below.
(2) Junction boxes, transformers, and other apparatuses essential to
utility service which, due to their function, are required to be
located above ground shall be screened from view of public rightsof-
way. No apparatus or its screening shall be placed in a location
that obstructs motorist visibility.
(3) The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements of
Subsections C(1) and (2) above:
(a) Single-family dwellings constructed on lots subdivided prior to
the effective date of this article; and
(b) Agricultural uses that require additional utility service,
provided such use is permitted under the terms of Chapter
175.
§ 175-40.4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.4
169:813
§ 175-40.5. Environmentally sensitive areas.
(c) Where existing overhead service is located, additional services
such as data, lighting, and communications may be attached.
A. Intent. This region is fortunate to be blessed with high quality natural
resources; however, as with any natural systems, they are vulnerable to
degradation if altered too much. Two categories of environmentally
sensitive areas are discussed in this section due not only to their
contribution to our unique natural heritage but also because of their
relationship with public health and safety: steep slopes, and streams
and wetlands. The standards here have been structured to provide
straightforward explanation (versus complicated calculations) and
flexibility in their implementation. The state's Stormwater Management
Act also provides authority as well as allowing limits on earthmoving
activities to "minimize the extent of disturbed lands."
B. Slope restrictions. The specific requirements for slope restrictions are
found in Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land Development), § 153-34.2,
Design standards, I-99 Interchange Overlay District.
C. Stream and wetland buffers. The specific requirements for stream and
wetland buffers are found in Chapter 153 (Subdivision and Land
Development), § 153-34.2, Design Standards, I-99 Interchange Overlay
District.
§ 175-40.4 PATTON CODE § 175-40.5
169:814
ARTICLE VIIIB
Historic Preservation
[Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-422]
§ 175-40.6. Historic preservation uses.
A. Specific intent. The intent of this section is to encourage protection of
historical buildings for the educational and cultural welfare of the
public in Patton Township; to safeguard the heritage of the Township by
preserving historic buildings that reflect elements of cultural, social,
economic, political, and architectural history; and to foster civic pride
in the beauty and accomplishments of the Township's past without
unduly impacting surrounding properties by providing limits on the
allowable historic conditional uses.
B. Scope. The regulations shall apply to all zoning districts in Patton
Township.
C. Use regulations.
(1) Use by right: all uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning
district.
(2) Uses permitted as a conditional use. The following uses shall be
permitted as conditional uses subject to meeting the definition of a
historic building and approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors:
(a) All uses permitted as conditional uses in the underlying zoning
district; and
(b) Historic use;
(c) Antique shop;
(d) Monument or exhibit for the purpose of community awareness
or education that is operated by a nonprofit organization.
D. Procedure and criteria for conditional uses. Prerequisites for approval
of conditional use:
(1) Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, a site plan, a
building plan illustrating all proposed alterations to the historic
building and list of materials that will be used shall be submitted to
the Township.
(2) All conditions listed under § 175-42 shall be completed.
E. Design standards.
(1) For screening, storage, landscaping, access and traffic control,
interior circulation and lighting requirements, see § 175-44.
§ 175-40.6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.6
169:815
(2) Any proposed additions shall be constructed in an architectural
style similar to the existing historic building.
(3) Inn: This use will be permitted subject to the following regulations:
(a) For lot sizes one acre or larger, the maximum number of guest
rooms permitted shall be eight, with the number of guests
limited to 16.
(b) For lot sizes less than an acre, the maximum number of guest
rooms permitted shall be four, with the number of guests
limited to eight.
(c) The total area of the dining space shall not exceed 800 square
feet.
(d) Parking:
[1] One parking space per guest room.
[2] One parking space per employee.
[3] One parking space per 50 square feet of dining area if the
area will be open to persons not lodging in the inn.
(4) Alteration: No major alterations shall be allowed to the historic
exterior facade of the building. If a natural or accidental alteration
occurs after a use is approved in a historic building in accordance
with this article, the owner can reapply for a conditional use to
rebuild the historic section of the building within five years from
the date of the alteration. The Board of Supervisors may approve
the conditional use if satisfactory evidence is provided that the
proposed reconstruction of the historic character of the property
would meet the intent of the article.
F. Area, bulk, open space and parking requirements. Area, density,
parking and open space requirements shall be as required in the
underlying zoning district in which the historic building is located as
per § 153-38 of the Patton Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
G. Proof of eligibility. The owner of the building must provide necessary
information and proof on the historic value of the building. The owner
may present literature, photographs, maps or any other information
that the Township will need to determine the historic value of the
building. The Township may require additional proof at any time during
the evaluation of the building's eligibility. Validity of the building's
historic value can be reinforced if a written statement is obtained from
The Centre County Historical Society or The Pennsylvania Historic and
Museum Commission. Based on the information presented, the Board of
Supervisors shall determine if the building meets the criteria to be
considered historic.
§ 175-40.6 PATTON CODE § 175-40.6
169:816
H. Withdrawal. If the historic value for which the use was granted is
destroyed or altered, the building will no longer be considered historic.
The Township will provide a ninety-day written notice to the owner,
after which the use permitted will be withdrawn. Any proposed
alterations to the building should be reported to the Zoning Officer for
evaluation. The Township shall determine if the alteration is major or
minor.
§ 175-40.6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.6
169:817

ARTICLE VIIIC
Wind Energy Facilities
[Added 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-531]
§ 175-40.7. Wind energy facilities.
A. Intent. The intent of these regulations is to provide for the construction
and operation of wind energy facilities in Patton Township, subject to
reasonable conditions that will protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. Scope. These regulations apply to all wind energy facilities proposed to
be constructed after the effective date of these regulations. Wind
energy facilities constructed prior to the effective date of these
regulations shall not be required to meet the requirements of these
regulations, provided that any physical modification to an existing wind
energy facility that materially alters the size, type and number of wind
turbines or other equipment shall require a permit under these
regulations.
C. Definitions. The definitions set forth below shall be applicable to this
article:
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — Sometimes referred to as "background
noise," is the existing or inherent sound level of an area at any given
time as produced by existing sources, normally specified as a reference
level for determining intrusive sound levels introduced by new sources.
BLADE CLEARANCE — Required minimum distance between the
lowest point of a rotor blade and the ground surface below it.
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITY (CWEF) — An electric
generation facility consisting of one or more wind turbines with a
combined rated capacity exceeding 100 kW, the main purpose of which
is to supply electricity for offsite use. This term shall include all other
related accessory structures and buildings serving the primary
intention of the producing and transmitting of electricity off site. The
term does not include wind turbines constructed primarily for
residential use on site as a permitted accessory use.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit of sound level which is a division of a
logarithmic scale used to express the ratio of the sound pressure of
the source to the pressure of an arbitrarily chosen reference pressure;
the ratio is expressed on the decibel scale by multiplying its base 10
logarithm by 20.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having equity interest in a
commercial wind energy facility, including their respective successors
and/or assigns.
FAIL-SAFE MODE — A device or feature which, in the event of failure,
responds in a way that will cause no harm or at least a minimum of
harm to other devices or danger.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:819
KILOWATT (kW) — The kilowatt is equal to 1,000 watts. This unit is
typically used to express the output power of engines and the power
consumption of electric motors, tools, machines, and heaters.
LANDOWNER, NONPARTICIPATING — Any landowner except those on
whose property all, or a portion, of a commercial wind energy facility is
located pursuant to an agreement with the facility owner or operator.
LANDOWNER, PARTICIPATING — A landowner upon whose property
all, or a portion, of a commercial wind energy facility is located or
pursuant to an agreement with the facility owner or operator.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (often referred to as a "met tower") — A
structure designed to support the gathering of wind energy resource
data, including the tower, base plate, anchors, cables, anemometers
and any and all related appurtenances used to monitor or transmit wind
speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time.
NACELLE — The structure that houses all of the generating
components, gearbox, drive train, etc., of a wind turbine.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library or other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in
use when the permit application is submitted.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of a wind energy facility.
RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITY (RWEF) (often referred to as
"small wind") — An electric generation facility consisting of one or more
wind turbines, with a combined rated capacity equal to or less than 100
kW, the purpose of which is to supply electricity for on-site residential
use. This term shall include all other related accessory structures and
buildings accessory to a primary use located on the same site.
ROTOR — The blades and hub assembly of a wind turbine.
SHADOW FLICKER — The on-and-off flickering effect of a shadow
caused when the sun passes behind the rotor of a wind turbine.
STALL — The increased angle at which the relative wind strikes the
blades of a wind turbine, or the "angle of attack," and reduces the
induced drag associated with lift. Stalling occurs passively by
increasing automatically when the winds speed up, but it increases the
cross section of the blade(s) face-on to the wind, and thus the ordinary
drag. A fully stalled turbine blade, when stopped, has the flat side of the
blade facing directly into the wind.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from average
elevation of the existing grade at the proposed tower foundation
perimeter to the highest point of the turbine, including the turbine rotor
blade. In the case of rooftop installations, see § 175-40.7D(4)(g).
VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (VAWT) — A type of wind turbine
in which the axis of rotation is perpendicular to the wind stream and
the ground. VAWT systems can be mounted on buildings,
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:820
telecommunications towers and poles for the purpose of producing
energy.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY ACCESSORY FACILITIES — All structures
and buildings associated with the conversion of wind to energy with
the exception of the wind turbine. Accessory facilities include but are
not limited to structures, buildings, substations, meteorological towers,
electrical transmission lines and access roads.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator
and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and turbine pad, if any.
YAWING — The misalignment between the wind and turbine pointing
directions. By minimizing the yaw angle, power output is maximized
and nonsymmetrical wind loads are minimized.
D. Residential wind energy facilities (RWEFs). An RWEF is permitted in all
zoning districts as an accessory use. RWEFs must meet the following
standards:
(1) Application requirements. The following shall be submitted with
any application for an RWEF:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed RWEF, including:
[1] An overview of the project.
[2] The project location.
[3] The generating capacity of the RWEF.
[4] The number, representative types and height or range of
heights of wind turbines to be constructed, including their
generating capacity, dimensions, respective
manufacturers and specifications.
[5] A description of any/all accessory wind energy facilities.
(b) A site plan showing the following:
[1] The project location.
[2] The planned location of the wind turbine(s).
[3] Property lines.
[4] Building and wind turbine setback lines.
[5] Any electrical cabling, ancillary equipment, buildings, and
structures, associated transmission lines, and the
proposed layout of all structures.
[6] All habitable structures located within 300 feet of any
proposed wind turbine.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:821
(2) Land development and subdivision.
(a) A proposed RWEF consisting of only one wind turbine shall be
exempt from the land development and/or subdivision plan
approval process unless a subdivision of land is proposed or
significant additional improvements are proposed that would
qualify the project as a land development as defined by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).211
(b) Any proposed RWEF consisting of more than one turbine shall
be compliant with all land development/subdivision
requirements pursuant to Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land
Development, and Chapter 175, Zoning.
(3) Eligibility requirements.
(a) Required primary use. The property on which an RWEF is
proposed to be located must have a permitted primary use
which would be drawing electricity from said wind turbine(s).
(b) Maximum rated capacity. Any proposed RWEF shall be limited
to a maximum rated capacity of 100 kW, whether consisting of
an individual or multiple wind turbines.
(4) Design and installation.
(a) Minimum lot size. There is no established minimum lot size;
however, in addition to all other standards contained herein, all
RWEFs shall conform to the setback requirements noted below.
For a land area needs assessment, please see
§ 175-40.7E(5)(a).
(b) Maximum height wind turbines: 150 feet or as otherwise
limited by any restrictions imposed by the FAA.
(c) Maximum height accessory structures: The maximum height of
accessory structures shall conform to the limits imposed by the
applicable zoning district.
(d) Setbacks from property lines.
[1] All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
property line a distance of not less than 1.1 times the
turbine height. The setback distance shall be measured to
the center of the wind turbine base.
[2] Where a property line is shared with an adjacent
landowner whose lands are subject to required yard or
setback areas as measured from the shared property line,
the distance of the yard or setback areas of the adjacent
211. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:822
landowner's property shall be included in the wind turbine
setback measurement.
[3] In accordance with § 175-40.7D(8), landowners may enter
into a separate recorded agreement that would exempt an
RWEF from the requirements of this section.
(e) Setbacks from public roads. All wind turbines shall be set back
from the nearest public road a distance of not less than 1.1
times the turbine height, as measured from the right-of-way
line of the nearest public road to the center of the wind turbine
base.
(f) Code compliance. Any proposed RWEF shall comply with any
and all applicable code requirements. The applicant shall
contact the Centre Region Code Agency for proper procedure.
(g) Rooftop installations. In addition to all other applicable
requirements for RWEFs, any turbine installed upon a rooftop
shall also meet the following.
[1] Maximum height shall be restricted to 15 feet above the
highest point of the roof.
[a] When the horizontal distance from the turbine support
to the edge of the roof is at least 15 feet, the
measurement shall be taken from the point where the
turbine base meets the roof to the highest point of the
turbine, including the turbine rotor blade.
[b] When the horizontal distance from the turbine support
to the edge of the roof is less than 15 feet, the height
of the turbine shall be measured from the ground
adjacent to the building, and the setback shall be
determined in accordance with § 175-40.7D(4)(d).
[2] Documentation requirements. At a minimum, the applicant
shall contact the Centre Region Code Agency, and the
following documents and information shall be provided to
the Centre Region Code Agency for review:
[a] An elevation drawing of the building or structure to
which the proposed wind turbine will be attached,
showing the placement of the wind turbine and
showing the projection of the wind turbine from the
structure, marked with all necessary dimensions.
[b] A report, signed by a licensed structural engineer,
certifying that the proposed turbine and structure to
which the turbine will be attached has been inspected
and that the findings of the inspection have been
conveyed to the applicant.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:823
(h) Visual appearance and power lines.
[1] Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white
or gray, as is customarily offered by the manufacturers of
such turbines.
[2] On-site transmission and power lines between wind
turbines shall be placed underground.
(i) Lighting. RWEFs shall not be artificially lit except as may be
required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
(5) Signage, warnings and safety measures.
(a) Signs. There shall be no signs posted on an RWEF or any
associated fencing or support structures that are visible from
any public road, except for the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner
identification.
(b) Overspeed controls. All wind energy conversion systems shall
be equipped with both automatic overspeed controls and
manual (electronic or mechanical) overspeed controls to limit
the rotor speed to within the design limits of the turbine.
(c) Blade clearance. The blade tip of any wind turbine shall, at its
lowest point, have ground clearance of no less than 25 feet.
This standard shall not apply to structure-mounted vertical
axis wind turbines (VAWTs); neither shall it apply to groundmounted
VAWTs designed to operate with a ground clearance
less than 25 feet. However:
[1] The blade tip or foil of any VAWT shall not have a ground
clearance less than 12 feet.
[2] The applicant shall furnish documentation from the
manufacturer that the VAWT proposed to be installed has
been designed to operate at a ground clearance less than
25 feet.
[3] The owner and/or developer shall agree to hold the
municipality harmless from and against any and all claims
or damages associated with any improvements or
construction completed in accordance with an approved
permit for the VAWT.
(d) Climb prevention/locks, wind turbines: shall not be climbable
up to 15 feet above ground surface. There shall be no steps,
bolts or ladders for the first 15 feet.
(e) Climb prevention/locks, VAWTs: If approved with a ground
clearance less than 25 feet in accordance with
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:824
§ 175-40.7D(5)(c), the VAWT shall conform to one or more of
the following options:
[1] The VAWT shall not be climbable up to 12 feet above
ground surface. There shall be no steps, bolts or ladders
for the first 12 feet; and/or
[2] A fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the
VAWT. The fence shall be no less than six feet in height and
shall, at no point, be closer to the VAWT than six feet.
(6) Operational standards. Upon successful approval of a conditional
use permit for an RWEF, the site, installation and operation of the
wind turbine(s) and associated facilities shall be used and operated
under the following requirements.
(a) Noise. Audible sound from an RWEF shall not exceed 60 dB(A),
as measured at the property line, except as may occur from
time to time as a result of utility disruptions and/or severe
weather events.
[1] When required to be measured, dB(A) levels shall be
measured by conventional sound level meters on slow
response.
[2] Any noise level falling between two whole decibels shall be
the lower of the two.
[3] Exemptions. In accordance with § 175-40.7D(8),
landowners may enter into a separate recorded agreement
that would exempt an RWEF from the requirements of this
section.
(b) Shadow flicker.
[1] The owner shall make all reasonable attempts to minimize
and/or eliminate shadow flicker to occupied buildings on
immediately adjacent properties.
[2] Exemptions. In accordance with § 175-40.7D(8),
landowners may enter into a separate recorded agreement
that would exempt an RWEF from the requirements of this
section.
(c) Signal interference.
[1] Prior to and during installation, the applicant shall make
reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption or loss of radio,
telephone, television or similar signals.
[2] Should a wind turbine cause any above-noted disruption or
loss of signals, the applicant shall mitigate any harm
caused by the RWEF, and the turbine shall be immediately
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:825
shut down until such time that the problem can be
diagnosed and a remedy be performed which would allow
turbine operation without signal disruption.
(7) Notification.
(a) Utility notification.
[1] Any proposal to connect an RWEF(s) to a utility electrical
supply system shall be accompanied by evidence that the
utility company has been informed of the intent to install
an interconnected customer-owned generator.
[2] Off-grid systems shall be exempt. The landowner shall note
on the applicable permit application(s) or on the land
development plan, if required, that the RWEF(s) will not be
connected to the grid.
(b) Landowner notification. When application is made for approval
of an RWEF, notice shall be mailed, at the applicant's expense,
to the owners of all properties adjacent and within 200 feet of
the lot on which the system is to be constructed. A copy of all
associated documentation shall be provided to the Township.
(8) Exemptions. Where established herein, exemptions from
requirements pertaining to RWEF(s) shall only be granted upon
conformance with the following:
(a) The applicant shall furnish a written agreement between
themselves and any applicable adjacent landowner(s).
(b) The agreement shall establish and notify the adjacent
landowner(s) from which specific exemption-qualifying
provisions the applicant is requesting relief.
(c) Any such agreement shall be recorded in the Centre County
Recorder of Deeds Office. The agreement shall describe the
properties benefited and burdened and advise all subsequent
purchasers of the burdened property/properties that the
agreement shall run with the land and may forever burden the
subject property/properties.
E. Commercial wind energy facilities (CWEFs). A CWEF shall be permitted
as a conditional use in the A1 Rural Zoning District only.
(1) Application requirements. The following shall be submitted with
any application for a conditional use permit for a CWEF:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed CWEF, including:
[1] An overview of the project.
[2] The project location.
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:826
[3] The generating capacity of the CWEF.
[4] The number, representative types and height or range of
heights of wind turbines to be constructed, including their
generating capacity, dimensions, respective
manufacturers and specifications.
[5] A description of any/all accessory wind energy facilities.
(b) An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the
property owner(s) and the facility owner or operator
demonstrating that the facility owner or operator has the
permission of the property owner to apply for the necessary
local permits for construction and operation of a CWEF.
(c) A site plan showing the following:
[1] Parcel identification number of the properties on which the
CWEF will be located.
[2] Properties within 1,000 feet of the proposed CWEF.
[3] The planned location of each wind turbine.
[4] Property lines.
[5] Building and wind turbine setback lines.
[6] Access road and turnout locations.
[7] Substation(s), electrical cabling from the CWEF to the
substation(s).
[8] Ancillary equipment, buildings, and structures, including
permanent meteorological towers, associated
transmission lines, and the proposed layout of all
structures.
[9] All habitable structures located within 1,000 feet of any
proposed wind turbine.
(d) Shadow flicker assessment. The developer shall prepare and
provide documentation related to shadow flicker assuming a
worst-case scenario where the wind turbine is in constant
operation while the sun is shining and the wind and the turbine
rotor keep tracking the sun by yawing the turbine exactly as
the sun moves. The documentation shall:
[1] Illustrate the affected properties, including any affected
occupied buildings.
[2] Note the time of day and time of year properties and all
occupied buildings will be affected.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:827
[3] Note the total amount of time each occupied building will
be affected by shadow flicker.
(e) Documents related to decommissioning, including a schedule
for the decommissioning and financial security.
(f) Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by Patton Township and the
Centre Region Code Administration (CRCA) to ensure
compliance with this chapter and any applicable International
Building and/or Fire Code requirements.
(2) Conditional use permit. A grouping of one or more wind turbines
known as a CWEF shall be permitted as conditional use in the A-1
Rural Zoning District according to the following regulations:
(a) Establishment of conditions. The conditional use permit for
CWEF shall establish the following prior to approval by the
Township Board of Supervisors:
[1] The tract(s) of land must meet all eligibility requirements
established in this chapter.
[2] The CWEF meets all pertinent regulations contained in
Chapter 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
[3] The CWEF meets all zoning requirements contained in this
chapter and all pertinent regulations contained in Chapter
175, Zoning.
[4] Evidence that the CWEF meets all design and installation
requirements specified in § 175-40.7E(5) of this chapter.
[5] Agreement between the Township and the applicant that
the wind turbines will be operated pursuant to
§ 175-40.7E(7) and decommissioned pursuant to
§ 175-40.7E(8).
[6] Type(s), size(s) and number of wind turbines as well as any
accessory structures or equipment accompanying the wind
turbines.
[7] Evidence that the CWEF will meet any other conditions
required by the Board of Supervisors in order to protect
the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
(b) Modification of conditional use permit. Once approval for a
conditional use permit is granted, the applicant shall abide by
all conditions, including everything established in Subsection
E(2)(a) above. Modification to the conditions can only be made
by applying for a new conditional use permit following all the
procedures set forth in this chapter. Any change in relation to
the land development and/or subdivision plan can be made
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:828
following the processes outlined in the Patton Township Code
unless they relate to modifications of the conditions
established for the conditional use permit.
(3) Land development and subdivision. Applicants shall submit land
development and/or subdivision plans with the conditional use
permit application which shall be compliant with all land
development/subdivision requirements pursuant to Chapter 153,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) Eligibility requirements. CWEFs are permitted on single tracts. A
single applicant may request that a CWEF be permitted on multiple
tracts, each under separate ownership if all of the wind turbines
are to be owned, operated and maintained by one facility owner.
(5) Design and installation. CWEFs shall be designed and installed as
follows:
(a) Minimum lot size.
[1] There is no established minimum lot size; however, in
addition to all other standards contained herein, all
CWEFs shall conform to the setback requirements noted
below.
[2] A sample calculation for the minimum land area needed,
based on the minimum setback from property lines, for a
wind turbine with a height of 400 feet is provided as
follows:
Using an imaginary circle drawn around the base of the
tower, with a radius extending from the center of the
base, the area of the circle surrounding the tower = pr2.
p = pi = 3.14 (rounded down)
r = radius = 1.1 x Height of Turbine (minimum setback)
C = Circumference (for illustration)
Therefore:
pr2 = 3.14 x (1.1 x 400)2
pr2 = 3.14 x (440)2
pr2 = 3.14 x (193,600) = 607,904 square feet = 13.96
acres
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:829
The minimum land area needed for a four-hundred-foottall
wind turbine (where the setback has not been waived)
is 13.96 acres.
(b) Setbacks.
[1] Occupied buildings.
[a] Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
occupied building on the same tract a distance not less
than 1.5 times the turbine height. The setback
distance shall be measured from the center of the
wind turbine base to the nearest point on the
foundation of the occupied building.
[b] Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
occupied building located on a nonparticipating
landowner's property at least five times the turbine
height or 2,000 feet, whichever distance is greater, as
measured from the center of the wind turbine base to
the nearest point on the foundation of the occupied
building.
[2] Property lines or adjacent yard setback.
[a] All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
property line a distance of not less than 1.1 times the
turbine height. The setback distance shall be
measured to the center of the wind turbine base.
[b] The yard setback area of an adjacent landowner may
be included within the turbine setback calculation up
to a maximum of 10% of the height of the turbine or
the full extent of such yard setback area, whichever is
greater.
[c] Exemptions. In accordance with § 175-40.7E(9),
participating and nonparticipating landowners may
enter into a separate recorded agreement that would
exempt a CWEF from the requirements of this section.
[3] Public roads. All wind turbines shall be set back from the
nearest public road a distance of not less than 1.1 times
the turbine height, as measured from the right-of-way line
of the nearest public road to the center of the wind turbine
base.
(c) Maximum height, wind turbines.
[1] The maximum height of a wind turbine shall only be
limited by any restrictions imposed by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). In the event of any conflict between
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:830
this regulation and any other provisions of the Township
Code, this regulation shall apply.
[2] Documentation verifying a completed review by the FAA,
along with any comments issued by the FAA, must be
submitted.
(d) Accessory structures. The maximum height of accessory
structures shall conform to the limits imposed by the
applicable zoning district.
(e) Code compliance. Any proposed CWEF shall comply with any
and all applicable code requirements. The applicant shall
contact the Centre Region Code Agency for proper procedure.
(f) Lighting. CWEFs shall not be artificially lit except as may be
required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
(g) Visual appearance and power lines.
[1] Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white
or gray, as is customarily offered by the manufacturers of
such turbines, or any color otherwise required by the FAA
or other applicable authority that regulates air safety.
[2] On-site transmission and power lines between wind
turbines shall be placed underground.
(6) Signage, warnings and safety measures.
(a) Signs.
[1] A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations.
[2] No advertising signs are permitted on any part of the
CWEF, including fencing and support structures. The
manufacturer's or owner's name and/or logo may be
placed on the nacelles of the CWEF but shall be limited to
25 square feet.
(b) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as reflectors, or tape
shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the
guy wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground surface.
(c) Controls and brakes. Any proposed CWEF shall comply with
any and all applicable control and braking requirements. The
applicant shall contact the Centre Region Code Agency for
proper procedure.
(d) Blade clearance. The blade tip of any wind turbine shall, at its
lowest point, have ground clearance of no less than 75 feet.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:831
(e) Climb prevention/locks. Wind turbines shall not be climbable
up to 15 feet above ground surface. There shall be no steps,
bolts or ladders for the first 15 feet.
(f) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment
shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by
nonauthorized persons.
(7) Operational standards. Upon successful approval of a conditional
use permit for a CWEF, the site, installation and operation of the
wind turbines and associated facilities shall be used and operated
under the following requirements:
(a) Use of public roads.
[1] The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads
to be used within Patton Township to transport equipment
and parts for construction, operation or maintenance of
the CWEF.
[2] The Patton Township Engineer (or a qualified third-party
engineer hired by the Township and paid for by the
applicant) shall document road conditions prior to
construction. The engineer shall document road conditions
again 30 days after construction is complete or as weather
permits.
[3] The applicant shall post surety acceptable to the Township
Engineer to demonstrate that it has appropriate financial
assurance to ensure the prompt repair of any/all damaged
roads.
[4] Any road damage caused by the applicant or its
contractors shall be promptly repaired at the applicant's
expense.
(b) Noise. Audible sound from a CWEF shall not exceed 60 dB(A),
as measured at the property line, except as may occur from
time to time as a result of utility disruptions and/or severe
weather events. Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic
emissions from the CWEF shall be equal to or exceed the
minimum standards for precision described in AWEA Standard
2.1 - 1989 titled Procedures for the Measurement and
Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind Turbine
Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier or per alternate
standards acceptable to the Township. Any proposed alternate
source must be submitted at the time of permit application.
Any noise level falling between two whole decibels shall be the
lower of the two.
[1] In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the applicable
standard given above, the applicable standard shall be
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:832
adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level. The
measurement of ambient noise levels shall be expressed in
terms of the highest whole number sound pressure level
in dB(A) which is exceeded for more than five minutes
per hour; shall be measured at the property line; to the
greatest extent practicable, shall employ techniques for
reducing the effect of wind-generated noise at the
microphone; and may be performed when wind velocities
at the proposed project site are sufficient to allow wind
turbine operation, provided that the wind velocity does
not exceed 30 miles per hour at the ambient noise
measurement location.
[2] Exemptions. In accordance with § 175-40.7E(9),
participating and nonparticipating landowners may enter
into a separate recorded agreement that would exempt a
CWEF from the requirements of this section.
(c) Shadow flicker.
[1] The facility owner and operator shall eliminate shadow
flicker to any occupied building on a nonparticipating
landowner's property.
[2] Exemptions. In accordance with § 175-40.7E(9),
participating and nonparticipating landowners may enter
into a separate recorded agreement that would exempt a
CWEF from the requirements of this section.
(d) Signal interference.
[1] Prior to and during installation, the applicant shall make
reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption or loss of radio,
telephone, television or similar signals.
[2] Should a wind turbine cause any above-noted disruption or
loss of signals, the applicant shall mitigate any harm
caused by the RWEF, and the turbine shall be immediately
shut down until such time that the problem can be
diagnosed and a remedy be performed which would allow
turbine operation without signal disruption.
(e) Liability insurance. The applicant shall be maintain a current
general liability policy covering bodily injury and property
damage with limits of at least $1 million per occurrence and $5
million in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to
Patton Township upon request.
(f) Public inquiries. The facility owner and operator shall maintain
on file with the Township a phone number and identify a person
for the Township to contact 24 hours seven days a week, in
emergency situations and for public inquiries and complaints
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:833
during normal business hours. The same information shall also
be posted near or on the turbine.
(g) System failure, violations and enforcement.
[1] If there is a mechanical failure that causes a CWEF to
become in violation of Patton Township Code, the facility
owner or operator shall immediately shut down the
affected wind turbine until a repair or correction is made
to eliminate the problem.
[2] If there is a mechanical failure that creates a clear hazard
or danger, Patton Township may, at its discretion, take
reasonable and necessary actions to shut down the
affected wind turbine.
(8) Decommissioning.
(a) The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the CWEF, or individual wind turbines,
within six months after the end of the useful life of the facility
or individual wind turbines. The CWEF or individual wind
turbines will presume to be at the end of their useful life if no
electricity is generated for a continuous period of six months.
(b) Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines,
buildings, cabling, electrical components, access roads,
foundations to a depth of 36 inches, and any other associated
facilities.
(c) Disturbed earth shall be graded, reseeded and/or reforested to
reclaim the site back to its predevelopment condition, unless
the landowner requests in writing and approval is granted by
Patton Township that the access roads or other land surface
areas not be restored.
(d) An estimate for the total cost of decommissioning
("decommissioning costs") shall be submitted to Patton
Township for review after the first year of operation and every
fifth year thereafter.
(e) The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to
decommissioning costs. The decommissioning funds shall be
posted and maintained with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
facility owner or operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth and is approved by Patton Township.
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:834
(f) Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance
bond, surety bond or other form of financial assurance as may
be acceptable to Patton Township.
(g) If the facility owner or operator fails to complete
decommissioning within the period prescribed, then the
landowner shall have six months to complete
decommissioning.
(h) If neither the facility owner or operator nor the landowner
completes decommissioning within the periods prescribed
herein, then Patton Township may take such measures as
necessary to complete decommissioning. The entry into and
submission of evidence of a participating landowner
agreement to Patton Township shall constitute agreement and
consent of the parties to the agreement, their respective heirs,
successors and assigns that Patton Township may take such
action as necessary to implement the decommissioning plan at
owner or operator expense.
(i) The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds
when the facility owner or operator has demonstrated and
Patton Township concurs that decommissioning has been
satisfactorily completed or upon written request of Patton
Township in order to implement the decommissioning plan.
(9) Exemptions. Where established herein, exemptions from
requirements pertaining to CWEFs shall only be granted upon
conformance with the following:
(a) The applicant shall furnish a written recorded agreement
between participating and nonparticipating landowners.
(b) The agreement shall establish and notify the participating and
nonparticipating property owner(s) from which specific
exemption-qualifying provisions the applicant is requesting
relief.
(c) Any such agreement shall be recorded in the Centre County
Recorder of Deeds Office. The agreement shall describe the
participating and nonparticipating properties benefited and
burdened and advise all subsequent purchasers of the
burdened property/properties that the agreement shall run
with the land and may forever burden the subject property/
properties.
(d) All participating and nonparticipating property owners
entering into agreement with a facility owner or operator shall
subsequently all be considered "participating landowners" by
said actions.
§ 175-40.7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.7
169:835
F. Vertical access wind turbines (VAWTs). Vertical access wind turbines
shall be permitted in accordance with the same standards, permit
requirements and procedures pertaining to CWEFs or RWEFs,
whichever type of facility is proposed.
G. Meteorological towers (Met). Meteorological towers are permitted in
accordance with the same standards, permit requirements and
procedures pertaining to CWEFs or RWEFs, whichever is applicable
based on the type of facility the Met tower will be used to gather wind
energy resource data for. In addition, the following shall apply:
(1) Temporary status. All Met towers and all associated apparatus shall
be decommissioned on or before the expiration of 24 months
following installation and in accordance with the decommissioning
provisions of § 175-40.7E(8).
§ 175-40.7 PATTON CODE § 175-40.7
169:836
ARTICLE VIIID
Mixed-Use Overlay District
[Added 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-555]
§ 175-40.8. Intent and area of application.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to:
(1) Permit and encourage a mix of land uses on previously developed
lands and in new construction in the C1 General Commercial
zoning district.
(2) Facilitate the redevelopment of underutilized commercial
properties.
(3) Promote walkable communities with pedestrian-oriented buildings
and connections to nearby destinations.
(4) Provide additional housing opportunities.
(5) Allow growth in places that are most conducive to accommodating
additional development.
B. Applicability. These are optional regulations.
(1) These regulations may be utilized to develop or redevelop property
located within the C-1 General Commercial District of Patton
Township.
(2) Any lands rezoned to C-1 subsequent to the enactment of these
provisions are eligible to develop under these provisions.
(3) Within the Mixed-Use Overlay District, all existing zoning, land use,
and building regulations now in place continue to apply except
where the regulations contained herein conflict with any other
regulation. When such is the case, these regulations are intended
to supersede and apply in order to facilitate development
consistent with the purposes of § 175-40.8A above.
C. Developer Agreement. In addition to any other required guarantees for
the installation of site improvements, a landowner or developer
proposing to develop or redevelop property in accordance with the
Mixed-Use Overlay District provisions shall submit a written statement
declaring their intent to develop under these regulations and to install
all improvements as required herein in addition to any other
requirements of the underlying zoning and all other applicable
regulations. The statement may be included on site development plans
or submitted as a separate document.
D. Definitions. For the purposes of the Mixed-Use Overlay District, the
following definitions shall apply.
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:837
ADULT USE — Any use involving a transaction for the purchase of
sexually oriented products.
AWNING — A temporary or permanent roof-like projection constructed
of cloth or fiber, wood, metal or other rigid material installed on a
wall above windows or other facade treatment and lending shelter to
pedestrians. The structure may or may not be retractable.
CANOPY — Similar to an awning. A canopy is considered to be an
extension of the architectural character of the building materials and
serving as a roof-like projection from a wall above windows or other
facade treatment and lending shelter to pedestrians.
COLONNADE — Similar to a portico. Consists of a series of columns
forming an entry area to a building and often attached to a roof
structure.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — On-site amenities provided for the
common enjoyment of residents and pedestrians. Such facilities
include, but may not be limited to, seating areas, landscaping,
architecture, public art, etc.
CORNICE — A horizontal element of a building that projects outward
from the building. Located at the top of the building or at another area
such as the top of a floor. Examples include roof overhangs and eaves.
DEVELOPER AGREEMENT — A written statement provided by an
owner or developer which declares their intent to develop a property in
accordance with the provisions of the Mixed-Use Overlay District.
GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a structure located above the
surface of the ground.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A space located within a nonresidential zoning
district where the primary use of the space is nonresidential. The
residential living area is subordinate to the nonresidential use. The use
of space for living purposes shall be limited to 40% of the floor area.
This type of arrangement differs from that of a home occupation where
the dwelling is the primary use.
MIXED-USE — A development incorporating a combination of
nonresidential and residential uses on the same property. A site may
integrate such uses vertically and/or horizontally.
PILASTER — A pier or column type structure attached to the wall of a
building at the ground floor level.
PORTICO — Typically an entrance area to a building constructed of a
series of columns.
PRIMARY FACADE ARTICULATION — Required architectural
treatments to be installed along the portion of the building facade
facing a street. For the purposes of the Mixed-Use Overlay District,
the location of these elements is the interface between the top of the
ground floor and the beginning of the second floor.
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:838
SHARED PARKING, ON-SITE — Parking required to be provided on the
same site as the mixed-use development. The calculation for required
parking is determined by analyzing the different peak parking periods
for each use and establishing the minimum parking based on the
maximum peak.
SHARED PARKING, OFF-SITE — Required parking that is permitted to
be located off premises from the mixed-use development. Parking shall
be determined in accordance with § 153-38, Off-street parking.
SIDE FACADE ARTICULATION — The placement of required
architectural treatments on the sides of mixed-use buildings. These
elements shall be consistent with those used on the primary facade.
TRANSIT REDUCTION — A reduction in the required amount of
parking based on the proximity of a development to public transit. A
common practice meant to encourage the use of public transportation.
E. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted uses. In addition to all currently permitted uses in the C1
District, in the Mixed-Use Overlay District, a parcel or building may
be used for one or more of the following uses permitted by right.
The uses must be combined with an existing use/s or, if new
construction, combined with a use/s permitted in the C1 District
notwithstanding any prohibited mix of uses included herein.
(a) Dwelling units located above the ground floor.
(b) Live/work units located above the ground floor.
(c) Accessory uses as permitted in the C1 district.
(d) Nonresidential uses above the ground floor.
Nonresidential uses are permitted on additional floors in
accordance with the underlying zoning district.
(2) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses within the Mixed-Use Overlay District. All
procedural requirements for conditional uses outlined within the
Township Code shall be followed.
(a) Live/work units located on the ground floor. Live/work units
are permitted on the ground floor of a mixed-use structure in
accordance with the following conditions:
[1] The portion of the floor area contained within the unit
being utilized as a live/work unit and allocated to living
space shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area of the
live/work unit space.
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:839
[2] The minimum size of the dwelling space shall meet the
standard established by the Centre Region Building Safety
and Property Maintenance Code.
[3] Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 153-38, Offstreet
parking, and § 175-40.8H herein, and determined
based on the nonresidential use of the space in accordance
with the following:
[a] No additional residential parking shall be required
when all employees reside in the unit (in accordance
with maximum occupancy established by the
Township and/or Centre Region Code Agency).
Verification of residency shall be provided.
[4] A ground floor live/work unit cannot be converted to an
exclusively residential use, but may be converted to
commercial.
[5] The interior shall be designed such that no portion of the
residential living space is viewable from the storefront and
sidewalk areas.
[6] The business owner/s shall furnish a copy of a current
business license.
[7] Utility services shall comply with each utility providers
rules or regulations regarding separate service
connections and meters for residential and non-residential
use within a live/work unit.
(3) Prohibited mixes. The following uses shall not be permitted to exist
on the same parcel with residential units in the Mixed-Use Overlay
District.
(a) Any use not currently permitted in the C1 district.
(b) Halfway house.
(c) Adult uses.
(d) Automobile service stations and gasoline stations.
(e) Drive-through facilities.
F. Area and bulk regulations. In order to achieve the purposes of the
Mixed-Use Overlay District, the following area and bulk regulations
shall be in effect.
(1) The following standards are per the underlying C-1 Zoning District,
unless otherwise noted:
(a) Lot width: minimum 150 feet.
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:840
(b) Building coverage (all structures): maximum 30%.
(c) Setback: 70 feet.
[1] As an alternative, the setback may be reduced to no less
than 50 feet upon approval of a site plan which provides a
rear yard of sufficient size so that the sum of the setback
and rear yards is at least 100 feet.
(d) Side yards: 15 feet minimum for each. (As an alternative, the
Patton Township Planning Commission may recommend and
the Patton Township Supervisors may approve the
consolidation of side yards for a property located in a C-1
Commercial District so that one side yard is eliminated but the
resulting side yard must be a minimum of 30 feet. Such a
conditional approval would be based on a certified statement
that abutting property owners will develop abutting properties
simultaneously, using the same style or types of architecture
and the same types of construction materials.) In addition to
the underlying zoning standard, the following shall also apply:
[1] Parking is permitted in the side yard area.
[2] To the extent practicable, parking for residential units
should be located in areas closest to a rear or side
entrance to the unit.
(e) Rear yards: 30 feet; except upon approval of a site plan as
provided in setback section above. Screening shall be provided
at the rear yard, along a ten-foot buffer strip measured from
the rear property line. In addition to the underlying zoning
standard, the following shall also apply:
[1] Parking is permitted in the rear yard area.
(f) Maximum building height: 50 feet.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: Maximum impervious
coverage shall be increased by 5% from the underlying zoning
to 80% for lot sizes fewer than three acres and 75% for lot sizes
equal to or greater than three acres.
[1] Lots less than or equal to 2.0 acres in size. Where
installed, permeable pavers, porous pavement and/ or
other permeable surface as approved by the Township
Engineer shall be considered as pervious surface in the
calculation for total maximum impervious coverage
permitted herein. Permeable surface shall be considered
to be pervious up to a maximum of 5% of the total lot area
of the lot upon which it is installed, in accordance with the
following:
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:841
[a] The permeable surface shall be used only for parking
areas containing spaces which are in excess of the
minimum required number of parking spaces. Only
those spaces located farthest away from the main
entrance shall be permitted to be covered with the
permeable surface.
[b] The surface shall have a ten-percent minimum
drainage void area and be designed with open graded
base and subbase material to promote infiltration and
filtration.
[c] For every portion of land area covered by permeable
surface, a backup, overflow system equal to the
permeable portion shall be installed adjacent to the
permeable surface. On uncurbed parking lots, such a
system may consist of a perimeter stone edge drain
with a direct connection to the subsurface storage
area.
[d] Spill controls must be installed in accordance with
standard engineering practice.
[e] In addition to the above, one or more of the
enhancements included on the Planned Commercial
(C-2) District List of Approved Landscaping and
Architectural Enhancements, included as an
attachment to Chapter 175, shall be installed on site.
[f] Signage. Signage shall be installed stating that no
parking or staging of construction vehicles is
permitted in areas covered with permeable paving.
[g] Installation. The permeable surface shall be installed
according to the manufacturer's specifications.
[h] Maintenance and repair. Maintenance and repair of
the permeable surface shall be performed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, Chapter 6.
[2] Bonus impervious area. For mixed-use development, an
additional 5% of impervious area shall be permitted when
stormwater best management practices are installed and
maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Management Best Practices Manual and when
at least one of the following is utilized:
[a] Green roof.
[b] Fully subsurface detention or retention of stormwater.
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:842
[c] Other best management practice that substantially
enhances stormwater management as approved by
the Township.
(2) The following standards are not part of the underlying zoning
district:
(a) Windows and doors. In an effort to create a pedestrianoriented
environment in mixed-use settings, a building used for
mixed-use shall incorporate storefront treatments in
accordance with the following:
[1] Transparency. A minimum of 50% of the street facing
ground floor facade shall be comprised of clear glass in
windows and doors.
[2] The areas provided above shall be designed to allow for
pedestrian views to interior displays or other store spaces.
[3] Opaque or reflective glass materials are prohibited.
(b) Maximum residential density. There shall be no maximum on
residential density established herein. Other site limitations
associated with parking requirements, impervious area,
building coverage, etc., will sufficiently govern the achievable
densities.
(c) Mix of uses. The following establishes the limits for different
uses in a mixed-use building. It is the purpose of these limits to
maintain the existing commercial character of the C1 District.
(d) Commercial/office/retail. The amount of ground floor area
devoted to nonresidential uses shall be no less than 75%.
G. Design standards. All design standards not otherwise specified herein
shall be per the underlying zoning district.
(1) Architectural standards. To provide for an aesthetically appealing
distinction between ground floor nonresidential uses and the
residential units above, the following minimum requirements shall
be met:
(a) Use of varying materials, textures or colors consistent with
adjacent structures.
(b) Use of architectural detailing or elements, such as awnings,
windows, colonnades, porches, porticos, columns, pilasters,
cornices, or canopies.
[1] Primary facade articulation. For the purposes of this
district, the primary facade articulation is that which
creates distinct separation between the top of the ground
floor and the beginning of the second floor. All treatments
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:843
designed for these purposes such as awnings, cornices,
canopies, etc. shall be installed accordingly and as
illustrated below.
[2] Side facade articulation. Side facade treatments shall be
similar and consistent with those of the primary facade
and according to the following:
[a] Where the distance between buildings is 20 feet or
greater, full treatments shall be required.
[b] Where the distance between buildings is less than 20
feet but greater than 10 feet, treatments such as
canopies, awnings, and cornices may be replaced with
offsets, bump-outs, recesses and belt courses or
similar architecture with less projection.
[c] Where the distance between buildings is less than 10
feet, additional treatments shall not be required, but
the varying colors and textures should be used.
(c) Varying horizontal elevations, bump outs, and recesses.
Figure 1
Figure 2
H. Off-Street parking requirements.
(1) Shared parking on-site. In determining the amount of parking to be
provided, the following method may be applied. For existing
development, the method is to be used to verify whether or not
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:844
additional parking is required for proposed residential units and/
or any reduction in parking required per § 153-38C(3)(a). Parking
for new mixed-use development shall be in accordance with the
following.
(a) Step 1: Calculate the minimum amount of shared parking
required per § 153-38 for each land use as if it were a separate
use. This is the base parking rate normally required.
(b) Step 2: To determine peak parking requirements for the site,
multiply the minimum parking required for each land use as
determined in Step 1 by the corresponding percentage for
each of the time periods shown in the table below.
(c) Step 3: Calculate the total parking for each of the uses for each
of the time periods.
(d) Step 4: Calculate the total aggregate required parking for each
time period by adding up the parking required for each use in
that time period column.
(e) Step 5: Identify the minimum shared parking requirement as
the column with the highest value.
On-Site Shared Parking Demand
Weekdays Weekends
Use
8:00
a.m. -
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. -
Midnight
Midnight
- 8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m. -
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. -
Midnight
Midnight
- 8:00
a.m.
Office 100% 10% 5% 10% 5% 5%
Retail 70% 90% 5% 100% 70% 5%
Hotel/
motel 75% 100% 100% 75% 100% 100%
Restaurant 60% 100% 10% 60% 100% 20%
Entertainment/
recreation
40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50%
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Example calculation:
A proposed development has the following amounts of
required parking:
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:845
On-Site Shared Parking Requirement Calculation
Without On-site Shared
Parking
With On-site Shared
Parking
Office (90,000 square feet) =
300 spaces
Weekday 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. - 460 spaces
Retail (30,000 square feet) =
100 spaces
Weekday 6:00 p.m. to 12:00
a.m. - 270 spaces
Restaurant (10,000 square
feet) = 50 spaces
Weekday 12:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m. - 125 spaces
Apartments (100 units) = 100
spaces
Weekend 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. - 240 spaces
Weekend 6:00 p.m. to 12:00
a.m. - 235 spaces
Weekend 12:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m. - 130 spaces
Total = 550 spaces Total = 460 spaces (using
peak period of 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on weekdays)
With on-site shared parking, the development requires only
460 spaces. This equates to the maximum needed for the
highest peak usage during the week and is 90 spaces fewer
than would otherwise be required, more than a 15%
reduction.
(2) Shared parking off-site. Off-site shared parking is permitted in
accordance with § 153-38C(3)(a). This differs from the above-noted
provision in that it pertains to shared parking located on adjacent
properties not held in common ownership.
(3) Transit reduction. Mixed-use development located within 1/4 mile
of a public transit stop may reduce the amount of required parking
by 10%.
(4) Other parking reductions. Other parking reductions as permitted
by § 153-38C(3)(a) remain in effect. In the event of a conflict
between these parking provisions and those of § 153-38, the
regulation that requires fewer parking spaces shall apply.
(5) Bicycle parking. Mixed-use development shall provide on-site
bicycle storage for 2.5% of the total number of required parking
spaces.
I. Bicycle and pedestrian connections.
(1) All mixed-use development shall provide for bicycle trails or lanes
that connect to all appropriate adjacent properties and
neighborhoods as a means of providing linkage between lots.
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:846
Where the bicycle trail can be combined with pedestrian sidewalk
systems, as determined by the municipality, then the combined
pedestrian/ bicycle trail shall meet American Association of State
Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.
(2) Sidewalks shall be required as per Chapter 149, Streets and
Sidewalks.
J. Community facilities.
(1) In lieu of public open space and in addition to required bicycle and
pedestrian amenities, mixed-use development shall include a
minimum combination of other amenities as per Table 1.
Table 1
Minimum Required Amenities
Seating
Drinking
Fountains Planters
Landscaping/
Architecture
Other
Improvements
1 bench per
storefront
or 1 bench
per each
entrance,
whichever
is greater
Substitutions:
2 chairs per
bench
1 picnic
table per
each
building
containing
commercial
or retail
tenants with
1 trash
receptacle
in close
proximity to
each table
1 per each
building
containing
commercial
or retail
tenants
2 per each
bench or
seating area
If no
seating, 3
per
storefront
or 1 per 10
feet of
facade
length,
whichever
is greater
Items
included on
the
Townshipmaintained
list of
acceptable
landscaping
and
architectural
enhancements
may be
used to
supplement
other
required
amenities
The
Township
will
consider
other
proposed
improvements
that are not
already
included
herein or in
the list of
landscaping
and
architectural
enhancements
if such
improvements
are
consistent
in character
and purpose
(2) Location and arrangement.
(a) Seating.
[1] Benches and chairs. Each bench provided should be
located at the storefront, near the entrance. If a storefront
§ 175-40.8 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.8
169:847
contains multiple entrances, a bench shall be provided for
each entrance. If chairs are substituted for benches, they
shall be located and arranged in a similar manner.
[2] Picnic tables. Picnic tables may be provided in lieu of other
seating as per Table 1. The table/s must be placed on
pervious surface. In addition, adequate trash receptacles
shall be placed in close proximity to each table.
(b) Drinking fountains. Each fountain shall be provided in a
common area readily accessible to patrons.
(c) Planters.
[1] If seating areas are not provided, planters should be
evenly spaced across the entire length of the storefront at
a minimum rate of three per storefront or one per every
ten feet of building facade, whichever is greater.
[2] Maintenance: All vegetation in the planters shall be
maintained and cared for so as to be alive and healthy. Any
dead or dying vegetation shall be replaced promptly.
(d) Enhanced landscaping and architecture. The Township
maintains a list of acceptable landscaping and architectural
enhancements that may be installed on-site. One or more of
these features may be used to supplement the required
amenities in Table 1.
(e) Other improvements. In addition to the amenities included
above, the Township will consider other proposed
improvements that are not already included herein or in the list
of landscaping and architectural enhancements if such
improvements are consistent in character and purpose.
(3) Construction and appearance. The construction and appearance of
amenities shall be generally harmonious with on-site and adjacent
property features.
§ 175-40.8 PATTON CODE § 175-40.8
169:848
ARTICLE VIIIE
Mixed-Use Overlay District 2
[Added 7-11-2018 by Ord. 2018-590]
§ 175-40.9. District regulations.
A. Intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, General intent,
these regulations may be utilized to develop or redevelop properties in
the C-2 (Planned Commercial) Zoning District and are intended to:
(1) Permit and encourage a diverse mix of land uses on properties
located near existing commercial and residential areas.
(2) Facilitate the redevelopment of underutilized commercial
properties and allow growth in places that are most conducive to
accommodating additional development.
(3) Provide opportunities for small-scale or locally owned businesses.
(4) Promote aesthetically pleasing developments with consistent
architectural themes.
(5) Promote communities with bicycle- and pedestrian-oriented
buildings and facilities, and connections to and from surrounding
properties.
(6) Promote communities with access to public transit.
(7) Encourage shared parking facilities to reduce impervious cover
and encourage effective management of stormwater runoff.
(8) Provide workforce and/or affordable housing opportunities
consistent with the goals and objectives of the Centre Region
Comprehensive Plan.
(9) Provide public gathering places for community events or public
celebrations.
B. Applicability. These are optional regulations.
(1) These overlay zoning district regulations, entitled Mixed-Use
Overlay District 2 (MXD2), may be applied only within the C-2
Zoning District of Patton Township.
(2) All existing zoning, land use, and building regulations of the Code
of Patton Township now in place continue to apply except where the
regulations contained herein conflict. In such case, these
regulations are intended to supersede and apply in order to
facilitate development consistent with § 175-40.9A, Intent.
C. Master plan approval. All development within the MXD2 must be done
pursuant to approval of a master plan in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:849
(1) Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is recommended
but shall not be mandatory, nor shall it be regarded as a formal
application for development. The purpose is to provide for an
informational exchange where the major elements of a proposed
master plan can be reviewed and evaluated at the municipal staff
level. The filing of any report, sketch plan, plat, or map prior to or
at such meeting shall not constitute submission of a plan or
application for development, nor shall such materials be binding on
subsequent submissions by the applicant.
(2) Sketch plan submission. The applicant is encouraged to submit a
sketch plan, in both paper and digital format. The purpose is to
discuss the conceptual sketch of the proposed development with
the municipal staff, Planning Commission, and Board of
Supervisors prior to final submission.
(3) Master plan application and review. Application for master plan
approval of an MXD2 development shall commence upon a
complete submission as described below:
(a) A master plan submission shall be deemed complete when the
applicant has furnished the following to the Township:
[1] Twelve copies of a master plan prepared by a registered
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or similarly
qualified person. The plan shall fully comply with the
requirements of this article. One additional copy shall be
submitted in a digital format acceptable to Patton
Township.
[2] Twelve copies of a narrative which shall fully comply with
the requirements of this article.
[3] Three copies of a transportation impact analysis, which
shall comply with the requirements of this article.
[4] Developer agreement. All property owners or developers
proposing to utilize these MXD2 regulations shall declare
their intent to do so in the form of a note on the master
plan, or in the form of a separate written developer
agreement.
(b) Once the submission is complete, the Township Zoning Officer
shall forward copies of the documents to the Township
Engineer, Centre Regional Planning Commission, Centre
County Planning Commission, COG Fire Director, COG Refuse
and Recycling Administrator, University Area Joint Authority,
State College Borough Water Authority, State College Area
School District, and other appropriate agencies.
(c) At any time during the review process, the applicant may
amend the originally submitted plan solely for the purpose of
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:850
correcting minor deficiencies in the original plan, to the extent
necessary to meet Township requirements.
(d) Review by the Township Planning Commission.
[1] At its next regular meeting following the receipt of the
application for master plan approval, provided that such
application was made at least 30 days prior to the meeting,
the Planning Commission shall review the plan to
determine its conformance with the provisions contained
in these regulations.
[2] The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board
of Supervisors of any recommended action, and any
changes or modifications to the plan after such decision is
made, provided that the Planning Commission shall make
such recommendations within 70 days after the date the
application was filed. No recommendation shall be made
until reports from the Centre County and Centre Regional
Planning Commissions are received, or until expiration of
30 days from the date the plan was forwarded to these
agencies; whichever comes first.
[3] If review by the Planning Commission results in a
recommendation to deny approval, notification to the
Township Board of Supervisors shall specify the
deficiencies found in the plan, list the requirements that
have not been met, and cite the provisions from which
such requirements originate.
(e) Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of
the recommendation from the Planning Commission, or upon
failure to receive recommendations within 70 days after
submittal, the Board of Supervisors shall review the
application for master plan approval.
[1] The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the
written reports of the Township Planning Commission and
all other reviewing agencies noted above to determine if
the plan meets all applicable regulations.
[2] Prior to approval of a master plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall require a public hearing. The Township
shall place a notice of the time and place of the public
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation as set forth
by the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,212 and shall also notify all adjoining
property owners by mail.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:851
(f) Approval or denial. The Board of Supervisors, within 50 days
following the Planning Commission action or inaction, shall by
official written communication to the applicant either:
[1] Grant approval of the master plan as submitted.
[2] Grant approval subject to the applicant meeting specified
modifications to the master plan.
[3] Deny approval of the plan, including reasons and/or plan
deficiencies as noted above.
(g) When the development may occur over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize development in phases,
subject to requirements or guaranties of improvements in
future phases of the development that it finds essential for the
protection of any approved phase. A schedule shall be
submitted with the application for master plan approval in
accordance with § 175-40.9C(4)(d). Requests by the landowner
or developer to revise the schedule may be granted at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(h) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the
master plan as presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time or change in the prescribed
manner of presentation or communication of the decision, in
which case failure to meet the extended time or change in
manner of presentation of communication shall have like
effect.
(i) In the event that approval is granted subject to conditions, the
landowner or developer may, within 30 days after receiving a
copy of the official written communication of the governing
body, notify the Board of Supervisors of his or her refusal to
accept all conditions, in which case, the Board of Supervisors
shall be deemed to have denied approval of the master plan. In
the event that the landowner or developer does not, within said
period, notify the Board of Supervisors of his or her acceptance
of all conditions, approval of the master plan shall be deemed
to have been denied.
(j) Approval of a master plan shall not authorize construction or
the issuance of any building permit. Such authorization or
issuance shall not occur until a land development plan is
approved for the applicable area.
(k) An approved master plan shall be recorded by the developer in
accordance with § 153-15, Recording of final plan.
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:852
[1] An applicant may request an extension, in writing, of this
deadline for up to an additional 90 days. Approval shall be
at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Required master plan content. Proposed master plans shall be
drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger (e.g., one inch
equals 30 feet) and shall contain the following information:
(a) General data.
[1] Name of proposed development.
[2] Purpose statement.
[3] Sheet index.
[4] North arrow.
[5] Graphic and written scale.
[6] Location map showing the proposed development in
relation to roadways, waterways, and municipal
boundaries.
[7] Legend describing all symbols and land use areas shown
on the plan (residential, nonresidential, etc.).
[8] Date the plan was originally prepared, and the date and
description of any revisions after formal submission.
[9] Name, address, and seal of the individual or firm that
prepared the plan.
[10] Total area of the master plan tract and each lot.
[11] Boundaries of the tract and each lot, showing bearings to
the nearest minute and distances to the nearest hundredth
of a foot. If desired, bearings and distances may be
provided as a line and curve table.
[12] Zoning district of master plan area and abutting
properties, including any overlay zoning districts.
[13] Perimeter setback of the tract and interior setbacks for all
lots.
[14] Names and addresses of property owners, and the deed
book and page numbers of deeds conveying the property.
Name and address of developer (if different).
[15] Names of owners, tax parcel numbers, and deed book and
page numbers for all properties within or abutting the
proposed master plan area.
[16] Signature blocks.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:853
[a] Certification of ownership and plan acknowledgment
of all property owners within the master plan area.
[b] Offer of dedication for land or objects intended for
public use.
[c] Centre County Recorder of Deeds.
[d] Township Planning Commission.
[e] Township Board of Supervisors.
[17] A table with data for the overall development and each
phase, including:
[a] List of proposed land uses, including residential,
nonresidential, mixed-use, and open space, and the
total acreage and percentage of the overall site of
each area.
[b] Size, in square feet, of all proposed buildings and the
intended use of each.
[c] Number of dwelling units in each building containing
residential uses.
[d] Residential dwelling unit density, in units per acre,
and nonresidential floor area ratio (FAR).
[e] Area and percentage of impervious coverage,
including streets, parking areas, sidewalks, bicycle
paths, and structures.
[18] A preliminary stormwater management plan illustrating
drainage patterns and detention pond areas. The plan
should include preliminary pond sizing calculations.
[19] A conceptual landscaping, screening, and buffering plan.
[20] A general grading plan indicating any major alterations to
the topography of the site.
[21] Proposed interior circulation plan for vehicular,
pedestrian, and bicycle traffic, including all sidewalks,
trails, and bikeways.
(b) Existing and proposed features. Approximate location of
natural or man-made features, existing and proposed, on or
within 100 feet of the property.
[1] Public and private streets, including:
[a] Location and width of right-of-way and cartway.
[b] Names and ownership (i.e. private, Township).
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:854
[2] Easements and rights-of-way.
[3] Utilities.
[4] Culverts and bridges.
[5] Railroads.
[6] Buildings and other structures.
[7] Public gathering places.
[8] Driveways, parking, and loading areas.
[9] Drive-through uses.
[10] Sidewalks and bicycle paths.
[11] Sinkholes.
[12]Watercourses and floodplains.
[13] Historic sites.
[14] Tree masses and unique vegetation.
[15] Required buffer yards.
[16] Significant topographical and physical features.
[17] Steep slopes.
[18] Critical groundwater recharge areas.
[19] Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of 10 feet or
greater (e.g., five feet, two feet).
(c) Narrative statement. The following information should be
included in a narrative statement submitted with the master
plan:
[1] A statement of the ownership of all of the land included
within the master plan area.
[2] An explanation of the design pattern of the development.
[3] The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other
restrictions that will be imposed on the use of land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public use or utilities. The covenants should
specifically indicate that any land proposed for public
gathering places shall be used for such purposes in
perpetuity.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:855
[4] A description of the form of organization proposed to own
and maintain the designated public gathering places or
other common facilities.
[5] A description of proposals to preserve natural features and
existing amenities and a statement of conceptual
landscaping designs.
(d) Development schedule. When it is anticipated that
development pursuant to an approved master plan will occur in
phases over a period of years, the following shall be included
with the application for master plan approval:
[1] The approximate date when subdivision and land
development plans for each phase will be submitted for
approval, and when each phase will be completed. Each
phase shall be able to function independently of the
undeveloped phases while being compatible with adjacent
or neighboring land uses.
(e) Traffic impact report. A traffic impact report (TIR) meeting all
requirements of § 153-42, Study contents, shall be included
with all master plan submissions.
[1] Major changes (as defined in this article) to the approved
master plan require submission of a revised TIR. This shall
occur prior to an application to amend the master plan.
[2] Subsequent land development plans that deviate from the
master plan analysis shall submit a revised TIR.
[3] Vehicular access.
[a] For tracts that are not subdivided or are subdivided
into two or three lots, access point(s) shall be as
determined by the TIR and may utilize a shared
driveway or internal public road.
[b] For tracts subdivided into four or more lots, access to
lots shall be from an internal public roadway.
(f) Architectural renderings. Renderings of representative
buildings and landmark features illustrating the view from
streetscapes within and adjacent to the site shall be submitted
to ensure that the development will meet the architectural
standards of § 175-40.9L, Streetscapes.
(5) Master plan amendments. Any major changes to an approved
master plan must submit an amended plan that meets the
procedural and content requirements presented herein. A major
change includes any of the following:
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:856
(a) Any increase in the approved residential or commercial area
percentage.
(b) Any significant changes in the approved densities for
residential areas.
(c) Any significant changes in the commercial or industrial floor
area ratios.
(d) Any decrease in the approved open space area percentage.
(e) A change in the location of external vehicular access points or
interior roadway locations.
(f) Any other change determined by the Township to be
significant.
D. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In the MXD2, land and structures may be used only
for the uses shown in Table 1, MXD2 Uses. The uses must be
combined with an existing use or, if new construction, combined
with a use permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses. Conditional uses are shown in Table 1, MXD2
Uses.
(a) Drive-through uses.
[1] All drive-through uses must be clearly shown on the
master plan for the site.
[2] To minimize disturbance to residential units located in
mixed-use structures, drive-through uses are only
permitted to operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
[3] Drive-through uses shall be sited in a manner that
minimizes disturbance to adjacent residential uses and all
related buildings, lanes, and drive aisles.
[4] Drive-through uses shall not compromise pedestrian
convenience, safety, or detract from the overall walkability
of the MXD2 development.
[5] Drive-through lanes shall be constructed as follows:
[a] Vehicles must not overflow into adjacent streets,
parking areas, or drive aisles.
[b] Drive-through lanes shall be shielded in a manner that
eliminates vehicle headlight glare into adjoining
properties and roadways.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:857
[c] Each vehicle stacking space shall be a minimum of 20
feet in length.
[d] Stacking lanes shall not extend onto adjoining
property unless the owner of the drive-through site
obtains a written easement from the adjoining
landowner to construct and use improvements upon
the adjoining property, and to maintain, repair,
replace, or remove such improvements. The easement
shall be recorded prior to approval of any related land
development plan.
Table 1
MXD2 Uses
§ 175-40.9D(3)
Permitted
Uses
Accessory
Uses
Conditional
Uses
Special
Uses1
Prohibited
Uses1
Same
permitted
uses as C-2;
with the
addition of:
Apartments
Townhouses
Customary
uses
accessory
to
permitted
uses
Drivethrough
uses
NOTES:
1 There are no special exceptions or specifically prohibited
uses in this zoning district.
E. Area and bulk regulations. Area and bulk regulations not specified
herein shall be per the underlying C-2 zoning district.
(1) Minimum lot size. All properties shall have a minimum lot size of 20
acres.
(2) Maximum height.
(a) The maximum permitted building height shall be 60 feet.
(b) Landmark features.
[1] One landmark feature may be included on the site.
[2] The maximum height of a landmark feature, measured to
the top of the feature, shall be as follows:
[a] Freestanding structures: 75 feet.
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:858
[b] Building-mounted: 20 feet above the mean height
between the eaves and ridge of a pitched roof, or the
highest point of a flat roof.
(c) The height of all proposed buildings and landmark features
shall be listed in a table on the master plan.
(3) Maximum building size.
(a) No single building within the development may exceed a sixtythousand-
square-foot footprint for the ground floor area.
(b) No single building within the development may exceed a floor
area ratio (FAR) of 0.15 for total floor area.
(c) Structures used primarily for parking shall be exempt from the
maximum building size requirement.
(4) Residential density.
(a) The development must include at least 6.25 dwelling units per
acre.
(b) The maximum residential density shall be 12.5 dwelling units
per acre.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Mix of uses. The amount of ground floor area devoted to
nonresidential uses shall be no less than 75% of the total building
ground floor area on the site.
(7) Setbacks.
(a) Side and rear yards. The side and rear yard building setbacks
adjacent to nonresidential zoning districts and undeveloped
residential zoning districts shall meet the C-2 setbacks for side
and rear yards adjacent to commercial and industrial zoning
districts as specified in § 175-17D, Table 4 (C-2 Area and Bulk
Regulations). All other side and rear yard setbacks shall be as
follows:
Structure Type
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)
Residential 30 50
Nonresidential or mixeduse
75 75
[1] Where required setbacks are 30 feet or greater, a thirtyfoot-
wide buffering strip shall be provided along the
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:859
property line and must include, at a minimum, the
following planting ratios:
Required Plantings Per 100 Linear Feet of Buffer
Type Number
Canopy trees 2
Understory trees 5
Evergreen trees 5
Shrubs1 15
1 50% of required shrubs must be evergreens to ensure
an effective all-season buffer.
To allow design flexibility, the following exchange ratios
may be utilized:
Substitution Equal To
2 understory 1 canopy
1 canopy 2 understory
2 evergreen 1 canopy
1 evergreen 5 shrubs
1 understory 3 shrubs
[2] Plantings must meet the following minimum standards:
[a] Canopy trees: minimum two-and-one-half- to threeinch
caliper measured at breast height (54 inches
above grade).
[b] Understory and evergreen trees: minimum eight feet
to 10 feet in height or two- to two-and-one-half-inch
caliper measured at breast height (54 inches above
grade).
[c] Shrubs: 24 inches to 30 inches in diameter.
[3] All plantings shall be selected to be compatible with the
environmental conditions they will be exposed to. Any
plant material that does not survive must be replaced
within one year.
[4] At least 50% of new plantings shall be native to the region.
Native vegetation shall include, but need not be limited to,
plant materials set forth in Chapter 175, Appendix C:
Plants Native to Central Pennsylvania.
[5] To ensure adequate headlight screening in reduced side
and rear yard setback areas, a plan for the use of
mounding and/or ornamental grasses to supplement the
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:860
required tree and shrub plantings must be approved by the
Township.
[6] Parking is permitted in the side or rear yard area as
follows:
[a] Parking in the side or rear yard areas adjacent to
existing residential uses is only permitted in the
setback areas established for nonresidential or mixeduse
structures. If parking is proposed in side or rear
yard areas, the parking setback shall be 59 feet from
the property lines.
[b] If parking is proposed in any side or rear yard areas,
the overall site must include two or more
enhancements, listed in Chapter 175, Attachment 10,
Appendix D: Approved Landscaping and Architectural
Enhancements.
[c] If parking is proposed in any side or rear yard areas,
buffering shall be required along the property lines in
accordance with the planting schedule in Subsection
E(7)(a)[1] of these regulations.
(b) Interior lot lines. No minimum setbacks for internal lot lines
are established herein. Such setbacks will be established by
the Board of Supervisors for each subdivision or land
development plan submitted pursuant to an approved master
plan. This allows the designer flexibility in the placement of
structures. However, a proposal using minimal setbacks must
clearly establish the sufficiency of the design pattern for which
the minimal setbacks are proposed.
(8) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum impervious
coverage permitted under the MXD2 regulations is 75% of the site.
The limit may be increased up to an additional 5% of the site area
with the use of green roofs or pervious pavement systems, which
shall be included in the master plan and utilized as follows:
(a) Green roofs.
[1] The green roof area may be deducted from the total
impervious coverage of the site under the following
conditions:
[a] The roof and building structure shall be designed and
sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and having previous
experience designing and constructing green roofs.
Retrofit roof designs shall be sealed by a structural
engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:861
[b] The roof shall be accessible for maintenance purposes
and may be available for limited access by building
occupants for their enjoyment.
[c] Plants selected for the green roof shall be native to
Pennsylvania, compatible with the growing region,
and generally drought tolerant.
[d] The building and/or property owner must submit a
signed and recorded maintenance agreement for the
green roof with the Township.
(b) Pervious pavement systems.
[1] Use of pervious pavement systems may be deducted from
total impervious coverage of the site under the following
conditions:
[a] The pervious pavement system shall be designed by a
competent person or firm with previous experience in
design and construction of such systems.
[b] The applicant must demonstrate appropriate water
table depth and sufficient soil infiltration below
pervious pavement systems to the Township Engineer.
[c] Pervious pavement systems shall be allowed in
parking lots, sidewalks, patios, and bicycle/pedestrian
paths, but will not be allowed in pavement areas
where heavy truck or bus traffic is expected, or on
slopes greater than 5%.
[d] The stone storage layer must have sufficient void
capacity to accommodate at least twice the two-year
storm volume.
[e] Pervious pavement systems shall be designed with an
overflow system in accordance with the latest version
of the PA DEP Best Management Practices Manual.
[f] Seal coating of the pervious pavement system shall
not be permitted.
[g] Pervious pavement systems must be cleaned at least
once every two years.
[h] The property owner must submit a signed and
recorded maintenance agreement for the pervious
pavement system with the Township.
F. Design and landscaping controls.
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:862
(1) Properties developed under the MXD2 regulations shall be exempt
from § 175-44A, C and D. Section 175-44B, E and G remain
applicable with the underlying C-2 zoning.
(2) Community assets.
(a) Hedgerows, waterways, historic sites, scenic points, views, and
vistas and other community assets and landmarks should be
preserved.
(3) Signage. All signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 140,
Signs.
(a) A signage plan and renderings showing thematic elements
shall be submitted with the master plan for the site.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Lighting fixtures for interior streets, sidewalks, and bikeways shall
be owned and maintained by the property owner.
(6) For emergency access, the site must provide a minimum of two
vehicular connections to off-site public roadways. Alternatively, site
access can be provided by a boulevard-style entrance/exit which
contains two cartways separated by a median.
G. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) Off-street parking shall be in accordance with § 153-38, Off-street
parking regulations, unless a different proposal is specified as part
of the required parking study submitted with the master plan.
(2) On-site shared parking. If the use of shared parking is proposed,
the following method shall be applied. If the site contains existing
parking that is intended to remain, this method must be used to
verify whether additional parking is required. Shared parking shall
be calculated as follows:
(a) Step 1: Identify the required base parking for each land use, as
specified in § 153-38. The following alternate base parking
minimums are permitted in MXD2 developments:
[1] Residential dwelling units equals 1.5 spaces per unit.
[a] Affordable housing units with less than three
bedrooms equals 1.0 space per unit.
[2] Restaurants equals 14.9 spaces per one-thousand-grosssquare-
foot floor area.
(b) Step 2: Determine peak parking requirements by multiplying
the base parking for each land use by the corresponding
percentage for each of the time periods shown in the following
table:
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:863
On-Site Shared Parking Demand
Weekdays
Use 0800-17001700-2100 2100-24000000-0800
Office 100% 10% 5% 2%
Retail 95% 75% 20% 2%
Hotel/motel 80% 80% 100% 100%
Restaurant 60% 100% 80% 10%
Entertainment/
recreation
40% 100% 80% 5%
Residential 60% 70% 95% 100%
Weekends
Use 0800-17001700-2100 2100-24000000-0800
Office 30% 5% 5% 2%
Retail 100% 70% 30% 2%
Hotel/motel 60% 80% 100% 100%
Restaurant 45% 100% 30% 2%
Entertainment/
recreation
100% 95% 90% 20%
Residential 60% 70% 100% 100%
(c) Step 3: Total the peak parking requirements for each time
period.
(d) Step 4: Identify the highest total peak parking requirement to
determine the minimum number of parking spaces for the
overall site.
(3) The master plan must include at least 95% of the required parking
spaces as calculated, whether based on the standard or shared
parking requirements.
(4) Parking analysis. The developer shall conduct parking studies as
the phased development of the site occurs in order to refine the
required parking ratios and time-based utilization rates for the
aggregated uses so that sufficient parking spaces are provided for
the future phases.
(a) The first study shall be submitted with the land development
plan (LDP) that includes the building(s) that constitute more
than 40% of the entire floor area included on the master plan,
provided that at least 20% of the floor area included on the
master plan has been completed and is occupied. If the initial
LDP includes 40% or more of the entire floor area included on
the master plan or less than 20% of the floor area is occupied,
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:864
the first study shall be submitted when the first of the below
thresholds are met.
(b) Studies shall also be submitted with LDPs that meet the sixtypercent
and eighty-percent floor area thresholds, provided that
at least 30% or 40%, respectively, of the floor area included on
the master plan has been completed and is occupied.
(c) Should a parking study indicate that the required parking
ratios and time-based utilization rates for the uses included on
the approved master plan will not provide sufficient parking for
the future phases of the MXD2 site, the developer shall submit
a revised/amended master plan to provide additional parking
spaces or reduce the proposed total building floor area to align
with the available parking proposed.
(d) Should a parking study indicate that the required parking
ratios and time-based utilization rates for the uses included on
the approved master plan have overestimated the parking
needs for the future phases of the MXD2 site, the developer
may submit a revised/amended master plan to align the
required number of parking spaces with the proposed total
building floor area and mix of uses.
H. Off-street loading regulations. All loading areas shall be in accordance
with § 175-47, Loading regulations, unless specified herein.
(1) Loading areas shall be depicted on the master plan. Loading areas
should not be located on primary streets or drives. Loading areas
may be shared by multiple businesses. Loading areas may be
colocated with parking lot drive aisles, provided that they do not
impede traffic flow.
(2) Loading and unloading shall occur only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
I. Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
(1) All mixed-use developments shall provide for bicycle access and
pedestrian sidewalks that connect to all suitable adjacent
properties and neighborhoods as a means of promoting multimodal
connectivity to and from the site. When it is most appropriate to
combine bicycle and pedestrian facilities, as determined by the
municipality, then the combined shared use path shall meet
American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) guidelines.
(2) Bicycle racks. Bicycle racks must be securely attached to concrete
footings, a concrete sidewalk, or another comparably secure
concrete surface, and made to withstand severe weather and
permanent exposure to the elements.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:865
(3) Bicycle parking spaces. All bicycle parking spaces shall be provided
in the following manner:
(a) Spaces shall be located in a manner that protects bicycles and
automobiles from damage.
(b) Spaces should be accessible by climbing no more than one step
or traversing a slope in excess of 12%, and via a route designed
to minimize conflicts with motor vehicles and pedestrians.
(c) Spaces should be located where sufficiently visible by the
public and building users, except in the case of long-term
bicycle parking that is located in secured areas. If short-term
bicycle parking spaces are not visible from the street, signage
shall be used to direct cyclists to them.
(d) Spaces shall be well lit if accessible to the public or bicyclists
after dark.
(4) Required bicycle parking.
(a) All MXD2 developments must include both short-term and
long-term parking spaces for all habitable structures in
accordance with the following table:
Structure
Type
Required Short-
Term Bicycle
Parking Spaces
Required Long-
Term (Sheltered)
Bicycle Parking
Spaces
Residential 1 space per 10
dwelling units
1 space per 50
dwelling units
Nonresidential 1 space per 20,000
square feet of gross
floor area
1 space per 10,000
square feet of gross
floor area
(b) The master plan must include at least 95% of the required
bicycle parking spaces as calculated.
(c) Bicycle parking analysis. The developer shall conduct bicycle
parking studies as the phased development of the site occurs in
order to refine the required bicycle parking calculations so that
sufficient bicycle parking spaces are provided for the future
phases.
[1] The first study shall be submitted with the land
development plan (LDP) that includes the building(s) that
constitute more than 40% of the entire floor area included
on the master plan, provided that at least 20% of the floor
area included on the master plan has been completed and
is occupied. If the initial LDP includes 40% or more of the
entire floor area included on the master plan or less than
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:866
20% of the floor area is occupied, the first study shall be
submitted when the first of the below thresholds are met.
[2] Studies shall also be submitted with LDPs that meet the
sixty-percent and eighty-percent floor area thresholds,
provided that at least 30% or 40%, respectively, of the floor
area included on the master plan has been completed and
is occupied.
[3] Should a parking study indicate that the required bicycle
parking calculations for the uses included on the approved
master plan will not provide sufficient bicycle parking for
the future phases of the MXD2 site, the developer shall
submit a revised/amended master plan to provide
additional bicycle parking spaces or reduce the proposed
total building floor area to align with the available bicycle
parking proposed.
[4] Should the bicycle parking study indicate that the required
bicycle parking calculations for the uses included on the
approved master plan have overestimated the bicycle
parking needs for the future phases of the MXD2 site, the
developer may submit a revised/amended master plan to
align the required number of bicycle parking spaces with
the proposed total building floor area and mix of uses.
J. Affordable housing. The following requirements shall be included in the
plan notes for the master plan for the development, or the developer
and Township shall execute and record an affordable housing
development agreement.
(1) A minimum of 5% of the residential units in the development shall
be designated as affordable housing units for tenants earning less
than 65% of the area median income (AMI) for Centre County, as
determined annually by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
(a) If a tenant search for an affordable unit does not yield a
qualified tenant within 45 days, units may be rented to
individuals earning less than 80% of the AMI for Centre
County.
(2) The following incentives are available for developers electing to
provide more than the minimum required affordable housing, up to
an additional 5% of the total number of units proposed:
(a) One additional market-rate unit shall be permitted for every
one additional affordable housing unit provided.
[1] All additional units, whether market-rate or affordable,
shall be exempt from the maximum residential density
limit of 12.5 units/acre.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:867
(b) The impervious coverage limit of the site shall be increased by
an additional 1,500 square feet for each additional affordable
housing unit.
(3) The period for which the units shall remain affordable shall be at
least 50 years from the date of initial occupancy of a unit.
(4) The bedroom mix of affordable units shall be generally in the same
ratio as the bedroom mix of the market-rate units of the project.
(5) The development phasing plan shall provide that the affordable
units are not the last units constructed.
(6) Affordable housing units may differ from market-rate units in a
development with regard to interior amenities and gross floor area,
provided that:
(a) The differences, excluding differences related to building size
differentials, are not apparent in the general exterior
appearance of the development;
(b) The differences do not include insulation, windows, heating
systems, and other improvements related to the energy
efficiency and standard components.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) The developer/owner shall retain the services of a qualified entity
or employee to certify the income eligibility of prospective tenants.
Qualifications of the initial entity or employee shall be submitted to
the Township for review and approval with the master plan for the
development or with the affordable housing development
agreement.
(9) Rent for affordable housing units shall be no more than 30% of
qualified tenant's household-gross monthly income. Monthlyhousing
expenses shall be calculated as the sum total of the
monthly rent, plus the current utility allowance per the Housing
Authority of Centre County.
(10) Unit/household size pricing calculation. In calculating the rents,
the following maximum relationship between unit size and assumed
household size shall apply:
Unit Type Household Size
Efficiency units One-person household
One-bedroom units Two-person household
Two-bedroom units Three-person household
Three-bedroom units Four-person household
Four-bedroom units Five-person household
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:868
(11) Household size numbers used for price calculation will not be used
to determine maximum legal occupancy of a dwelling unit.
Maximum legal occupancy of a dwelling unit will be based on the
Centre Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance Code for
multifamily dwellings.
(12) Annual rent increases shall be limited to the percentage increase in
the median household income within the State College
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).
(13) The developer/owner shall annually submit to the Township a
summary of all activities related to the affordable housing units,
including but not limited to:
(a) Qualifications of entity or employee certifying the income
eligibility of prospective tenants.
(b) Units available to rent in previous 12 months.
(c) Applicants approved as tenants.
(d) Applicants determined to be ineligible as tenants.
(e) Rent increases for continuing tenants.
(f) Any evictions or other legal actions taken by or against
tenants.
(14) The Township shall review, or engage a qualified entity to review,
the developer/owner's annual submittal of a summary of all
activities related to the affordable housing units. If the review
determines a tenant was overcharged the developer/owner shall
refund the excess to the tenant.
(15) The Township, or a designated qualified entity, reserves the right to
audit the developer/owner's records of all activities related to the
affordable housing units. Such audits shall not occur more
frequently than quarterly. If an audit determines that a tenant was
overcharged, the developer/owner shall refund the excess to the
tenant.
(16) Parkland credit for affordable housing. The parkland requirement
shall be waived for the number of affordable housing units
provided.
K. Public gathering places.
(1) All MXD2 developments shall include a public gathering place that
encompasses an area of no less than 2% of the total site area.
(2) Public gathering places shall be reserved by an easement, in a
manner and form acceptable for recording by the Centre County
Recorder of Deeds, between the developer(s) and the Township
that allows public use of the space for a minimum of 10 years.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:869
(3) Public gathering places may be used to fulfill a portion of the
parkland requirements of § 153-34, Public use and service areas.
The following may receive credit:
(a) The land area of the public gathering place.
(b) The cost of the construction of the public gathering place.
(c) The estimated cost of maintenance and operations of the public
gathering place for a ten-year period.
(d) The estimated cost of sponsoring public celebrations for a tenyear
period.
(4) Public gathering places shall be located central to the development
and not within 250 feet of adjacent properties. Exceptions shall be
permitted as follows:
(a) Two hundred feet from adjacent properties with the
installation of a sound-attenuating fence.
(b) One hundred fifty feet with the installation of a soundattenuating
fence and a minimum ten-foot forested buffer strip
along existing residential uses between the public gathering
place(s) and adjacent properties.
(5) If the proposed development includes amenities such as fountains,
gardens, courtyards, or others, they should be located within a
public gathering place. Renderings of all amenities shall be
provided with the master plan.
(6) Public celebrations. The developer may provide a proposal to
sponsor public events to be held on the public gathering place, or
elsewhere on the MXD2 site. All such proposals shall be submitted
with the master plan and must be approved by the Township Board
of Supervisors.
(a) If the public gathering place includes private drives or
driveways that may be closed for public celebrations,
alternative access routes shall be illustrated on the master
plan.
(7) (Reserved)
L. Streetscapes.
(1) Building layout and orientation in the MXD2 should provide an
atmosphere and environment that is walkable and provides a
pedestrian scale. Renderings shall be submitted to the Township
illustrating the view of the buildings from the streetscape.
(a) Buildings shall be located next to the sidewalk along primary
streets to create a town center environment.
§ 175-40.9 PATTON CODE § 175-40.9
169:870
(b) Building facades are an integral component of the streetscape.
Buildings shall be constructed with materials and/or
treatments that create a unifying architectural theme.
Renderings shall be submitted to the Township illustrating the
view of the buildings from the streetscape.
(c) The MXD2 shall create an environment that encourages active
human engagement and is pedestrian, child, and family
friendly. Amenities in the streetscapes will include pedestrian
lighting, a central public space where people may gather,
street trees, planters, and benches/seating. The amenities shall
be included in the streetscape renderings. From the
renderings a schedule of amenities will be developed and
included upon the master plan.
(d) The developer may propose other amenities that are not
already noted above if such amenities are consistent in
character and purpose with the overall development plan.
(2) Parking in the town center should be provided in a variety of
locations, including on-street and off-street. The overall design
should be cohesive and allow for an optimum mix and usability of
all the spaces in such a way to promote viable retail interests while
maintaining a pedestrian scale and public spaces. Off-street
parking is encouraged at the rear of the buildings to minimize large
areas for specific uses (such as parking) in the public viewshed.
(3) Other amenities. The developer is encouraged to incorporate the
following features into the MXD2 development:
(a) Location(s) for food trucks for regular business and special
events.
(b) Cellular phone/data facilities as building-mounted equipment
and/or a distributed antenna system integrated with other
street infrastructure.
(c) Wireless Internet service in businesses and common areas.
§ 175-40.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-40.9
169:871

ARTICLE IX
Supplemental Regulations
§ 175-41. General regulations.
A. Visibility at intersections. The following shall apply to all:
(1) On a corner lot or at a point of entry on a public road, nothing shall
be erected, placed or allowed to grow in a manner which obscures
vision as follows: above the height of 2 1/2 feet measured from the
center line grades of the intersecting streets; and within the area
bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points on these street lines 25 feet from their intersection.
B. Stripping of topsoil, excavation of clay, sand, gravel or rock. Soil or sod
may be removed only under the following circumstances:
(1) As part of the construction, grading or alterations of an approved
building or development site, in connection with normal lawn
preparation and maintenance on the lot from which such soil or sod
is removed, in connection with the construction or alteration of a
street and as part of a recognized agricultural practice if such
practice is conducted so as to create no erosion or other
conservation hazard.
(2) Removal of soil or rock in excess of that for approved building or
site development shall be allowed only under special permit from
the Board of Supervisors, such permit to define any reclamation
procedures (regrading, reseeding, etc.) necessary during or at the
conclusion of such removal operation.
(3) Dumping, deposition or filling with refuse, riffraff, tree stumps,
building debris, soil, rocks, etc. shall be prohibited except in those
areas so designated by the Township, in accord with a previously
approved building or site development plan, in keeping with
recognized agricultural practices or under special permit granted
by the Township Supervisors, such permit to define conditions
under which approval is granted.
C. Exceptions to maximum height requirements. [Amended 8-13-1986
by Ord. No. 86-213; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-354; 5-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-400; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-586]
(1) In Rural, Commercial and Industrial Districts, the maximum height
requirements shall not apply to the following: barns and silos,
belfries, bulkheads, chimneys, church spires, domes, monuments,
observation towers, skylights, smokestacks, utility poles and
towers, ventilators, water tanks, windmills and solar energy
systems, provided that:
(a) They are erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose they are to serve; and
§ 175-41 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-41
169:873
(b) If over 45 feet in height, they shall not exceed a height equal to
their setback distance from any property line.
(2) The maximum height for telecommunications towers and antennas
shall be in accordance with the requirements of § 175-48.1,
Telecommunications facilities.
(3) In the Low-Density Residential District (R-2), antennas and
supportive structures on residential dwellings for private
noncommercial amateur purposes, including but not limited to ham
radios and citizen band radios, may exceed the maximum height
requirements for buildings but in no instance shall they exceed a
fixed height of 45 feet or, for crank-up or variable height antennas,
an extended height of 60 feet, provided that:
(a) They are erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose they are to serve.
(b) They shall not exceed a height equal to their setback distance
from any property line.
(c) The height of antennas mounted on a building shall be
measured from ground level.
D. Outdoor storage prohibition. Junkyards as defined by this chapter shall
hereafter be permitted only in the I-1 Industrial District.
E. Farm regulations. Agriculture, farmhouses and usual farm buildings
shall be permitted without restriction except as follows: the minimum
size of a farm shall be considered as 10 acres; farm buildings shall not
be constructed closer than 50 feet to a front property line; no manure
storage shall be established closer than 100 feet to any property line;
there shall be no more than one additional dwelling for each 10 acres of
farm; all other new construction shall also conform to setback
requirements; and mushroom farms are permitted as an agricultural
use, by special exception in an R-1 District.
F. Sale of farm products. The display and sale of farm products in R-1, R-2
and C-1 Districts shall be permitted provided that: a setback of 30 feet
is observed for all buildings; parking space for at least three cars shall
be provided behind the highway right-of-way line and the sale of farm
products shall be conducted from a portable stand, dismounted at the
end of the growing season (April 1 to December 1).
G. Location of satellite dish antennas. In all residential districts except
R-1, satellite dish antennas four feet in diameter or larger are
prohibited from being placed in the front yard. [Amended 9-11-1991
by Ord. No. 274]
H. Family care, group homes and halfway houses/rehabilitation centers.
§ 175-41 PATTON CODE § 175-41
169:874
§ 175-42. Procedures and criteria for conditional uses.
(1) No family care group home or halfway house/rehabilitation center
shall be allowed unless it is certified by, and meets all regulations of
appropriate local, state or federal agency(ies).
(2) Not more than one group home or halfway house/rehabilitation
center shall be allowed per block face.
(3) Not more than one group home or halfway house/rehabilitation
center shall be allowed per block face.
I. Minimum lot size for on-lot sewage disposal. Lot size in all districts with
on-site sewage disposal shall not be less than one acre. [Amended
9-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-222]
J. Height limitation for flagpoles. In all districts the maximum height for a
flagpole shall be equivalent to the maximum building height. [Added
5-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-400]
A. § 175-1002.1. Prerequisites for approval of conditional use.
(1) It shall be required that prior to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, a suitable site plan shall be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission for review and approval.
(2) The site plan shall be submitted through the Township Secretary to
the Planning Commission at least 20 days prior to its next
scheduled meeting and shall contain:
(a) A site plan showing the overall development scheme, including
proposed site layout, existing zoning of the site and
surrounding properties, parking facilities, traffic flow patterns
and control devices, access to all adjacent streets and alleys
with traffic flow patterns and existing and proposed traffic
control devices, a list of the type of establishments to be
located on the site and their approximate floor areas,
landscaping and paving plans, method of water runoff control,
plans for water supply and sewage treatment, the location and
types of fences or walls and signs on the property and the
phases for development.
(b) The submitted plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission which may require changes or additions or may
recommend to the Township Supervisors that the conditional
use permit application be denied as not being in the best
interest of the Township. Recommendations to the Township
Supervisors shall be accompanied by a written statement
stating the reasons for the recommendations.
(c) If the Planning Commission requires changes or additions to
the site plan but does not recommend denial of the application,
§ 175-41 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-42
169:875
the applicant shall make such corrections or additions and
shall submit a final plan to the Planning Commission for review.
(d) The final plan shall reflect the changes required by the
Planning Commission and shall contain the following:
improvements to be made, including architectural plans,
elevations, sections, site layout and landscaping plans,
locations showing parking, landscaping and building to scale,
zoning setbacks, all adjacent streets and alleys with proposed
traffic control devices (such as turning bays, accelerationdeceleration
lanes, access to adjacent roadways, etc.)
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, completely dimensioned parking and
site traffic control devices shown. A statement showing likely
improvements to be undertaken during the first phase of
construction, which are to be completed within one year from
the issuance of a building permit, as well as those being built at
a later specified date shall be provided. Engineering drawings
showing water runoff control, sewage treatment and all other
utilities installations shall also be included.
(3) When it has been determined by the Township Planning
Commission that the plans under these sections are in conformity
with the requirements and intent of this chapter, three copies of the
final plan shall be submitted to the Township Supervisors. When
any and are changes required by the Supervisors have been made
and the Supervisors approve the final plan, the Supervisors shall
then issue the conditional use permit. All development shall be
made according to the approved final plan before an occupancy
permit will be issued. Any changes or deviations from the approved
final plan or other requirements of this chapter shall be approved
by the Planning Commission and the Board of Township
Supervisors subject to the revocation of the zoning and building
permits. Any decision may, upon the election of the applicant, be
appealed to the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Criteria, conditions and modifications. A conditional use permit may be
granted by the Township Supervisors upon recommendations of the
Township Planning Commission subject to the following:
(1) No conditional use shall be approved unless the Township
Supervisors find the proposed conditional use:
(a) Complies with all requirements in this article.
(b) Is consistent with the general intent of this chapter in § 175-2.
(c) Is designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses and
the area of its locations.
(2) In considering an application for a conditional use, the Township
Supervisors shall consider and may impose conditions or
modifications concerning the following development features:
§ 175-42 PATTON CODE § 175-42
169:876
(a) Size and location of site.
(b) Street and road capacities in the area.
(c) Ingress and egress to adjoining public streets.
(d) Location and amount of off-street parking.
(e) Internal traffic circulation system.
(f) Fencing, screening and landscaped separations.
(g) Density, building bulk and location.
(h) Usable open space.
(i) Lighting.
(j) Noise, air pollution, water pollution and other environmental
influences.
C. No approved conditional use shall be modified, structurally enlarged or
expanded in ground area unless the site plan is amended and approved
in accordance with procedure applicable to initial approval of the
conditional use permit.
D. Buffer yards. [Added 7-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-291]
(1) Buffer yards are required, as applicable, on each lot (or lease area)
or land development area independent of adjoining uses or
adjoining buffers.
(2) If a developed use increases in intensity or changes, increases in
the buffer yards may be required by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Consideration should be given to utilizing existing vegetation as an
element in the application of buffer yards.
(4) Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or
structures. All except side buffer yards of interior lots may be
crossed by access driveways and utility easements, provided that
such are not more than 25 feet in width at the point intersection.
(5) Where a required buffer yard is wider than the setback(s) required
in the district, the wider dimension will govern.
(6) All plantings shall be selected to be compatible with the
environmental conditions they will be exposed to. Any plant
material that does not survive must be replaced within one year.
The determination of the buffer yards shall be made through the
use of Tables 3, 4 and 5, as provided in § 175-40A, Environmental
design. All uses within each use classification would be considered
to have an equal impact on neighboring uses. Impacts resulting
from greater intensity uses on adjacent parcels would include:
noise, dust, lighting glare, heat, traffic, building bulk and height,
§ 175-42 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-42
169:877
§ 175-43. Open space regulations.
An area sufficient to conform to the density requirements of the zoning
district of this chapter where such land is located shall be reserved for
park, woodland, conservation playground, lake or other suitable recreation
purpose. Such reservation shall be made by any of the following procedures:
§ 175-44. Districts design and landscaping controls for R-3,
Commercial (C), Office Buffer (OB) and Industrial (I) Districts.
[Amended 8-12-1987 by Ord. No. 87-221; 11-18-1998 by Ord. No.
98-358; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-438]
storage areas and impervious surface areas. The intensity of
adjoining uses must also be determined from the classification
system. Once the land use classifications are determined, the
appropriate buffer yard can then be applied to the land
development.
A. The acceptance of the deed to such land by the Township, by the school
district or by the Park and Recreation Board.
B. The sale, lease or other disposition of such property to a private or
nonprofit corporation chartered under the laws of Pennsylvania to
administer and maintain the facilities subject to an acceptable deed
restriction limiting eventual disposition of said property for the
purposes stated in the articles of incorporation.
C. The inclusion of a portion of said property in the deed descriptions of
the individual purchasers of subdivision subject to an acceptable deed
restriction limiting eventual disposition of that portion to be used for
the purposes outlined in the plan submitted to the Township Planning
Commission. Access rights for all residents within the development
shall be guaranteed.
A. Screening (C-1 and I Districts). A planted visual barrier or landscape
screen shall be provided between any district and contiguous
residentially zoned districts. This screen shall be composed of plants
and trees arranged to form both a low-level and a high-level screen. The
high-level screen shall consist of trees planted with specimens no
smaller than five feet in height and planted at intervals of not more than
10 feet. The low-level screen shall consist of shrubs or hedges planted
at an initial height of not less than two feet and spaced at intervals of
not more than five feet. The low-level screen shall be placed in
alternating rows to produce a more effective barrier. All plants not
surviving three years after planting must be replaced at the expense of
the property owner. The Supervisors, at their option, may require
construction of a visual barrier to properly protect adjacent residential
areas.
B. Storage (C, OB and I Districts). All storage shall be completely screened
from view from any public right-of-way and any residential district
§ 175-42 PATTON CODE § 175-44
169:878
which abuts the district. Screening shall consist of an evergreen
planting or an architectural screen. All organic rubbish or storage shall
be contained in an airtight, vermin-proof container which shall also be
screened from view from any public right-of-way or abutting residential
district. The exterior storage of tractor trailers which supply or service
establishments in the district shall be prohibited.
C. Landscaping (R-3, C, OB and I Districts).
(1) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings, other
structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage area shall be planted with an all-season ground
cover and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs in accordance
with an overall landscape plan as approved by the Planning
Commission. All sites and parcels of land adjacent to a public street
or dedicated service roadway shall maintain a landscaped strip
adjacent to the right-of-way of at least 15 feet. This area shall not
be used for buildings, parking spaces, aisles or storage and only
approved driveways shall be permitted to be constructed on or
across this strip. The right-of-way of any public street, highway or
service road shall not be used for any use incidental to the
adjoining property.
(2) The landscape plan shall indicate all landscaped areas, plant and
landscaping materials to be used, a replacement program for
nonsurviving plants and a satisfactory method for maintaining and
irrigating all landscaped areas.
(3) The Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors shall reserve
the right to include any additional requirements to the landscape
plan that they feel is necessary to protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(4) The developer shall be responsible and obligated to carry out the
approved landscape plan in an expedient manner.
(5) The developer and/or property owner shall be responsible and
obligated to carry out the approved landscape plan in an expedient
manner and maintain the property on a continuing basis consistent
with the approved landscape plan.
D. Access and traffic control.
(1) For C-2, I-1 and I-RD Districts. All access to any major road shall be
by an indirect means. No properties adjacent to a major road shall
have direct access to the roadway. The means of indirect access
shall be either by access to a public street which connects to the
major road or by a service road parallel to the major road. All
service roadways shall be dedicated to the public and shall have a
minimum right-of-way of 40 feet. Service roadways shall be
required to allow access by their extension to adjoining properties'
lines. The service roadways may be permitted to be connected to
§ 175-44 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-44
169:879
§ 175-45. Slope controls.
the major roadway provided that the distance from other points of
access (including public streets) is not less than 500 feet and where
the sight distance of oncoming traffic from both directions (except
in the case of divided highways) is not less than 500 feet.
(2) For C and I Districts. The developer must submit a circulation plan
for all parcels of land adjacent to a major road showing the design
of all service roadways, the driveways to the service roadway and
all access points to all public streets or highways. The Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors shall reserve the right to
require any changes to the circulation plan submitted and to
require any additional traffic control devices and accelerationdeceleration
lanes that are deemed necessary to protect the safety
and welfare of the public. The circulation plan must be approved
before a building permit can be issued. The developer shall be
responsible for the construction of all traffic control and access
requirements according to the approved circulation plan.
E. Interior circulation for C, OB and I Districts.
(1) Interior drives shall be designed so as to prevent blockage of
vehicles entering or leaving the site. Drives may be one-way or twoway
as approved by the Planning Commission and Township
Supervisors.
(2) All interior drives shall be designed in relation to the parking areas
and pedestrian circulation routes to minimize the conflicts between
parking, pedestrians and vehicle circulation.
(3) Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in size and shall
be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking
facilities.
(4) Interior circulation (for C and I Districts).
F. (Reserved)213
G. Shopping cart storage. Any establishment which furnishes carts or
mobile baskets as an adjunct to shopping shall provide definite areas
within the required parking space areas for storage of said carts. Each
designed storage area shall be clearly marked for storage of shopping
carts.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals stated in § 175-2, the
purpose of this section is to prevent the erection of dwellings in areas
213. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Lighting, was repealed 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-357.
§ 175-44 PATTON CODE § 175-45
169:880
unsuitable for building sites; to minimize danger to public health by
protecting watersheds; to discourage erosion of soils by maintaining
adequate foliage cover on hills; and to promote the perpetuation of
open space on hillsides; to prevent erection of buildings on floodplain
areas (See Article V).
B. Designation of area. Areas to be regulated under this section shall be
indicated generally on a topographical map maintained by the Planning
Commission and available to the Zoning Officer. The general areas
where slope conditions appear to exist shall be indicated on this map.
C. Procedures.
(1) Any person desiring to change or in any way modify an existing use
of land in an area subject to these controls shall supply a statement
to the Planning Commission signifying their intentions that the
intended use of the land will be a use permitted by these
regulations.
(2) If such change in use involved the construction of any building, the
applicant shall, in addition, furnish the Zoning Officer with a
statement prepared by a registered civil engineer or surveyor to
the effect that the proposed building will not be erected on any land
where the percentage of grade exceeds 25%.
D. Use regulations. The following uses are the only uses permitted in areas
subject to slope controls:
(1) Parks and outdoor recreational uses shall be permitted so long as
their activities do not conflict with the use of the land as a
watershed.
(2) Buildings constructed in accordance with the regulations of the
applicable zoning district, provided that no portion of the building
is constructed on a slope whose grade exceeds 25%.
(3) Tree farming, forestry and other farm uses, subject to the farm
regulations in § 175-27 of this chapter, when conducted in
conformance with conservation practices that ensure adequate
protection against soil erosion.
E. Special exceptions. Single-family residences or a portion thereof may
be constructed on a slope which grade exceeds 25% if the building is
constructed in such a manner which does not disturb the existing grade
and natural soil conditions. An applicant requesting such a special
exception shall comply with the requirements of § 175-65C of this
chapter. In addition, the applicant shall supply the Zoning Hearing
Board with the following:
(1) Plans of the property indicating existing grades, with contour lines
at two-foot intervals and proposed grades.
§ 175-45 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-45
169:881
§ 175-46. Off-street parking regulations. [Amended 7-25-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-254]
Off-Street parking regulations are contained in Patton Township Ordinance
No. 81, as amended, commonly referred to as the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.214
§ 175-47. Loading regulations.
(2) Plans indicating proposed paved areas, storm drainage facilities
and ground cover, as well as trees and ornamental shrub locations.
(3) Plans, elevations and sections.
(4) A statement prepared by a registered architect stating an
explanation of the building methods to be used in overcoming
foundation and other structural problems created by slope
conditions, preserving the natural watersheds and preventing soil
erosion.
A. Loading and unloading space for one vehicle shall be at least 12 feet
wide, 45 feet long and shall have at least a fourteen-foot vertical
clearance; loading and unloading spaces shall have paved surfaces to
provide safe and convenient access during all seasons; loading facilities
shall not be constructed within an area bounded by a triangle 25 feet on
each side, measured from the joining point of street lines, in such a
manner as to obstruct vision. Required off-street parking spaces shall
not be used for loading and unloading purposes except during hours
when business operations are suspended.
B. Required off-street loading berths for new construction, enlargement or
change in use. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-384]
Use Floor Area Required Berths
Retail stores, commercial
recreation, eating and all
others unless specified
First 5,000 square
feet or fraction
thereof
1
Each additional
20,000 square feet or
fraction thereof
1
Office building First 10,000 square
feet
1
Each 20,000 square
feet additional
1
Automotive Sales Length 55 feet 1
Places of assembly 1
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-45 PATTON CODE § 175-47
169:882
§ 175-48. Site plan requirements and procedures.
Use Floor Area Required Berths
Funeral parlor First 2,400 square
feet
1
Each additional 5,000
square feet
1
Required off-street parking space shall not be used for loading and
unloading purposes except during hours when business operations are
suspended.
Required off-street loading berths for new construction, enlargement
or change in use.
Manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, testing, assembly
or repair
First 3,000 square
feet
1
Next 7,000 square
feet
1
Each additional
20,000 square feet
1
Wholesale uses First 2,000 square
feet
1
Next 8,000 square
feet
1
Each additional
10,000 square feet
1
All others 1
A. Purpose. To encourage the orderly physical development of the
Township throughout the compatible arrangement of buildings, offstreet
parking, lighting, drainage, ingress and egress on the site in a
manner that will promote safety and convenience for the public and
preserve property values to surrounding properties.
B. When required. Before a building permit is issued for the erection or
alteration of a structure or building or the occupancy of a lot, parcel,
property or properties or the excavation, filling, grading etc. of the site,
a suitable site plan shall be submitted and approved as set forth herein
by the Township Supervisors. No use permitted in a zoning district for
which a site plan is required other than a use existing at the time of
zoning of the applicable land shall be commenced until a suitable site
plan has been submitted and approved as set forth herein by the
Township Supervisors and all conditions of the site plan have been
satisfied. If any building used for commercial or industrial activity is
unoccupied or not used for a period of one year, its existing use after
the one year period shall be considered vacant and any new tenant or
use that subsequently occurs will be considered a change in use that
§ 175-47 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48
169:883
must conform to site plan requirements. [Amended 1-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-297]
C. Exceptions. Uses by right in the A-1, R-1 and R-2 Districts are hereby
expressly excepted from the provisions hereof. [Amended 9-11-1991
by Ord. No. 274]
D. Procedure. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No. 139]
(1) The site plan shall be submitted to the Township Planning
Commission through the Township Secretary 20 days before the
meeting at which the site plan will be considered. The submitted
plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall
make any necessary recommendations, in writing, within 30 days of
receipt. The developer shall then make such corrections to the plan
as required and shall then submit three copies of a final plan to the
Township Supervisors which indicates or consists of:
(2) Improvements to be made, including architectural plans,
elevations, sections, site layout and complete landscape plan
showing parking and landscaping to scale, zoning setbacks, all
adjacent streets and alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, completely
dimensioned parking layouts with all parking spaces shown.
(3) A statement showing likely improvements to be undertaken during
the first phase of construction, which are to be completed within
one year from the issuance of a building permit, as well as those
being built at a later specified date.
(4) When it has been determined by the Township Supervisors that
plans under these sections are in conformity with the requirements
of this chapter, then they shall notify the Zoning Officer to issue a
zoning permit simultaneously with the required building permit.
[Amended 8-12-1987 by Ord. No. 87-221]
E. Contents of the site plan. The property owner or agent shall submit four
copies of maps, drawings and materials necessary to meet the following
requirements.
(1) A site plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger.
(2) A site plan shall include a vicinity sketch at one inch equals 400
foot scale showing roads, buildings, land use, zoning and access
driveways within 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the site
plan.
(3) The boundaries, dimensions and legal description of the property
covered by the site plan shall be shown.
(4) The site plan shall be drawn upon a topographic survey map of the
area at a contour interval of not more than five feet. Contour
intervals of 20 feet may be acceptable for individual parcels of not
less than five acres intended for agricultural or open space uses, or
§ 175-48 PATTON CODE § 175-48
169:884
for one single-family dwelling. [Amended 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
139]
(5) The proposed use of the site shall be shown and the number of
required off-street parking spaces shall be listed. If the exact use is
not known at the time of site plan submittal, off-street parking shall
be calculated at one parking space for each 150 square feet of
gross floor area.
(6) The location of each existing and proposed structure shall be
shown. Each structure should show the number of stories, gross
floor area and entrance to the structure, in addition to required
setback lines.
(7) The location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb cuts,
aisles, off-street parking and loading spaces and walkways shall be
shown.
(8) The location, intensity, height and lighting direction of the
proposed lighting facilities shall be shown.
(9) The location and height of screening walls and fences shall be
shown and the materials to be used in their construction.
(10) The type of surfacing to be used on all parking and loading areas
shall be shown.
(11) The location and landscape schedule of all perimeter and interior
landscaping, including grass, trees and shrubs shall be shown with
size and plant names.
(12) A proposed stormwater management plan in conformance with
Chapter 147, Stormwater Management, and approved by the
Patton Township Engineers and reviewed by the Centre County
Conservation District. A proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan in accordance with 25 P.S. § 102, Erosion Control and
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection or its
designated agent. [Amended 7-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-171;
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330]
F. Conditions of approval. The Township Planning Commission shall find
that the following conditions been met before recommending approval:
(1) The proposed arrangement of buildings, off-street parking, access,
lighting, landscaping and drainage are compatible with adjacent
land uses.
(2) The vehicular ingress and egress and on-street circulation provides
for safe, efficient and convenient movement of traffic as well as
protection to the smooth and safe flow of traffic on the adjacent
roadway.
§ 175-48 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48
169:885
(3) There is provision for the safe movement of pedestrians within the
site.
(4) There is a sufficient mixture of grass, trees and shrubs within the
interior and on the perimeter (including public right-of-way) of the
site to provide a pleasant appearance to the public. Any part of the
site plan area not used for buildings, structures, parking or
accessways shall be landscaped with a mixture of grass, trees and
shrubs.
(5) All outdoor trash storage areas shall be screened.
G. Assurance of performance. An occupancy permit shall be issued when
the provisions of this chapter are complied with and the approved
landscaping, fencing, off-street paving, drainage and any other specific
condition of the site plan have been completed. If weather or other
unforeseen conditions prohibit compliance, the applicant may request
and be issued a temporary occupancy permit for no longer than a sixmonth
period. Any further extension of the temporary permit shall be
determined by Township Supervisors.
H. Change of an approved site plan. An applicant who proposes to change
an approved site plan may do so only under the following conditions and
procedures: [Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-340]
(1) Substantial change. If the building is to be enlarged more than 30%
of the original gross floor area or curb cuts are to be increased, the
applicant must reapply to the Planning Commission for approval.
Also, if the applicant wishes to rearrange parking, landscaping,
drainage, lighting, etc., so that the revised plan substantially
changes the original site plan, the applicant must reapply.
(2) Minor change. If the applicant wishes to rearrange the off-street
parking, change the landscape schedule, lighting, drainage, fences
or move the buildings in a manner in which the revised site plan
does not substantially change the original plan, the applicant can
do so upon the approval of Township Zoning Officer and the revised
site plan shall be filed with the Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors.
I. Conduction of business on approved site plan lot without meeting site
plan conditions. On a parcel of land having an approved site plan, the
initiation of any activity or use shall not take place before all of the
conditions of the site plan and other provisions of this chapter have
been satisfied. Such conduct of an activity or use without compliance
with site plan conditions and/or this chapter provision shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, except in cases where weather or
seasonal conditions require an extension of time.
J. DEP approval of the planning modules associated with a land
development plan must occur prior to the issuance of any building
permit for the land development. All land development plans must
§ 175-48 PATTON CODE § 175-48
169:886
§ 175-48.1. Telecommunications facilities. [Added 12-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-354]
contain the following note that acknowledges the need for planning
module approval prior to construction: "DEP Planning Module approval
must occur prior to a building permit being obtained for any
construction related to this land development plan." [Added
4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 95-321]
K. Bed-and-breakfast regulations. A bed-and-breakfast, an owneroccupied
single-family dwelling providing, for compensation, sleeping
accommodations and breakfast for transient guests, shall be permitted
in the A-1 Rural, R-1 Rural Residence, R-2 Low-Density Residence, PC
Planned Community and the residential area within the PAD Planned
Airport Zoning Districts, subject to the following regulations: [Added
10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-303; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-496]
(1) For lot sizes one acre or larger, the maximum number of guest
rooms permitted shall be five, with the number of guests limited to
10.
(2) No exterior alterations, additions or changes to the residential
character of the dwelling unit shall be permitted in order to
accommodate or facilitate a home occupation.
(3) The length of stay per guest shall be limited to 30 days per sixmonth
period.
(4) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room.
Up to two parking spaces may be provided on-street if the street
width is at least 28 feet.
(5) There shall be no use of show windows or display or advertising
visible outside the premises to attract customers or clients other
than the signage permitted by Chapter 140, Signs.
(6) For lot sizes less than one acre (when otherwise permitted in the
zoning district), the maximum number of guest rooms permitted
shall be two, with the number of guests limited to four.
(7) The use shall be carried on completely within the dwelling unit.
A. Specific intent. In addition to the general goals listed in § 175-2, it is the
purpose of this section to achieve the following:
(1) To provide a competitive and wide range of telecommunications
services while minimizing the impacts of the telecommunications
infrastructure in populated areas.
(2) To encourage and maximize the shared use of existing
telecommunication towers, buildings and structures.
§ 175-48 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.1
169:887
(3) To ensure that new towers will be safe, placed in suitable locations
and blend into the environment where located.
B. Review and permitting.
(1) All applications for the location, subdivision, lease and licensing of
sites for all new telecommunications facility buildings and towers
are subject to the requirements of the Township's Subdivision and
Land Development215 and Zoning Ordinances and are subject to
review by the Planning Commission and approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) Telecommunications facilities that cease to operate for 12
consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated
operation and must be removed within 90 days at the expense of
the facility and/or property owners.
(3) Legally preexisting towers and antennas will not be required to
meet the following requirements unless specifically indicated.
C. Location, area and bulk requirements.
(1) Telecommunications towers are permitted in the following zoning
districts:
(a) NR-1 (Natural Resource District).
(b) A-1 (Rural District) [tower location permitted only above 1,400
feet; see Subsection C(2)]. [Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-496]
(c) C-1 and C-2 (Commercial Districts).
(d) IRD (Research, Development and Light Industry District).
(e) I-1 (Industrial District) (as a conditional use).
(f) UD (University District) (as a conditional use).
(2) The maximum height of telecommunications towers shall be 200
feet, measured from the average natural grade of the approved
facility area to the top point of the tower or antenna, whichever is
greater, except for locations above elevation 1,400 feet as shown on
United States Geological Survey Topographic Quadrangle
mapping, in which case the following shall apply: the maximum
height shall be 50 feet and a whip antenna shall be permitted to
extend a maximum of 15 feet above the structure to a total
maximum height of 65 feet, and the tower and/or antenna must be
of a concealed, camouflaged or stealth design that blends into the
natural environment so as not to be seen or recognized. This
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-48.1 PATTON CODE § 175-48.1
169:888
includes tree poles or architecturally screened antenna that can be
attached to existing structures other than towers.
(3) The minimum setback of telecommunications towers shall be as
required in the applicable zoning district, except for the following:
No telecommunications tower shall be located closer than 200 feet
or 110% of the proposed telecommunications tower height,
whichever is greater, from any existing residence or residential lot
line regardless of the zoning district in which the tower and
associated buildings are located.
(4) Minimum lease area and/or license area size of telecommunications
facilities. No minimum lease area and/or license area size is
required for a telecommunications facility; however, as required in
the applicable zoning district and Subsection C(3) above, the
setbacks of the parent tract perimeter boundaries shall apply.
(5) Evidence of need for towers.
(a) It is required that the applicant for the placement of a
telecommunications tower shall submit to the Township
evidence of the need for the telecommunications tower in the
proposed location and that the applicant has exhausted all
alternatives to locate on an existing tower or structure.
(b) In addition, the applicant must demonstrate via written
evidence from a qualified, licensed and professional engineer
that, in terms of location and construction, there are not
existing towers, telecommunications towers, buildings,
structures, elevated tanks or similar uses able to provide the
platform for the telecommunications antenna within a one-mile
radius of the chosen location. Collocation is not possible if:
[1] Coverage diagrams and technical reports demonstrate
that collocation on existing telecommunications towers is
not technically possible in order to serve the need; and
planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of existing telecommunications towers within the
municipality, considering existing and planned use of those
telecommunications towers, and existing
telecommunications towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost;
[2] Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF)
interference with other existing or planned equipment for
that telecommunications tower, and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
[3] Existing or approved telecommunications towers do not
have the space on which planned equipment can be placed
§ 175-48.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.1
169:889
so it can function effectively and at least in parity with
other similar equipment in place or planned; or
[4] Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment
planned by the applicant on existing and approved
telecommunications towers.
(6) Telecommunications antennas (shared use). Telecommunications
antennas may be attached to any building or structure in all zoning
districts, including but not limited to a church, a municipal or
governmental building or facility, an agricultural building, a
building owned by a utility, telecommunications tower, water tank
and major electrical transmission lines, pursuant to the following:
(a) Antennas shall not be permitted on single-family homes,
townhomes and duplexes.
(b) Building and zoning permits shall be required.
(c) Antennas shall be no taller than 15 feet above the existing
structure.
(d) Antennas shall be architecturally compatible with the existing
structure.
D. Design and construction.
(1) Any proposed telecommunications tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically and in all respects, to accommodate both
the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least
one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers
must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas
upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
(2) The telecommunications tower shall be designed and constructed
to all applicable standards of the American National Standards
Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-F Manual, as amended.
(3) A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix 1,
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, as amended,
shall be submitted to the municipality to document and verify
design specifications of the foundation for the telecommunications
tower and anchors for the guy wires, if used.
(4) Telecommunications towers shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour.
(5) A telecommunications tower may not be located on a lot that is
listed on an historic register or in an officially designated state or
federal historic district.
§ 175-48.1 PATTON CODE § 175-48.1
169:890
(6) The applicant shall present documentation that the
telecommunications tower is designed in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations.
(7) Guy wires, if utilized, must be anchored no closer than 25 feet from
any property line. Guy wires shall not cross or encroach on any
utility rights-of-way and shall not cross property lines.
(8) The applicant shall provide, upon request, a statement from a
qualified, licensed professional engineer that the NIER
(Nonionizing Electromagnetic Radiation) emitted from the
telecommunications tower, when measured in conjunction with the
emissions from all communication facilities on the tower, does not
result in an exposure at any point on or outside such facility which
exceeds the lowest applicable exposure standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI).
(9) Except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, no
telecommunications tower may use artificial lighting or strobe
lighting at night.
(10) Upon request, the applicant shall provide to the municipality, not
more than once per year, information indicating that the approved
telecommunications tower or antenna remains structurally sound.
The applicant shall bear the costs of any inspection necessary to
determine the structural soundness of a telecommunication tower
or antenna.
(11) All federal, state and municipal environmental regulations
regarding the placement of telecommunications facilities must be
followed in the design, review and construction processes.
(12) Telecommunications facilities shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis. The site shall be visited only for
necessary maintenance.
E. Fencing and screening of facilities.
(1) A security fence (including security wiring) of eight feet in height
shall completely enclose the telecommunications facility. A fence
eight feet in height shall also completely enclose the anchored
locations of guy wires, if used.
(2) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan. Sites in which
telecommunications towers are located shall be required to comply
with the following landscaping requirements:
(a) Landscaping and planting shall be provided for a minimum
depth of 15 feet along all public rights-of-way abutting the lot
where the telecommunications tower is located. COD (Corridor
Overlay District) requirements shall take precedence over the
§ 175-48.1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.1
169:891
§ 175-48.2. Illumination standards. [Added 8-12-1998 by Ord. No.
98-357]
fifteen-foot minimum landscaping requirement if a
telecommunications facility is located within a COD.
(b) Landscaping, consisting of sight obscuring trees and shrubs in
accordance with the buffer yard regulations (Class V, Tables
3-5), shall be required at the perimeter of the security fences
and the telecommunications facility. Existing wooded areas,
tree lines and hedgerows adjacent to the facility shall be
preserved and used to substitute or meet a portion of the
buffer yard requirements.
F. Access and parking.
(1) The applicant must demonstrate on the land development plan that
parked vehicles at the facility will not impede traffic on the
adjoining cartways.
(2) Internal access to the telecommunications tower shall be provided
by a minimum twelve-foot-wide cartway with a concrete or
bituminous concrete surface for a minimum of 50 feet from any
public or private street. The length of the cartway beyond this 50
feet shall, at a minimum, be surfaced with a durable and mud-free
gravel surface. The vehicular access to the telecommunications
tower and telecommunications facility building shall meet the
applicable street standards of Chapter 149 (Streets and Sidewalks)
for private streets and/or driveways.
G. Signs. Signs for telecommunications facilities shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 140 (Signs). In addition, the following
requirements shall apply:
(1) No advertising shall be permitted on towers.
(2) An emergency information sign of no more than two square feet in
sign area and bearing no commercial advertising shall be mounted
on the gate of any fenced facility area.
A. Purpose.
(1) To establish lighting standards for public safety and welfare while
minimizing the adverse effects of outdoor lighting;
(2) To promote indirect lighting standards that will enhance the safety
and enjoyment of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists;
(3) To prevent the creation of nuisances caused by unnecessary
intensity and glare of outdoor lighting onto neighboring properties,
roadways and into the night sky;
§ 175-48.1 PATTON CODE § 175-48.2
169:892
(4) To promote lighting practices and systems to conserve energy
without decreasing safety.
B. General requirements. Outdoor off-street lighting shall meet one of the
following standards (as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering
Society):
Table 1
Zoning District
and/or Uses
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
at the
Property Line
(See Note 1)
Maintained
Average
Illumination
at the Site
(See Note 2)
Maximum
Permitted
Height of
Luminaire
(See Note 3)
Commercial and
industrial uses in
C-1, C-2, I-I, IRD,
PC, PAD, UD
Districts
0.5 FC (0.2
when adjoining
residential uses
and districts
and all
roadways)
2.0 FC 25 feet (20 feet
within 100 feet
of any
residential
district or
structure)
Single-family, twofamily
and
manufactured
home park
residential uses in
any Zoning
District
0.2 FC N/A 12 feet (See
Note 5)
Multifamily
residential uses
(apartments,
townhouses and
assisted living
facilities with
similar densities)
0.2 FC 0.5 FC 12 feet (See
Note 6)
Agricultural/
conservation uses
in A-1, NR-1, PAD
and PC
0.2 FC N/A 20 feet (12 feet
within 200 feet
of an ad- joining
home)
All other nonresidential
uses in
residential,
conservation, PC,
PAD and UD
Districts
0.5 FC (0.2
when adjoining
residential uses
and districts
and all
roadways)
1.0 FC 20 feet
§ 175-48.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.2
169:893
Table 1
Zoning District
and/or Uses
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
at the
Property Line
(See Note 1)
Maintained
Average
Illumination
at the Site
(See Note 2)
Maximum
Permitted
Height of
Luminaire
(See Note 3)
Recreational
sports facilities
[Amended
4-27-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-456]
See requirements of § 175-48.2D
NOTES:
1. The maximum permitted illumination is measured in footcandles
at the property lines at ground level. Lighting levels must be
measured in footcandles with a directreading, portable light
meter.
2. The maintained average illumination is calculated in footcandles
on the pavement areas of the site. In no case shall the level of
illumination be less than 0.2 footcandles in parking and pedestrian
areas. Additional illumination may be needed where pedestrian
security and site entrance identity issues arise. The "utilization
curve" as identified in the IES (Illuminating Engineering Society)
Lighting Handbook, Application Volume, as revised, shall
determine the maintained average illumination.
3. All luminaires utilized by commercial, industrial and
nonresidential uses shall be designed to have total cutoff of light
at an angle less than 90° and located so that the bare lightbulb,
lamp or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of
an observer at ground level at the property line.
4. (Reserved) [Amended 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-456]
5. Safety or security lighting may be mounted on a home up to the
height of any exterior wall. Such lighting shall be directed to serve
the property and shall have as little spill-over as possible.
6. Lights illuminating balconies of multistory apartments shall not be
included in the twelve-foot-height limitation.
C. Illumination requirements.
(1) Wall-mounted luminaires intended for parking lot illumination on
commercial, industrial, nonresidential and multifamily residential
buildings and structures shall have fixtures that cut off direct light
from view. All parking lot and site perimeter lighting must be
located on poles or at ground level and must be directed toward the
§ 175-48.2 PATTON CODE § 175-48.2
169:894
property interior. All luminaires designed for entryways and
decorative purposes on nonresidential and multifamily residential
buildings and structures which exceed 2,000 lumens (150 watts
incandescent) shall have fixtures that cut off direct light from view.
(2) All outdoor lighting shall be reduced by 75% or deactivated by
timers and sensors during nonoperating hours for nonresidential
uses. Illuminated signs are included in this requirement.
(3) (Reserved) [Amended 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-456]
(4) All nonresidential site light sources, and residential light sources
higher than 12 feet, must be directed away from public streets and
private properties. The lamps must be shielded in a manner so that
they are not visible from an adjoining property. Sensor controlled
lamps exceeding 2,000 lumens (150 watts incandescent) must have
cutoff-type luminaires.
(5) In parking lots, luminaires shall be located on mast arms, where
necessary, such that trees do not interfere with the required
lighting.
(6) As part of any land development plan submittal, an exterior lighting
plan must be provided to Patton Township. The plan must provide a
detail of all fixtures proposed, and a plan view must be provided
showing number and location of the fixtures along with the
intensity, lighting patterns and type of illumination.
(7) Luminaires mounted beneath canopies such as those at gasoline
stations and convenience stores shall be recessed so that the lens
cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the
canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the canopy so
that light is cut off at less than 90 degrees. Luminaires shall not be
mounted on the top or sides (fascias) of the canopy, and the sides
(fascias) of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
(8) Parking lot lighting designs may include luminaires of a particular
"period" or architectural style as an alternative or supplement to
the cutoff luminaires, provided that:
(a) If the fixtures are not cutoff luminaires, the maximum output
shall not be more than 2,000 lumens (150 watts incandescent);
(b) Maximum luminaire mounting height shall not exceed 15 feet;
(c) Parking area lighting shall be in accordance with Table 1.
(9) Federal and state required security lighting specifically for air
travel safety shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
This lighting includes, but is not limited to, airport runway lights
and warning lights.
§ 175-48.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.2
169:895
(10) Streetlights shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
except that federal interstate, state and Township roadways within
the Township shall have a maximum shielded luminaire height of 25
feet or, if a plan for full cutoff fixtures and supplemental shielding
to protect neighboring properties from glare is presented to and
approved by the Township, a maximum luminaire height of 40 feet.
[Amended 6-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-367]
(11) Temporary holiday and special event lighting is permitted and shall
be placed to prevent glare.
(12) Flood- and/or spotlights shall be directed away from adjoining
properties and roadways and shall be completely shielded to
prevent glare.
(13) Existing lighting (prior to the adoption of this regulation) that
produces glare to pedestrians or vehicles shall be shielded and/or
redirected to eliminate the hazard. When existing light fixtures are
replaced, the new fixtures and luminaires shall meet the
requirements of this regulation.
(14) Luminaires shall not be permitted which shine light into the night
sky except as noted in (a) and (b) below. Luminaires utilized to
uplight building facades shall be completely shielded and/or aimed
so that no light is directed to the night sky. [Amended 5-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-400]
(a) Flood and/or spot lights utilized to uplight landscaping shall
have luminaires with a maximum output of no more than 2,000
lumens (150 watts incandescent). The luminaires shall be
located or shielded so that the light source is not visible by an
observer standing at ground level at the property line.
(b) Flagpoles displaying the flag of the United States of America
may utilize uplighting in all districts with the following
limitations:
[1] No more than one uplit flag display is permitted on a lot.
[2] No more than two luminaires may be installed. The
combined maximum output of the luminaires shall not
exceed 9,500 lumens. The combined maximum output
shall be computed by adding the manufacturer’s initial
lumen rating for each lamp.
[3] Luminaires shall be selected that concentrate and direct
the light to illuminate the area where the flag will be
displayed. Wide-angle floodlights shall not be used.
[4] The luminaire(s) shall be located or shielded so that the
light source is not visible by an observer standing at
ground level at the property line.
§ 175-48.2 PATTON CODE § 175-48.2
169:896
D. Recreational sports facilities lighting. Recreational sports facilities are
areas designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately
owned, including but not limited to: baseball diamonds, soccer and
football fields, basketball courts, golf courses, tennis courts, swimming
pools, and any other outdoor area where the primary use is the pursuit
of an athletic activity. [Added 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-456]
(1) Minimum lot size for recreational sports facilities lighting: two
acres.
(2) Illumination of the activity area. To provide sufficient illumination
to safely conduct recreational activities, lighting designs should
meet the sports lighting illumination recommendations of
publication IESNA RP-6-01, "Recommended Practice for Sports and
Recreational Area Lighting," from the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA).
(3) Luminaire height. The height of luminaries shall, to the extent
practicable, be the minimum necessary to provide the illumination
levels recommended by IESNA RP-6-01 as well as to ensure
meeting the shielding and spill light requirements of this section.
(4) Shielding of luminaries. Recreational sports facilities have unique
lighting needs that vary on the nature of the activity and the size of
the facility. Because of their uniqueness, the actual playing area
cannot always be illuminated appropriately with cutoff luminaries.
Accordingly, semicutoff luminaries such as floodlights and other
applications are permitted to meet the lighting design objectives
for recreational sports facilities, provided such luminaries meet the
following criteria:
(a) Luminaires shall be full cutoff as defined by IESNA; or
(b) Luminaires shall be:
[1] Provided with internal and/or external glare-control
louvers, visors, barndoors or other shielding.
[2] Installed in a manner consistent to minimize uplight and
off-site lighting.
[3] Aimed at an angle such that the luminaire meets the
definition for semicutoff fixture (no more than 5% of the
emitted light projects above the horizontal) as defined by
the IESNA.
[4] Aimed, to the extent practicable, to restrict illumination to
the functional area being illuminated for sports or
recreation.
(c) Only full cutoff luminaries conforming to the other outdoor
lighting regulations shall be used to illuminate areas beyond
the active sport area.
§ 175-48.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.2
169:897
(5) Curfew. A nightly deadline for extinguishing the recreational sports
facility lighting shall be included on the land development plan.
With the approval of the Board of Supervisors, a process for
requesting an extension of the deadline for special events (e.g.,
tournaments) may also be included on the land development plan.
(6) Maximum illumination at property lines. The maximum illumination
levels permitted at the property line(s) produced by the sum of all
outdoor lighting installations on said property shall be measured at
grade in horizontal footcandles (FC) and shall not exceed the
requirements of Table 2 (below).
Table 2
Site Location
Maximum Illumination at
Property Line
Outside Regional Growth
Boundary
0.2 FC for all conditions
Within Regional Growth
Boundary
0.2 FC adjacent to Regional
Growth Boundary (RGB)
0.2 FC adjacent to existing
residential uses within the RGB
(see Notes 1, 2)
0.5 FC adjacent to other uses
within the RGB (see Note 1)
2.0 FC adjacent to public rightof-
way
§ 175-48.2 PATTON CODE § 175-48.2
169:898
Table 2 Notes:
1. The maximum illumination permitted at the property line can
be increased to 0.5 FC adjacent to existing residential uses
within the RGB and 1.0 FC adjacent to other uses within the
RGB when the site developer provides proof that property
owners and residents within 200 feet of the property line
location(s) where the increased light trespass is proposed
have been notified of the time and place of public meetings at
which the illumination plan will be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors. Proof of notice shall
be in the form of signature for delivery of notice or a signed
statement from property owners and residents or similar
document. If warranted, the Board of Supervisors may require
additional screening at the property line in the form of fencing
or buffer yard plantings to mitigate the additional light
trespass.
2. "Existing residential use" shall mean parcels with dwelling
units upon them, or parcels with residential zoning permits,
land development plans, or subdivision plans that have been
approved within five years, or parcels with plans for
residential development that are under review by the
Township and were submitted prior to the land development
plan for sports facility lighting.
§ 175-48.2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-48.2
169:899

ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses, Premises, Structures and Lots
§ 175-49. Intent.
§ 175-50. Nonconforming use regulations.
Lawful uses, located either within a building or other structure, or part
thereof or on the land or in combination of both, which at the effective date
of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto became nonconforming,
may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, including
subsequent sales of the property, subject to the following regulations:
A. The zoning districts established by this chapter are designed to guide
the future use of land in the Township by encouraging the development
of desirable residential, commercial and manufacturing areas, with
appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses, to the end of
promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, prosperity
and other aspects of the general welfare.
B. To achieve this end, lawful existing uses which would be prohibited or
restricted under the terms of this chapter, or future amendments, and
which do not conform to the character and regulations of the zoning
district in which they are located must be subject to certain limitations.
The regulations set forth below are intended to provide a gradual
remedy for the undesirable conditions resulting from indiscriminate
mixing of uses and to afford a means whereby nonconforming uses can
be gradually eliminated and reestablished in more suitable locations
within the Township.
C. Similarly, buildings or other structures which do not comply with one or
more of the applicable district requirements as to lot width, minimum
lot area and yard spaces, width of lot, coverages or height are deemed
to be nonconforming.
D. Nonconforming uses and structures will be generally permitted to
remain; the purpose of regulating them is to restrict further investment
in uses or structures which are inappropriate to their locations.
E. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in plans, construction or intended use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective
date or amendment of this chapter and on which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on.
A. Enlargement. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased upon ground not occupied at the time of the passage of the
Zoning Ordinance nor upon that portion of said ground not devoted to
the nonconforming use.
B. Damage or destruction.
§ 175-49 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-50
169:901
§ 175-51. Nonconforming lots of record.
Nonconforming lot regulations shall be as follows: In any district, in which
single-family houses are permitted, notwithstanding the area limitation
imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family house and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record
in existence at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
provided that the following requirements shall be observed.
(1) In the event that a manufacturing nonconforming use, in a
residential district, is destroyed or partially destroyed by fire,
explosion or other disasters or otherwise damaged to the extent of
75% or more of the assessed valuation of all buildings, structures
and other improvements on the lot, as determined from the
assessment rolls effective at the date of the damage or destruction,
such nonconforming uses shall terminate and the lot shall
thereafter be used only for conforming uses.
(2) In the event that any nonconforming use, in any district, is
destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other disaster
or otherwise damaged to the extent of 75% or more of the assessed
valuation (as defined above), such nonconforming use shall
terminate and the lot shall thereafter be used only for conforming
uses.
C. Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of land ceases operations for a
period of more than one year after which the owner of such property
does not file a certification of intention to maintain such use, then this
shall be deemed to be an intent to abandon such use and any
subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of this
chapter.
A. Such lot must be in separate ownership, and not form part of a
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
B. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
requirements of area or width, or both, generally applicable in the
district in which the lot is located and a variance shall be issued by the
Zoning Hearing Board except as follows:
(1) No application for a variance shall be accepted if the side, front or
rear yards or the width or area of the lot in question is less than
50% of the required minimum for the district in which it is located.
(2) If two or more lots with continuous frontage in a single ownership
are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter,
and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot
width and area established by this chapter, the lands involved shall
be considered an undivided parcel and no portion of such parcel
shall be occupied or sold which does not meet lot width and area
requirements established by this chapter.216
§ 175-50 PATTON CODE § 175-52
169:902
§ 175-52. Nonconforming structures in the Flood District.
[Amended 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 154]
Structures existing in the Floodplain District prior to the enactment of
this chapter, but which are not in compliance with its use regulations,
may continue to remain provided that prior to any modification, alteration,
reconstruction, repair or improvement a variance is obtained from the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with § 175-69.
216. Editor's Note: Former Section 1104, Registration of nonconformity, was repealed
8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-330.
§ 175-52 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-52
169:903

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 175-53. Administration.
§ 175-54. Enforcement.
A. Officer.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Township Secretary or by such other person as may be designated
by the Township Supervisors as the Zoning Officer for this purpose.
(2) Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(a) To examine all applications for permits.
(b) To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter and as may be
subsequently amended.
(c) To issue permits for uses by special permit only after such uses
and buildings were approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(d) To inspect nonconforming uses, buildings and lots and to keep
a filed record of such nonconforming uses and buildings as a
public record and to examine them periodically.
(e) Upon the request of the Planning Commission or the Zoning
Hearing Board, present to such body facts, records and any
similar information on specific requests to assist such body in
reaching its decision.
(f) To be responsible for the keeping up-to-date this chapter and
the Zoning Map.
B. Appeals. Any appeal from a decision or action of the Zoning Officer shall
be made directly to the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Notification of violation. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, they shall notify, in
writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. They
shall order discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or of
additions, alterations or structural changes thereto, discontinue any
illegal work being done or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the designated Zoning Officer of the
Township. No permit of any kind as provided in this chapter shall be
granted by them for any purpose except in compliance with the
§ 175-53 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-54
169:905
§ 175-55. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-330]
§ 175-56. Zoning permit.
provisions of this chapter or a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the courts.
B. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. They shall record properly such
complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as
provided by this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be
paid over to the municipality whose ordinance has been violated.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction or
alteration of any building, structure or any portion thereof, to be issued
simultaneously with the required building permits where possible.
B. Application for permits shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer
designated by the Board of Supervisors and shall contain all
§ 175-54 PATTON CODE § 175-56
169:906
§ 175-57. Schedule of fees.
§ 175-58. Amendments.
information necessary for such officer to ascertain whether the
proposed erection, construction, alteration or use complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Such permits shall be granted or refused within 30 days from date of
application.
D. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter, except after written order from the Zoning
Hearing Board or the courts.
E. Application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by any lawful
information that may be required by the Zoning Officer or other
sections of this chapter. Where it is proposed to establish on-site
sewage disposal and/or water, a feasibility report by an independent
registered engineer shall be required.
F. A permit shall also be required before any proposed construction,
alteration or other development is undertaken within the Flood District.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit in the Flood District, the Zoning
Officer shall review the application to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits such as those required by state and federal laws
have been obtained including those required by Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,217 and the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1334. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made. [Added
9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 154]
A. The Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure, for zoning permits, special
permits, variances and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
B. Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Officer.
Permits, special exceptions and variances shall be issued only after fees
have been paid in full, and the Zoning Hearing Board shall take no
action on appeals until preliminary charges have been paid in full.
A. Power to amend. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries and
requirements set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended, supplemented, changed or repealed through amendment by
the Board of Supervisors.
B. Enactment of zoning ordinance amendments. Zoning ordinance
amendments that include proposals or elements that are defined as
"developments of regional impact" shall be subject to the regional
review process adopted by Patton Township through an intermunicipal
217. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 175-56 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-58
169:907
agreement, the Centre Region Growth Boundary/Sewer Service Area
Implementation Agreement, effective January 18, 2007, with the other
Centre Region Council of Government municipalities. The regional
review process (Section IV of the Agreement) is included by reference
and may be found at Article XIV of Chapter 4 of the Code of the
Township of Patton.218 [Added 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-274;
amended 2-28-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-479]
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing
body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.
In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map
change notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted
by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality
along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested
citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
planning agency, the governing body shall submit each such
amendment to the planning agency at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the planning
agency an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(3) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the governing body shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote
on the amendment.
(4) At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by
the local governing body, the proposed amendment shall be
submitted to the Centre Region Planning Commission, as the
designated agent for the Centre County Planning Commission.
(5) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the
zoning ordinance shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
218. Editor's Note: Said Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-58 PATTON CODE § 175-58
169:908
ARTICLE XII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 175-59. Membership of the Board. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-330]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three residents of the Township,
appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Their terms of office shall be three
years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. The Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors
of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no
other office in the Township.
§ 175-60. Removal of members.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board
of Supervisors, taken after the member has received 15 days advance notice
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with
the vote if the member shall request it, in writing.
§ 175-61. Organization of the Board.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a
majority of all the members of the Board but the Board may appoint a
Hearing Officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board as provided
in § 175-64. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and the laws of the
commonwealth.
§ 175-62. Meetings.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board may determine, all of which shall be open to the public.
§ 175-63. Records.
The following requirements shall be observed by the Zoning Hearing Board:
A. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon the question or indicating absence or failure to vote
on the part of any member.
B. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit
a report of its activities to the Township Supervisors once a year.
§ 175-59 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-64
169:909
§ 175-64. Hearings. [Amended 1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-297]
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the governing body
shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of
ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. In addition to the written
notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of
time.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
municipality, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before
the Board and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
§ 175-64 PATTON CODE § 175-64
169:910
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or Hearing Officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or their representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or their representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule
or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the
facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there
has been no stipulation that their decision or findings are final, the
Board shall make their report and recommendations available to the
parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of
findings and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days
after the report of the hearing officer. Where the Board fails to render
the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to
hold the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed,
in writing, or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has
been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board
shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last day
§ 175-64 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-64
169:911
§ 175-65. Jurisdiction. [Amended 1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-297]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided
in Subsection A of this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to them
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the governing body.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-330]
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter.
F. Applications for special exceptions under this chapter.
G. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with
the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
H. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination pursuant to a request
for a preliminary opinion.
I. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
§ 175-64 PATTON CODE § 175-65
169:912
§ 175-66. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals under § 175-64 and proceedings to challenge an ordinance under
§ 175-65B may be filed with the Board, in writing, by an officer or agency
of the Township or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under
§ 175-65C may be filed with the Board by any landowner or any tenant with
the permission of such landowner.
§ 175-67. Time limitations.
The time limitations for raising certain issues and filing certain proceedings
with the Board shall be the following:
§ 175-68. Stay of proceedings. [Amended 1-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-297]
involving subdivision, land development or planned residential
development.
J. Applications for variances and special exceptions to Chapter 140
(Signs) of the Patton Township Code. [Added 10-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-395]
A. No issue of alleged defect in the process of enactment of any ordinance
or map or any amendment thereto shall be raised in any proceeding
filed with the Board later than 30 days from the time such ordinance,
map or amendment takes effect unless the person raising such issues
alleges and proves that they failed to receive adequate notice of the
enactment or amendment. If such person has succeeded to their
interest after the enactment of the ordinances, adequate notice to their
predecessor shall be deemed adequate notice to them.
B. Under the same conditions, limitations and exceptions as prescribed in
§ 175-67A, no person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Board later than 30 days after any application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate Township
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to limit the
approval in any manner.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 913.3 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code219 and during its pendency
before the Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged
ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or
body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the
Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the
Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on
219. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10913.3.
§ 175-65 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-68
169:913
§ 175-69. Special exceptions and variances in the Flood District.
[Amended 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 154]
petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency
or body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by them if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
A. Application requirements.
(1) A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to
flooding, the location of the proposed construction, the location of
any other flood-prone development or structures and the location
of any existing or proposed stream improvements or protective
works. Included shall be all plans for proposed subdivision and land
development in order to assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
§ 175-68 PATTON CODE § 175-69
169:914
(2) A plan which details existing and proposed contours and elevations
of the ground (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) and
the lowest floor (including basement) of the proposed construction,
base flood elevations (highest flood elevation of record) and other
associated factors such as pressures and impact forces, etc.,
storage elevations, size of the structure streets, water supply,
sanitary facilities, soil types and floodproofing measures, including
the specific reference to the level of the floodproofing in relation to
the base flood elevation.
(3) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic and buoyancy factors associated with the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of
floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure.
B. Criteria.
(1) All new structures and structures which are modified, improved,
altered or reconstructed to an extent which equals or exceeds 50%
of the structure shall meet the following criteria.
(a) They shall be firmly anchored in accordance with engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored as follows: [Amended
10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
[1] Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties
per side at intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more
in length and one additional tie per side for units less than
50 feet in length.
[2] Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the
manufactured home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length
and four additional ties per side for units less than 50 feet
in length.
[3] All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(b) They shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of
floodwaters into the water supply and waste treatment systems
as well as other utility and facility systems. In addition, waste
treatment systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
§ 175-69 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-69
169:915
§ 175-70. Procedures. [Amended 7-10-1985 by Ord. No. 85-204]
(c) All residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level. All
manufactured homes and any additions thereto shall also be
elevated in accordance with the following requirements:
[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
[1] The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on
pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
will be at or above the base flood elevation.
[2] Adequate surface drainage is provided.
[3] Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
[4] Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large
enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed
in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart and reinforcement
shall be provided for pilings that will extend for six feet or
more above the ground level.
(d) All nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor level
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level
or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities and be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the
compatibility of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, repair or improvement
of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value, shall require that the structure be
elevated and/or floodproofed as specified above to the greatest
extent possible.
A. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider, at a minimum, that the granting of a variance will not:
(1) Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense.
(2) Create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public or conflict
with any other applicable state or local ordinances or regulations.
B. Notice.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant, in writing,
that:
§ 175-69 PATTON CODE § 175-70
169:916
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance.
(b) Such construction increases risks to life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be recorded and maintained along with a
justification for the issuance of a variance. These variances shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance
Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no variance shall be
granted for:
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction of any structure to be used for any of the following
activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park. [Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-379]
(3) Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for
the production or storage of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances or which will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or
other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances)
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the
premises:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
§ 175-70 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 175-70
169:917
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 175-70 PATTON CODE § 175-70
169:918
Appendix
Chapter A177
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A177-1. Entry into agreement.
That the Township of Patton enter into a Cable System Franchise
Agreement in the form attached hereto, made part hereof and incorporated
herein by this reference as if it had been set forth verbatim in this section
and a copy of which shall be filed with this ordinance in the Township
Ordinance Book.220
§ A177-2. Authorization to sign agreement.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized
and directed, on behalf of the Township, to sign and execute said Cable
System Franchise Agreement under the Municipal Seal of the Township.
§ A177-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions or parts thereof, permits
or licenses inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance
be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or
conflict.
§ A177-4. Unauthorized reception.
In addition to those criminal and civil penalties provided for by state and
federal law, any person, firm or corporation who creates or makes use of any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electronically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of the TCI franchised system without
the express consent of TCI of Pennsylvania, shall upon conviction thereof
before any court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100, nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution, to be paid
to the municipality or, in default thereof, to be confined in jail for a period
of not more than 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
220. Editor's Note: The Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-70 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:919
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
96-327
6-12-1996 Council of
Governments: Articles
of Agreement
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-429
Ord. No.
96-328
6-12-1996 Sewers and sewage
disposal: industrial
pretreatment program
Ch. 136, Art. IV
Ord. No.
96-329
6-12-1996 Intermunicipal
agreement for
enforcement of
industrial pretreatment
program
Ch. 4, Art. V
Ord. No.
96-330
8-14-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
96-331
9-25-1996 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
96-332
10-9-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
96-333
10-9-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
96-334
12-11-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
96-335
12-11-1996 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
96-336
12-11-1996 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. No.
97-337
2-12-1997 Individual and
community sewage
disposal systems
amendment; on-lot
sewage disposal
facilities amendment
Ch. 136, Arts. II
and III
Ord. No.
97-338
3-12-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
97-339
4-23-1997 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
97-340
4-23-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:920
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-341
4-23-1997 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. No.
97-342
4-23-1997 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
97-343
4-23-1997 Signs amendment Ch. 140
Ord. No.
97-344
8-13-1997 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
97-345
9-24-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
97-346
9-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
97-347
12-10-1997 Adoption of BOCA Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-404
Ord. No.
97-348
12-10-1997 Property maintenance Ch. 127
Ord. No.
97-349
12-10-1997 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-411
Ord. No.
97-350
12-10-1997 Plumbing Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-406
Ord. No.
97-351
12-10-1997 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-405
Ord. No.
97-352
12-10-1997 Electrical standards Ch. 70
Ord. No.
97-353
12-10-1997 One- and two-family
dwellings
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-407
Ord. No.
97-354
12-10-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
98-355
1-21-1998 Community on-lot
sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 136, Art. V
Ord. No.
98-356
2-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
98-357
8-12-1998 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 153 and 175
Ord. No.
98-358
11-18-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:921
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-359
11-18-1998 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
89-360
10-28-1998 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
98-361
12-9-1998 Municipal Drug Task
Force
Ch. 4, Art. VI
Ord. No.
99-362
1-4-1999 Per capita tax
amendment; occupation
assessment tax
amendment
Ch. 158, Arts. I
and V
Ord. No.
99-363
2-24-1999 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. No.
99-364
2-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
99-365
2-24-1999 Building construction:
adoption of BOCA Code
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2003-404
Ord. No.
99-366
5-26-1999 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 153 and 175
Ord. No.
99-367
6-16-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
99-368
6-16-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
99-369
10-13-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
99-370
10-13-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
99-371
10-?-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
99-372
10-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2000-373
1-3-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2000-374
1-3-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2000-375
3-22-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2000-376
4-12-2000 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:922
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2000-377
6-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch 167
Ord. No.
2000-378
6-14-2000 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2000-379
10-25-2000 Mobile home parks and
zoning amendments
Chs. 103 & 175
Ord. No.
2000-380
10-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2000-381
10-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2000-382
11-8-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2000-383
12-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2001-384
1-2-2001 Sewers and sewage
disposal; streets and
sidewalks; subdivision
and land development;
and zoning amendment
Chs. 136, 149,
153 and 175
Ord. No.
2001-385
1-17-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2001-386
2-28-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2001-387
4-11-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2001-388
5-16-2001 Subdivision and land
development and
zoning amendment
Chs. 153 and 175
Ord. No.
2001-389
6-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2001-390
6-20-2001 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2001-391
6-20-2001 Mobile Command and
Communications Post
Vehicle
Ch. 4, Art. VII
Ord. No.
2001-392
6-20-2001 Fire prevention and
property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
Nos. 2003-410
and 2003-411
Ord. No.
2001-393
9-12-2001 Dog sanitation Ch. 52
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:923
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2001-394
10-10-2001 COG agreements
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2001-395
10-24-2001 Signs and zoning
amendment
Chs. 140 and 175
Ord. No.
2001-396
12-12-2001 Centre Region Council
of Governments Office
Project (COGOP)
Intermunicipal
Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2002-397
2-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2002-398
2-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2002-399
4-10-2002 Bond agreement NCM
Ord. No.
2002-400
5-22-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2002-401
7-10-2002 Emergency
Management Program
Agreement
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2006-478
Ord. No.
2002-402
11-6-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2003-403
2-26-2003 Bond agreement NCM
Ord. No.
2003-404
2-26-2003 Adoption of BOCA Code
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
Ord. No.
2003-405
2-26-2003 Mechanical standards
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
Ord. No.
2003-406
2-26-2003 Plumbing amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
Ord. No.
2003-407
2-26-2003 Residential code Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
Ord. No.
2003-408
2-26-2003 Electrical standards
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-530
Ord. No.
2003-409
2-26-2003 Fuel Gas Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
Ord. No.
2003-410
2-26-2003 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-450
Ord. No.
2003-411
2-26-2003 Fire prevention
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-430
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:924
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2003-412
2-26-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2003-413
2-26-2003 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2003-414
3-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2003-415
3-26-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2003-416
3-26-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2003-417
3-26-2003 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2003-418
10-8-2003 Schlow Memorial
Library Article of
Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2003-419
12-12-2003 Streets and sidewalks
and subdivision and
land development
amendments
Chs. 149 and 153
Ord. No.
2004-420
1-5-2004 Streets and sidewalks
and subdivision and
land development
amendments
Chs. 149 and 153
Ord. No.
2004-421
1-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2004-422
2-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-423
2-11-2004 Industrial pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 136, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2004-424
2-11-2004 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2004-425
2-11-2004 Library project note NCM
Ord. No.
2004-426
3-10-2004 Streets and sidewalks
and zoning
amendments
Chs. 149 and 175
Ord. No.
2004-427
3-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:925
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2004-428
4-28-2004 Centre Region Code
Administration Agency
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2004-429
4-28-2004 Centre Region Building
and Housing Code
Board of Appeals
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2004-430
6-16-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-530
Ord. No.
2004-431
6-16-2004 Food handling
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2009-514
Ord. No.
2004-432
7-21-2004 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. I
Ord. No.
2004-433
9-8-2004 Trees amendment Ch. 163
Ord. No.
2004-434
9-8-2004 Motor grading sharing
agreement termination
NCM
Ord. No.
2004-435
9-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2004-436
9-8-2004 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 58
Ord. No.
2004-437
9-8-2004 Nuisances amendment Ch. 107
Ord. No.
2004-438
9-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-439
9-22-2004 Animals amendment Ch. 52
Ord. No.
2004-440
9-22-2004 Firearms amendment Ch. 76
Ord. No.
2004-441
9-22-2004 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 116
Ord. No.
2004-442
9-22-2004 Recreational vehicles
amendment
Ch. 169
Ord. No.
2004-443
10-13-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-444
10-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2004-445
10-27-2004 Centre Area Cable
Consortium Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. VIII
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:926
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2004-446
12-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-447
12-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2004-448
12-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2004-449
12-15-2004 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 149
Ord. No.
2004-450
12-15-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-491
Ord. No.
2005-451
1-3-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2005-452
1-3-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2005-453
1-3-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2005-454
1-3-2005 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. III
Ord. No.
2005-455
1-26-2005 Board of Supervisors Ch. 7
Ord. No.
2005-456
4-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2005-457
4-27-2005 Oak Hall Parkland
Acquisition agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2005-458
6-15-2005 Bond agreement NCM
Ord. No.
2005-459
7-20-2005 Intermunicipal zoning
implementation
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2005-460
8-17-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2005-461
9-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2005-462
10-26-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-491
Ord. No.
2005-463
11-9-2005 Interpretation of park
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 112
Ord. No.
2005-464
12-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:927
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2005-465
1-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2006-466
1-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2006-467
2-8-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2006-468
2-8-2006 Intermunicipal
employee benefit
insurance agreement
Ch. 4, Art. X
Ord. No.
2006-469
3-22-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-491
Ord. No.
2006-470
3-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2006-471
7-19-2006 Zoning: NR-2 Natural
Resource and Recycling
District
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2006-472
7-19-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2006-473
8-16-2006 Police mutual aid
services agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XI
Ord. No.
2006-474
10-11-2006 Whitehall Road
Regional Parklands
ownership agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XII
Ord. No.
2006-475
10-11-2006 Planning, development
and operation of
regional parks
agreement
Ch. 4, art. XIII
Ord. No.
2006-476
10-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2006-477
12-13-2006 Centre Region growth
boundary/sewer service
area implementation
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XIV
Ord. No.
2006-478
12-13-2006 Regional Emergency
Management Program
Agreement amendment
Ch. 4, Art. II
Ord. No.
2007-479
2-28-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2007-480
2-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:928
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007-481
3-14-2007 Open space and
recreation areas
Ch. 110
Ord. No.
2007-482
6-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2007-483
6-20-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2007-484
8-15-2007 Spring Creek
Watershed Commission
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XV
Ord. No.
2007-485
9-26-2007 Fire, rescue and related
services
Ch. 15
Ord. No.
2007-486
10-24-2007 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 153; 175
Ord. No.
2007-487
10-24-2007 Individual and
community sewage
disposal systems
amendment and on-lot
sewage disposal
facilities amendment
Ch. 136, Arts. II
and III
Ord. No.
2007-488
11-7-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. III
Ord. No.
2007-489
11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2007-490
12-12-2007 Board of Supervisors
compensation
amendment
Ch. 7, Art. I
Ord. No.
2007-491
12-12-2007 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-519
Ord. No.
2007-492
12-12-2007 Central Booking
Program
Intergovernmental
Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XVI
Ord. No.
2008-493
1-30-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2008-494
2-25-2008 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2008-495
2-27-2008 Signs amendment Ch. 140
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:929
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008-496
5-28-2008 Community on-lot
sewage disposal
systems amendment;
streets and sidewalks
amendment;
subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 136, Art. V;
149; 153; 175
Ord. No.
2008-497
5-28-2008 Regional records
management and
mobile computer (RM/
MC) system
intergovernmental
agreement
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2008-503
Ord. No.
2008-498
7-16-2008 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 153; 175
Ord. No.
2008-499
8-20-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2008-500
8-20-2008 Cable systems Ch. 60
Ord. No.
2008-501
10-8-2008 Well construction and
siting
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-523
Ord. No.
2008-502
10-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2008-503
10-22-2008 Regional records
management and
mobile computer (RM/
MC) system
intergovernmental
agreement
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2016-572
Ord. No.
2009-504
1-5-2009 Council of Governments
Agreements
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2009-505
1-28-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-506
5-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2009-507
6-17-2009 Keeping of chickens in
residential areas
Ch. 52, Art. III
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:930
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009-508
6-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-509
6-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-510
7-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-511
8-19-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-512
9-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-513
10-14-2009 Police mutual aid
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. II
Ord. No.
2009-514
10-14-2009 Food establishments
and food handling
Ch. 83
Ord. No.
2009-515
10-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2009-516
12-9-2009 Solid waste Ch. 144
Ord. No.
2010-517
2-10-2010 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2010-518
3-10-2010 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 153; 175
Ord. No.
2010-519
4-28-2010 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-585
Ord. No.
2010-520
6-16-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2010-521
8-18-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 31, Art. I
Ord. No.
2010-522
8-18-2010 Hess Softball Field
Complex agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XVIII
Ord. No.
2010-523
8-18-2010 Well construction and
siting repealer
Ch. 172,
reference only
Ord. No.
2010-524
9-8-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2010-525
9-22-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:931
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2010-526
9-22-2010 Signs amendment Ch. 140
Ord. No.
2011-527
4-25-2011 Regional parks
borrowing
NCM
Ord. No.
2011-528
5-25-2011 Parks amendment Ch. 112
Ord. No.
2011-529
7-20-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-585
Ord. No.
2011-530
8-17-2011 Uniform construction
codes amendment;
electrical standards
repealer
Chs. 63; 70,
reference only
Ord. No.
2011-531
9-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2011-532
9-28-2011 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2011-533
11-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2011-534
11-16-2011 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. II
Ord. No.
2011-535
11-16-2011 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2011-536
12-7-2011 Board of Supervisors:
compensation
amendment
Ch. 7, Art. I
Ord. No.
2011-537
12-7-2011 Homestead Farms
Neighborhood
Improvement District
Ch. 104, Art. I
Ord. No.
2011-538
12-7-2011 Homestead Farms
Neighborhood
Improvement District
Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XIX
Ord. No.
2012-539
1-23-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2012-540
4-11-2012 Regional wide area and
local area network
intermunicipal
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XX
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:932
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2012-541
4-25-2012 Food establishments
and food handling
amendment
Ch. 83
Ord. No.
2012-542
4-25-2012 Health services
intermunicipal
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XXI
Ord. No.
2012-543
6-20-2012 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2012-544
7-18-2012 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2012-545
9-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2012-546
10-24-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2012-547
10-24-2012 Loan refinancing NCM
Ord. No.
2013-548
3-27-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2013-549
12-11-2013 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2013-550
12-17-2013 Centre Region Growth
Boundary and Sewer
Service Area
Implementation
Agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XIV
Ord. No.
2014-551
1-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2014-552
1-6-2014 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
214-553
3-26-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2014-554
3-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2014-555
4-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2014-556
5-14-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:933
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014-557
5-28-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2014-558
6-11-2014 Council of Government
Agreements
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2014-559
6-11-2014 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
2014-560
9-24-2014 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2014-561
11-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2014-562
12-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2015-563
1-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2015-563.5
2-11-2015 Parks amendment Ch. 112
Ord. No.
2015-564
3-11-2015 Council of Government
Agreements
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2015-565
3-11-2015 PSATS Unemployment
Group Trust
intermunicipal
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XXIII
Ord. No.
2015-566
4-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2015-567
6-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2015-568
6-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2016-569
2-24-2016 Nuisances amendment Ch. 107
Ord. No.
2016-570
5-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2016-571
11-2-2016 General obligation note NCM
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:934
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2016-572
8-17-2016 Regional records
management and
mobile computer (RM/
MC) system
intergovernmental
agreement
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2017-580
Ord. No.
2016-573
11-2-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2016-574
11-2-2016 Zoning amendment;
burial of human
remains
Ch. 175; Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2016-575
11-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2016-576
11-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2016-577
11-2-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 31, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-578
12-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2017-579
1-3-2017 Centre regional
pollutant reduction
plan intermunicipal
agreement
Ch. 4, Art. XXIII
Ord. No.
2017-580
1-3-2017 Regional records
management and
mobile computer (RM/
MC) system
intergovernmental
agreement
Ch. 4, Art XVII
Ord. No.
2017-581
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2017-582
2-8-2017 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2017-583
3-22-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2017-584
4-26-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2017-585
5-10-2017 Property maintenance
and fire code
Ch. 127
Ord. No.
2017-586
7-19-2017 Solar energy systems;
zoning amendment
Ch. 142; Ch. 175
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:935
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2018-587
11-1-2017 General Obligation
Note
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-588
12-13-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2018-589
4-11-2018 Alcoholic Beverages:
Open Containers
Ch. 50, Art. I
Ord. No.
2018-590
7-11-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2018-591
7-18-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-592
5-23-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2018-593
7-18-2018 Open Space and
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 110
Ord. No.
2018-594
8-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
Ord. No.
2018-595
8-15-2018 Noise: Noise Control Ch. 105, Art. I
Ord. No.
2018-596
9-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 167
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2018-597
11-20-2018 Signs Amendment Ch. 140 22
Ord. No.
2019-598
1-7-2019 Manager and
Deputy Manager,
Township
Amendment
Ch. 25 22
Ord. No.
2019-599
5-22-2019 Signs Amendment Ch. 140 22
Ord. No.
2019-600
8-21-2019 General Obligation
Note
NCM 22
Ord. No.
2019-601
8-21-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 167 22
Ord. No.
2019-602
11-13-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 116 22
Ord. No.
2019-603
11-13-2019 Trees Amendment Ch. 163 22
§ DL-1 PATTON CODE § DL-1
169:936
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2019-604
12-11-2019 Cable Franchise
Agreement
NCM 22
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § DL-1
169:937