8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 1/339
Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 825]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to § 1008 (b) of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46008(b), the codification of the legislative
ordinances for the Borough of Pleasant Hills, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp., are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the
date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills,
and it is the intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code is
hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
Ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of
§ 1-3 below, and only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted
from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Borough of
Pleasant Hills and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided and/or
expressly provided in § 1-4 below.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 2/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1- 3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of certain ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 10-16-2000.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Borough
prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Borough or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Borough.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing the name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines; or providing for the collection of fees and charges related to the use of water
and/or the sewers.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Borough or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 3/339
Q.
R.
S.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance or resolution establishing a specific fee amount for any
license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
Any ordinance or resolution establishing a fine or penalty for violation of a Borough ordinance.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to the adoption of the
Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4
and/or prior to the date of adoption are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be temporarily placed in the
Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough
for adoption and revision as part of this Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
Nomenclature.
Throughout the Code, wherever the following terms were used in the original legislation, they
have been updated as follows:
The term "Burgess" is revised to read "Mayor" (except in historical documents such as
the Sewer Authority's Articles of Incorporation).
The terms "District Magistrate" and "Justice of the Peace" are revised to read "District
Justice."
In penalty sections where "Burgess" or "Mayor" was cited as a convicting official, such
term has been deleted.
In Chapters 222, 308 and 322, the term "Department of Environmental Resources" is revised
to read "Department of Environmental Protection."
In § 374-111, the term "Building Inspector" is revised to read "Zoning Officer."
Statutory references. Where original legislation referred to repealed provisions of state law and the
new controlling statute was apparent, statutory references have been updated as follows:
In § 47-1, the reference to "the Regional Planning Law of 1956, May 29, P.L. (1958) 1845,
Section 202 as amended by Act No. 284, December 8, 1976, P.L. 1277" (which was repealed
12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177) is revised to read "53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2341 et seq."
In § 59-1, the reference to the "Newspaper Advertising Act of 1929, May 16, P.L. 1784" (which
was repealed 7-9-1976 by P.L. 877, No. 160) is revised to read "45 Pa. C.S.A. § 301 et seq."
In § 77-18, the reference to the "Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 1972, July 12, No. 180,
§ 1 et seq., 53 P.S. § 481 et seq., as amended" (which was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L.
1158, No. 177) is revised to read "53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq."
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 4/339
D.
A.
B.
The enactment of this ordinance incorporates the revisions and amendments of Ordinance No.
824, which is enacted the same date as the within ordinance. Ordinance No. 824 was enacted as
a summary of revisions to existing ordinances.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulations, the provisions of the Code shall control Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code, are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the office of
the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption,
such copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code
shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and directed by the Borough
Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in
the office of the Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally
adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions are
printed as supplements to the Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 5/339
Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice of the
introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The
enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of introduction
and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering and tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by addition or deletion, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the
law of the Borough to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance and
the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
Chapter 5. Allegheny County Health Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 3-9-1964 by Ord. No.
322. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Officer — See Ch. 39.
§ 5-1. Membership.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby agrees to voluntarily join and become
associated with the Allegheny County Health Department as a full and participating member therein.
§ 5-2. Notification.
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby directed to notify, by letter, the
Allegheny County Health Department of the enactment of this chapter and to forward a true and
correct copy of this chapter to the Allegheny County Health Department.
§ 5-3. Effect on existing provisions.
No part of this chapter shall be considered or construed as repealing, either in whole or in part, any of
the existing ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. It is the specific intention of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills that this chapter shall not, to any extent whatsoever, amend,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 6/339
modify or repeal any existing ordinance relating to the health or safety of the residents of the Borough
of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 7. Auditor, Independent
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-18-2002 by Ord. No.
801. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 330.
§ 7-1. Duties of Independent Auditor.
The duties of Borough Auditor, as required by the Borough Code, shall be carried out by an
Independent Auditor who shall be a certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of
certified public accountants so registered or a competent public accountant or competent firm of public
accountants.
§ 7-2. Appointment.
The appointment of an Independent Auditor shall be made, annually, by resolution to make an
independent examination of the accounting records of the Borough of such fiscal year and such
Independent Auditor shall also perform the other duties and exercise the powers as conferred upon
them by law.
§ 7-3. Position of elected Auditor abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished.
Chapter 13. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 13, Cable Rate Review Board, adopted 1-17-1994 by Ord. No. 710, was
repealed 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 819.]
Chapter 17. Civil Service Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 4-17-1950 by Ord. No.
58. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 17-1. Creation.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Pleasant Hills a Civil Service Commission for the
purpose of effectuating the provisions of law in regards to civil service status of the members of the
police force of the Borough.
§ 17-2. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 7/339
The Commission shall consist of three members who shall be qualified electors of the Borough and
shall be appointed by the Borough Council initially to serve for the terms of two, four and six years
respectively; and as the terms of each thereafter expire, each member shall be appointed by the
Borough Council for a term of six years. Any vacancy occurring in any Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled for the unexpired term within the period of 30 days after such vacancy
occurs.
§ 17-3. Oath.
Each member of the Commission hereby established, before entering upon the discharge of the duties
of his office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States and of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to perform his official duties with fidelity.
§ 17-4. Restrictions on members holding office.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointive office under the United States
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the commonwealth,
except that one member of the Commission may be a member of the Council of the Borough.
§ 17-5. Organization; meetings.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its appointment and shall elect one of
its members as the Chairman and one as the Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter meet and
organize on the first Monday of each even-numbered year. Each Commissioner shall be notified in
writing of each and every meeting. Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum and no
action of the Commission shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 17-6. Clerical assistance and aid.
Provisions shall hereafter be made by the Borough Council as an administrative function for the
furnishing of clerical assistance and general aid for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of law
relating to civil service.
§ 17-7. Rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations for carrying
into effect the provisions of law relating to civil service; but such rules and regulations shall not become
effective until first approved by the Borough Council.
§ 17-8. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have such powers and perform such duties as is authorized by law.
§ 17-9. Compensation.
The Commissioners shall receive no compensation.
Chapter 25. Educational Service Agency
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 8/339
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-21-1980 by Ord. No.
570. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 25-1. Creation.
By authority vested in Boroughs by Act No. 108 of 1979,[1] the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby
establishes an Educational Service Agency. This Agency shall be entitled the "Pleasant Hills
Educational Service Agency."
Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 25-2. Membership; terms of office.
The Educational Service Agency shall be composed of three individuals, each of whom shall be a
resident of the Borough, at least 18 years of age, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council for
three-year overlapping terms, coinciding with the calendar year, provided that in the case of the three
individuals appointed at the time of establishment of the Educational Service Agency, the term of one
shall expire on the first day of January of the first year after the establishment, the term of one shall
expire on the first day of January of the second year after the establishment, and the term of the third
member shall expire on the first day of January of the third year following establishment.
§ 25-3. Restrictions on membership.
No elected Borough or School District official shall be eligible to appointment to or membership on the
Educational Service Agency. A vacancy shall occur in the Educational Service Agency in the case of
any member who ceases to be a resident of the Borough, or who otherwise becomes disqualified for
appointment or membership.
§ 25-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the Educational Service Agency occurring for any reason shall be filled by appointment
by the Borough Council of a successor to serve for the remainder of the term of the individual being
replaced.
§ 25-5. Compensation.
Members of the Educational Service Agency shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from
time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 25-6. Bond.
Each member of the Educational Service Agency may, at the discretion of the Borough Council, be
required to furnish a bond, in the amount and with the surety specified by the Borough, for the faithful
performance of his duties as a member of the Educational Service Agency.
§ 25-7. Function.
The function of the Educational Service Agency shall be to employ and supervise school crossing
guards, also referred to as "special school police," to protect children going to or from school. In order
to enable the Educational Service agency to perform that function, the Borough delegates to the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 9/339
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
G.
Educational Service Agency the authority to appoint and supervise crossing guards or special school
police as set out in the Borough Code.
§ 25-8. Duties.
The Educational Service Agency shall have the following authority, and it shall be its duty to:
Prepare annually, and, on or before the first day of November of each year, submit to the Borough
Council for approval a budget showing its contemplated income and its proposed expenditures for
the succeeding year.
Annually adopt the budget as submitted under Subsection A of this section as modified by the
Borough.
From time to time employ, and/or discharge, and fix the compensation of crossing guards or
special school police to serve in the Borough.
Exercise supervision and control over the crossing guards or special school police by:
Establishing, administering and enforcing rules and regulations for the work and conduct of
the crossing guards or special school police;
Establishing work schedules and designating the locations where and the time when the
various individuals are to be on duty;
Establishing position classifications if deemed necessary, and designating the individuals to
serve in each classification;
Providing for supervision as necessary;
Exercising any and all other prerogatives normally associated with personnel management.
From moneys budgeted and available, make all payments for the services of crossing guards or
special school police and make all other expenditures as prescribed by law or superior body or
agency, or as otherwise deemed necessary or appropriate.
Receive, in addition to payments by the Borough, any payments by the School District or any
other gift, grant, devise, or bequest.
Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its control, and establish one or more
separate bank accounts into which all income shall be deposited and from which all expenditures
shall be made.
§ 25-9. Transfer of moneys.
The Borough shall transfer and pay over to the Educational Service Agency the moneys that the
Borough is required to pay as compensation to special school police under the Borough Code, or other
agreement executed with the School District, as provided in the Borough Code, as well as other
moneys as necessary to cover expenditures budgeted for the Educational Service Agency as provided
in § 25-8 in this chapter.
§ 25-10. Continuation.
The Educational Service Agency hereby recognized and formally established shall continue until
changed or abolished by action of the Borough or until the suspension of Act 108 of 1979 as adopted
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 10/339
by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accord with the terms thereof.
Chapter 31. Ethics, Code of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-12-1969 by Ord. No.
424. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 31-1. Adoption.
The following Code of Ethics is hereby adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills:
CODE OF ETHICS
Preamble
We believe that responsible representative government is the best form of government for the
American People.
We believe that government in the United States of America requires a positive spirit of cooperation
among the people's servants at the municipal, state and federal levels.
We believe that effective representative government in our municipalities is necessary to the
preservation of the vitality of freedom in our nation.
We believe that each and every public servant, elected or appointed in the field of local government
bears part of the responsibility for the maintenance of true representative government.
We consider public service to be at once a responsibility and an honor; we will make every effort, in
our conduct in office, to be worthy of both the responsibility and the honor.
While recognizing the necessity of laws to protect the public against the unjust steward, we
acknowledge that the people deserve more of a public servant than mere adherence to laws against
criminal behavior and civil misdemeanor. We promise therefore to conduct our public lives according
to the highest ethical standard. We promise not only to avoid what is legally wrong, but to seek out
and to do what is ethically right.
In keeping with this general undertaking, we promise to abide by the Code of Ethics of the
Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs.
Code of Ethics
1. We shall learn the laws governing the conduct of officials and employees of Boroughs in
Pennsylvania, and we shall faithfully observe their letter and their spirit.
2. We shall constantly endeavor to enlarge our understanding of Borough government and to
improve our competence in the performance of our functions.
3. In all matters that come before us in our official capacities, our first concern shall be to
advance the public interest to the maximum.
4. If at any time we are aware that we have, or may reasonably be considered to have, a direct
or indirect private interest in any proposed official action of the Borough, we shall disclose
publicly the nature and extent of our interest.
5. In our contacts with other persons and groups, we shall conduct ourselves in keeping with the
trust and dignity reposing in our positions as servants of the people of our Borough; we shall
take care to guard not only the reality but also the appearance of justice and integrity.
6. We shall place the competence and effectiveness of the public service before the interests of
persons, factions and parties.
7. We shall obey and abide by the policies duly established by the Council; we shall adhere to
and enforce standard rules and procedures for performance of the functions of Borough
government.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 11/339
A.
Code of Ethics
8. We shall not make available to any person any services, tangible or intangible, that are not
equally available under the law to any other citizen.
9. We shall not use to our own personal advantage nor to the advantage of persons related to us
by family, friendship or business, confidential information to which we have access by virtue of
our public offices.
10. We shall refuse personal gifts in every instance where we have reason to believe the gift
would not have been extended to us except for our official position, where we have reason to
believe that the giver's interests are likely to be affected by our official actions, or where the
gift is, or may reasonably be considered to be, designed to influence our official actions.
11. In any transaction, negotiation or litigation to which the Borough is a party, we shall not
represent private interests, nor shall we convey to private interests any information or advice
not generally available to the public.
12. We shall not use, nor permit others to use, the power of our offices to solicit contributions from
municipal employees on behalf of any candidate for political office; nor shall we demand that
any municipal employee solicit contributions on behalf of any candidate for political office.
Chapter 39. Health Officer
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-21-1983 by Ord. No.
598. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Allegheny County Health Department — See Ch. 5.
§ 39-1. Repeal of Board of Health provisions.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby repeals, in its entirety, Ordinance No. 44
enacted the 12th day of December 1949, and Ordinance No. 480 enacted the 26th day of March 1973.
§ 39-2. Transfer of powers and duties to Health Officer.
All of the powers and duties of the existing Board of Health shall be transferred to the Health Officer of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 47. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 47, Lewis Run Watershed Commission, adopted 2-17-1982 by Ord. No. 585,
was repealed 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 819.]
Chapter 53. Manager, Borough
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 1-15-1996 by Ord. No.
728. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 53-1. Creation of office.
The Office the Borough Manager is hereby created on the date of the adoption of this chapter. The
authority to create the position of Borough Manager is found in the Borough Code, 53 P.S.
§ 46141.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 12/339
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
As provided in the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46143, the office of the Borough Manager, Street
Commissioner, Secretary and Treasurer are not incompatible and any two or more of said offices
may be held by one person.
§ 53-2. Appointment; removal.
The Borough Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all members of
Borough Council.
The Borough Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council and may be removed at
any time by a majority vote of all members of Borough Council.
§ 53-3. Qualifications.
The Borough Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and administrative abilities.
§ 53-4. Powers and duties.
The Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46142, provides that Borough Council, by ordinance, may delegate any
of the nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties of Borough Council to the Borough Manager.
Accordingly, Pleasant Hills Borough Council hereby delegates to the Borough Manager the following
nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties:
Administration of departments, offices and agencies.
He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of
the Borough with the exception of the Pleasant Hills Police Department.
The Borough Manager is further given the power and authority to reprimand any employee
under his supervision. The Borough Manager, with the approval of Borough Council, may
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision.
The Borough Manager shall file a written report of any action taken under authority of this
subsection to Borough Council.
The Borough Manager shall also perform whatever shall be assigned to him, from time to time, by
Borough Council. It is the intent of Borough Council to designate the Borough Manager as the
Chief Operating Officer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 53-5. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Manager shall be established under the terms and provisions of the
Pleasant Hills Salary Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-6. Bond.
The Borough Manager, before entering upon his duties, shall give a bond to the Borough of Pleasant
Hills in the sum of $35,000. The amount of this bond may be changed by the provisions of the Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The premium for this bond shall be paid by the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 13/339
§ 53-7. Delegation of duties by Mayor.
The Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46142, provides as follows: "With approval of Borough Council, the
Mayor may delegate to the Borough Manager any of his nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and
duties." The Borough Manager is authorized to perform any nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and
duties delegated by the Mayor of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, provided that the assignment has been
provided the Borough Manager in writing.
§ 53-8. Acting Borough Manager.
If the office of the Borough Manager shall become vacant, Borough Council shall have the authority to
appoint an Acting Borough Manager until such time as Borough Council shall fill the position of
Borough Manager. The Acting Borough Manager shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of
Borough Manager and shall receive such compensation as Borough Council shall establish.
§ 53-9. Amendment or repeal of provisions.
The Borough Council reserves the right at any time, by ordinance, to amend or otherwise modify or
repeal this chapter or any part thereof.
Chapter 59. Newspaper, Official
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-8-1971 by Ord. No.
454. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 59-1. Designation.
[Amended 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 997]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills designates the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette as the
official newspaper of the Borough of Pleasant Hills for the publishing of legal notices. All matters which
are required to be advertised shall be published in this newspaper, so long as said newspaper remains
the official newspaper of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and said newspaper remains recognized as a
newspaper of general circulation as defined in 45 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 (relating to definitions). The
designation of the official newspaper of the Borough of Pleasant Hills may be changed in the future.
Such changes may be made at the discretion of Borough Council by enactment of a future ordinance
as defined in 45 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 as may be amended.
§ 59-2. Additional advertising.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills may, at its option, place legal advertising in any
other newspaper which it desires, in addition to the official newspaper of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 59-3. Newspaper required to submit evidence of qualifications.
That the official newspaper of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, at least one time each year, submit
documentary evidence to the Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills that it meets the requirements
of a newspaper authorized to accept legal advertising, under the provisions of the Newspaper
Advertising Act of 1929, May 16, P.L. 1784.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 14/339
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Chapter 65. Pensions
[Legislation regarding pensions for Borough employees is on file in the Borough offices.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission — See Ch. 17.
Personnel regulations — See Ch. 71.
Police retirement provisions — See Ch. 77, Art. III.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 89.
Social security — See Ch. 97.
Chapter 71. Personnel
[Legislation regarding personnel matters for Borough employees is on file in the Borough offices,
where it may be examined during regular office hours.]
Chapter 75. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-4-1977 by Ord. No.
536. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
South Hills Regional Planning Commission — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
§ 75-1. Creation.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby creates the Pleasant Hills Planning
Commission pursuant to the authority granted under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 75-2. Membership; compensation.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall be composed of seven residents of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills. All members of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. No more than two
members of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall be officers or employees of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
§ 75-3. Appointment; terms of office.
All members of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Each member of the Planing Commission shall serve for
a term of four years or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
The term of office of all members of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall expire on
December 31 of the last year of their appointment.
The term of office of the first members of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall be
staggered in the following manner:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 15/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B.
Two members shall serve until December 31, 1977.
Two members shall serve until December 31, 1978.
Two members shall serve until December 31, 1979.
One member shall serve until December 31, 1980.
§ 75-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, at the request of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, have the power and shall be required to:
Prepare a Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and present it for the consideration of
the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files of the Pleasant Hills
Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
Perform such other duties as may be requested by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills consistent with the terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, pursuant to the authorization granted to it
under Section 209.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] does hereby request
that the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission perform the following acts and duties:
[Added 12-7-1977 by Ord. No. 543]
Make recommendations to the Borough Council concerning the adoption or amendment of an
Official Map.
Prepare and present to the Borough Council a Zoning Ordinance revision and update, and
make recommendations to the Borough Council on proposed amendments to said ordinance.
Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development, planned residential
development regulations as set forth in the act.
Prepare and present to the Borough Council a building code and a housing code and make
recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
Prepare and present to the Borough Council environmental studies for specific developments
under these and other powers and duties of the Planning Commission.
Submit to the Borough Council recommendations as to a capital improvement program.
Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive Plan and planning.
Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies and individuals as to the
effectiveness of the proposals of such individuals when such proposals come within the
purpose of the Planning Commission as outlined in the act and local enabling legislation.
Hold public hearings and meetings.
Require from other departments, agencies and officers of the municipality such available
information as relates to the work of the Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 16/339
(11)
(12)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
In the performance of its functions, to enter upon land with the consent of the owner to make
examinations and surveys.
Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties and
obligations imposed by this act and the duties and powers conferred by the enabling
legislation of the Borough Council.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10209.1.
§ 75-5. Conduct of business.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman and such
other officers as the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission may determine. Each of these persons
shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission may make rules and regulations to govern its procedures
consistent with the ordinances and resolutions of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall keep a full record of its business and the minutes of
all meetings to be forwarded to the Borough Secretary and Borough Council when they are
approved. Interim reports concerning the activities of the business of the Planning Commission
may be requested by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as the Borough
Council deems necessary.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
§ 75-6. Employees and consultants.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission may appoint employees or consultants to help assist the
Pleasant Hills Planning Commission in the performance of its duties. All such appointments shall be
with the consent and approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 75-7. Expenditure of funds.
The Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall not have the authority or power to incur any
indebtedness except with the specific approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant hills.
Any expenditure to be made for or on behalf of the Pleasant Hills Planning Commission shall be with
the prior approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 77. Police Department
[The current legislation pertaining to personnel issues relating to the Police Department is on file in the
office of the Borough Secretary, where it may be examined during regular office hours.]
Chapter 89. Salaries and Compensation
[The current Salaries Ordinance for Borough employees, as well as amendments thereto, which
includes salary rates and some personnel policies, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
where it may be examined during regular office hours.]
Chapter 93. Sewer Authority
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 17/339
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-11-1952 by Ord. No.
78. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 298.
§ 93-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions contained in the Act of Assembly approved the 2nd day of May 1945, P.L.
382, as amended or supplemented,[1] the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby declares the need and its
desire in the interest of public safety, welfare and convenience for the creation of an Authority to
function within and without the territorial limits of the Borough of Pleasant Hills to provide storm
sewers, sanitary sewers and elimination or treatment plants and all facilities in relation or connection
therewith, and further hereby signifies its intention to organize such an Authority.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 93-2. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuant of said need, desire and intention and in conformity with the terms and provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, Articles of the proposed Authority are hereby set forth
as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF PLEASANT HILLS AUTHORITY PLEASANT HILLS,
ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, Pa.
In compliance with the requirements of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved the 2nd day
of May, 1945, P.L. 382, the undersigned Municipal Authorities of the Borough of Pleasant Hills in the
County of Allegheny and in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, desiring that a body corporate and
politic be incorporated under the said Act, do hereby, for and in behalf of the said Borough of
Pleasant Hills and of its body corporate and politic certify:
(1) The name of the Authority is Pleasant Hills Authority.
(2) The said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved the
2nd day of May, 1945, P.L. 382.
(3) No other authority has been organized under this Act or under the Act of 1935, P.L. 463,
and is in existence in or for the said Borough of Pleasant Hills.
(4) The name of the incorporating municipality, together with the names and addresses of its
municipal authorities, are as follows:
A. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
B. The names and address of its municipal authorities are:
NAMES ADDRESSES
Burgess, C. C. Larson 135 Marshall Circle
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
President of Council
Walter A. Brand
136 Delano Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Vice President of Council
C. F. McWilliams, Jr.
116 E. Bruceton Road
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 18/339
NAMES ADDRESSES
Councilman, Ralph O. Faett 5 National Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Councilman, M. S. Metcalfe 176 Columbia Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Councilman, Harry C. Neel 250 Capitol Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Councilman, Robt. D. Blasier 244 Capitol Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Councilman, Frank R. Dwyer 62 W. Bruceton Road
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
Solicitor, Louis Rosenberg 1422 Greyston Drive (Home)
306 Berger Building (Office)
Pittsburgh, Pa.
Council Secretary,
John E. Robinson
146 Delano Drive
Pittsburgh 27, Pa.
(5) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of the said
Authority are as follows:
NAMES ADDRESSES TERM OF OFFICE EXPIRES
Tom J. Davies 122 National Drive 5 years
F. Bice Johnson 238 Capitol Drive 4 years
Thomas C. Pratt 143 Columbia Drive 3 years
Dorsey W. Dick 312 Old Clairton Rd 2 years
Richard S. Dodds 351 Temona Drive 1 year
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Borough of Pleasant Hills has by Ordinance No. 78, duly enacted and
approved by the Burgess on the 11th day of February, 1952, having advertised the same in the Hill
Top Record on the 15th day of February, 1952, and recorded the same in Ordinance Book No. 1,
Page 180, caused these Articles of Incorporation to be signed by the Burgess and the President of
the Borough Council, and the municipal seal of the borough hereunto affixed and the same to be
attested by John E. Robinson, the Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, this 11th day of February, 1952,
ATTEST: BOROUGH OF PLEASANT HILLS
BY C. C. LARSON/S/ Burgess
John E. Robinson/S/ Secretary of the
Borough and of the Borough Council
BY Walter A. Brand/S/ President of Council
§ 93-3. Execution.
The said proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed by and on behalf of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills by the Burgess and by the President of the Borough Council. The Seal of the
said Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be thereunto affixed and the same shall be attested by the
Borough Secretary and the Borough Solicitor is authorized and directed to cause to be published such
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 19/339
[1]
[1]
[1]
notices of this chapter and the intention to incorporate as are required by the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, approved the 2nd day of May, 1945, P.L. 382, and to transmit the Articles of Incorporation
and application therefor to the Secretary of the Commonwealth, as is by law provided, and to do any
and all other further acts required for the effectuating of the purposes of this chapter.
§ 93-4. Purpose.
The said Authority hereby created shall be known as the "Pleasant Hills Authority" and shall be
established for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, improving, maintaining, extending and operating
of storm water, sanitary sewer lines or any system thereof, part or parts thereof, elimination, disposal
or treatment plant or plants, and all other facilities in connection therewith as may be required and
signified by contract or agreement or approval by the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and for such purposes
to have all of the powers and authorities vested in it by law for the enjoyment and exercising of the
powers and privileges conferred by Acts of Assembly to municipal authorities.
Chapter 101. South Hills Area Council of Governments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 9-10-1973 by Ord. No.
482. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 101-1. Participation.
Resolution No. 169 adopted by Pleasant Hills on June 11, 1973, agreeing to participate in the South
Hills Area Council of Governments is hereby ratified and approved. A copy of the Resolution is
attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A."[1]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Articles of Association between the members of the South Hills Area Council of Governments is
hereby approved. A copy of the Articles of Association are incorporated herein by reference and
attached as Exhibit "B."[1]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-3. Bylaws.
The Bylaws of the South Hills Area Council which were adopted by the General Assembly at the
organizational meeting of said Council are ratified and approved. A copy of the Bylaws are
incorporated by reference, attached hereto, and marked Exhibit "C."[1]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-4. Financing.
The manner and extent of financing the Association shall be through dues, gratis and funds received
from the membership and other sources. The dues structure of the South Hills Area Council of
Governments was adopted by the General Assembly at an organizational meeting of said Council and
is hereby ratified and approved. The dues structure will not be increased by any participating
municipality during the calendar year 1974-1975.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 20/339
§ 101-5. Representative.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Borough Council shall from time to time appoint representatives and/or an alternate
representative/liason to the South Hills Area Council of Governments. This appointment will be carried
out by majority vote of Borough Council.
§ 101-6. Nonprofit corporation.
The formation of a nonprofit corporation by the South Hills Area Council of Governments is hereby
ratified and approved. The name of the nonprofit corporation will be South Hills Area Council of
Governments, Inc. It will be organized upon a nonstock basis with the members being the same as the
member municipalities of the unincorporated association, South Hills Area Council of Governments.
The Incorporators of the nonprofit corporation will be the official representatives to the Board of
Directors of the Council from the member municipalities. The unincorporated association will remain in
existence and shall perform all functions, powers or responsibilities delegated to it by the member
municipalities. The nonprofit corporation shall perform such functions as are designated by the
unincorporated association. The unincorporated association is authorized to make such payments to
the nonprofit corporation as are authorized by the unincorporated association.
§ 101-7. Real and personal property.
Real or personal property shall be acquired, managed and disposed of by action of the unincorporated
association in accordance with its Bylaws.
§ 101-8. Duration; agreements.
The duration of the unincorporated association shall be perpetual or until such time as the member
municipalities shall elect to withdraw in accordance with the Bylaws and procedures of the
unincorporated association. The purpose and object of the unincorporated association shall be as
enumerated in the Articles and Bylaws of the association. The organizational structure necessary to
implement any agreement among the member municipalities shall be the South Hills Area Council of
Governments, as herein set forth.
Chapter 105. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 105, South Hills Regional Planning Commission, adopted 11-9-1964 by Ord. No. 335, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919.]
Chapter 115. Workers' Compensation Trust
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
694. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 115-1. Execution.
The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and deliver the following documents:
The Municipal Risk Management Workmen's Compensation Pooled Trust Agreement (hereafter the
"agreement"); and the participant application, Which documents are attached hereto and made a part
hereof and which may be inspected by any interested citizen at the office of the Municipal Secretary.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 21/339
§ 115-2. Duration.
The duration of the term of the agreement is four years from the date of admission to the trust as a
participant.
§ 115-3. Purpose.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in Article V of the agreement.
§ 115-4. Scope of authority.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II, Article V, Article VI, Article VIII
and Article IX of the agreement.
§ 115-5. Funding.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the agreement shall be
appropriated from the general funds of the political subdivision.
§ 115-6. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement consists of the trust, trustees,
service agents and fiscal agents created by the agreement.
§ 115-7. Acquisition and management of property.
Property acquired for purposes of the trust shall be acquired, managed and disposed of under the
terms of the attached trust agreement.
§ 115-8. Entrance into contracts authorized.
The trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee
benefits, including social security for its employees.
Chapter 126. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 126, Adult Entertainment, adopted 4-13-1964 by Ord. No. 326, was repealed
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824.]
Chapter 132. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 132, Air Conditioning, adopted 8-9-1965 by Ord. No. 357, was repealed 5-17-
2004 by Ord. No. 824. See now Ch. 374, Zoning.]
Part II: General Legislation
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 22/339
[1]
[1]
A.
Chapter 138. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 206.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
Article I. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Fees for Private Burglar Alarm Systems, adopted 1-8-1973 by Ord. No.
477, was repealed 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 1013.
§ 138-1. through § 138-3. (Reserved)
Article II. False Alarms
[Adopted 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 950[1]]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, False Alarms, adopted 10-21-1985 by Ord.
No. 624, as amended.
§ 138-4. Definitions.
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 1013]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FALSE ALARM
Any signal activated by an automatic protection device, any audible alarm or any other kind of
direct or indirect signal which results in the police, fire department or emergency medical providers
being required to respond which is not the result of an actual fire, police or medical emergency.
This definition shall apply to alarms which are generated by other than a legitimate emergency.
This definition shall include, but not be limited to a faulty and/or defective alarm system, and also
include alarms generated by a system without adequate battery backup to prevent false alarms.
For purposes of this section, the police department and fire department shall maintain a record of
such alarms separately. For purposes of enforcement of this section, each false alarm shall count
as one false alarm per occurrence, regardless of the number of different emergency departments
required to respond.
§ 138-5. Determination of false alarm and requirement for
property owner to address the situation.
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 1013]
The determination of whether an alarm which is responded to constitutes a false alarm is a
determination made by the first responder and the determination of the police department or fire
department who have responded to the alarm shall be final. The record owner of the property in the
Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be responsible to comply with the requirements of this article. Should
the number of false alarms for any property exceed the permitted number, as set forth below during the
period January 1st through December 31st for any year, a fee/penalty shall be due as follows:
No charge will be imposed for up to five false alarms in any calendar year;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 23/339
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
In the event of any sixth false alarm during any calendar year, a fee in the amount of $50 shall
apply;
In the event of any seventh false alarm during any calendar year, a fee in the amount of $100 shall
apply;
In the event of any eighth false alarm during any calendar year, and for each subsequent false
alarm during said calendar year, a fee of $150 shall apply for the eighth and each subsequent
false alarm.
§ 138-6. Penalty and remedy for violation; when effective.
In the event of a violation of any of the terms of this article, in addition to such other remedies as
may be available under existing law, an action may be initiated in equity to prevent, restrain,
correct, abate or enjoin such violation. The failure of the property owner to pay any of the charges
set forth in § 138-5 above within 30 days of being billed for these charges shall result in the ability
of the Borough to enforce and collect these charges through a municipal lien and/or to initiate an
action at the office of the District Judge to recover the amount of the fees, plus the court costs.
The terms of this article and the imposition of these fees shall take effect 30 days after the
enactment of this article.
Chapter 144. Amusement Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-15-1999 by Ord. No.
763. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 330.
§ 144-1. Enacting clause.
Be it ordained and enacted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and it is hereby
ordained and enacted by the authority of the same, that from and after the effective date of this
chapter, the following Ordinance shall be in full force and effect in the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 144-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pleasant Hills Amusement Tax Ordinance."
§ 144-3. Repealer; effect on existing rights and liabilities.
Ordinance No. 398 is hereby repealed as are all other ordinances or parts of ordinances insofar as
they conflict with the provisions of this chapter; however, such repeal shall not affect any act done or
any liability or violation accrued under any such prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded and all
such liabilities or violations shall continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if such repeal
or supersession had not been made; and any offense or violation committed and any penalty or
forfeiture incurred under any such ordinance herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the
same manner as if this chapter had not been approved.
§ 144-4. Word usage; rules of construction.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 24/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed
and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular.
Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
The word "may" is permissive.
That the Borough of Pleasant Hills intends to favor the public interest as against any private
interest.
The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter shall not be considered to
control but may be used to aid in the construction thereof.
General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be restricted by preceding particular
words.
§ 144-5. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases, as used in this
chapter or in an application for license of video or mechanical device, shall have the meaning given to
them in this section:
APPLICANT
Any individual, partnership or corporation who seeks to obtain a license for a video or mechanical
amusement device under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF VIDEO OR MECHANICAL DEVICE
The document filed by an applicant requesting a permit to possess in the Borough of Pleasant
Hills any video or mechanical amusement device, jukebox or pool table and/or other electronic
device, machine or apparatus whatsoever, for the playing of games and amusement.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT
Any restaurant, bar, tavern, retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business, whether or not in
operation.
GAMBLING DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus used for the playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or
other casino games by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus used for the playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or
other casino gambling games by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or
token which has or has been modified to have a knockoff or knockdown switch or other capability
for erasing or eliminating playing credits.
JUKEBOX
Any device, machine or apparatus which plays recorded music, whether by record, tape, compact
disc or other means, by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
OWNER
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 25/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Any individual, partnership or corporation who is the lawful owner of any video or mechanical
amusement device for which a license is sought under this chapter.
POOL TABLE
Any device or apparatus upon which is played the game of 8-ball, billiards, pool, snooker or other
similar games for which a fee is charged, whether or not such device is operated through the
insertion of coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
PROPRIETOR
Any individual, partnership or corporation who owns, leases or maintains the business
establishment in which any video or mechanical amusement device is placed for the use,
patronage, recreation or amusement of the public or of persons in or about the business
establishment.
VIDEO OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus used for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc,
slug or token, including but not limited to "claw machines," "electric or electronic dart boards,"
"pinball machines" and "video games."
§ 144-6. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall at any time have in his possession within
the Borough of Pleasant Hills any video or mechanical amusement device, jukebox or pool table for the
playing of games and amusement without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter
provided in this chapter.
§ 144-7. Application for license.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to procure a license as required in § 144-6 of this
chapter shall apply therefor in writing to the Borough Manager. Said application shall set for the
following information:
The name and residence of the person, firm, partnership or corporation applying for the license;
The name and residence of the owner of each jukebox, pool table or video or mechanical
amusement device to be licensed;
The name and residence of the proprietor of the business establishment in which each jukebox,
pool table or video or mechanical amusement device is to be located, used or installed;
If the owner of the business establishment is not the applicant, then the applicant shall set forth
the length of the time for which the premises has been leased, and whether applicant is a citizen
of the United States.
The manufacturer, name of machine, serial number, type and fee for each machine, video or
mechanical device, pool table, jukebox or apparatus to be located on the premises, installed or
used;
A verification by the applicant, owner and proprietor, that the facts set forth in the application are
true and correct to the applicant's, owner's and proprietor's personal knowledge information or
belief, and that any false statements therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes Code,
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to authorities;
That the applicant has been provided a copy of this chapter and that the applicant has read and
agrees to be bound by all terms and provisions hereof;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 26/339
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
That a license does not sanction or condone the use or possession of any illegal gambling device,
whether illegal per se or as modified;
That the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall notify the appropriate law enforcement officials of the use
of possession of per se, modified or other illegal gambling devices, whether or not such devices
are licensed;
That the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall immediately revoke the license of any device illegally
used or possessed, either per se or as modified; and
That the illegal use or possession of an unlawful gambling device, either per se or as modified,
may result in a criminal prosecution by the Borough of Pleasant Hills or other law enforcement
officials.
§ 144-8. Persons ineligible for licenses.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills shall not issue a license for video or mechanical devices to any person
who:
Is not a citizen of the United States;
Is not 21 years of age;
Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition, for possessing or using
a video or mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, within three years of the date of application.
§ 144-9. Conditions for issuance of license.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed from the date of application
during which time the Borough Manager may, at his discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the
application. A license shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
That obtaining or displaying a Borough license does not sanction, authorize or permit the use or
possession of an illegal gambling device, either per se, or as modified;
That the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall notify the appropriate law enforcement officials of the use
or possession of per se, modified or other illegal gambling devices, whether or not such devices
are licensed;
That the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall immediately revoke the license of any video or
mechanical device illegally used or possessed, either per se or as modified;
That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an unlawful gambling device, either
per se or as modified, he may be prosecuted by the Borough of Pleasant Hills or other law
enforcement officials; and
That if the Borough Manager has reasonable grounds to believe that a particular video or
mechanical device is illegal, either per se or as modified, the Borough Manager shall not issue a
license for said device.
§ 144-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any illegal gambling devices
whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be an illegal gambling device,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 27/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
either per se or as modified, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
§ 144-11. License fees.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
No license shall be issued until the annual fees as set forth in the current Fees Resolution of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, shall have been paid by the
applicant to the Borough Manager for each and every device to be installed or used.
§ 144-12. Issuance and display of license.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, and if the application fully complies with
this chapter, the Borough Manager shall issue a disc, plate, or sticker setting for the number of the
license for each machine so licensed, and said disc, plate or sticker shall be attached and fastened to
the respective machine or device so that the same may be clearly observable and readable. All discs,
plates or stickers issued by the Borough of Pleasant Hills for video and mechanical amusement
devices shall state that the video or mechanical amusement device is for amusement purposes only,
that it is not a gambling device and that only games and not money may be won on the machine or
device.
§ 144-13. Inspection.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills or its agents may, during regular business hours, conduct inspections of
any business establishment where any video or mechanical amusement device licensed under this
chapter is located, installed, placed or used, to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 144-14. Revocation; debarment and contraband declaration.
In the event any applicant, owner or proprietor falsifies any information on an application for
license of video or mechanical devices, or violates this chapter, the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall
immediately revoke all licenses issued under this chapter to such applicant, owner or proprietor.
Moreover, in the event an owner of a video or mechanical amusement device or a proprietor of a
business establishment is convicted of possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement
device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Borough of
Pleasant Hills shall revoke each license issued to such person, as an applicant, owner or
proprietor.
Additionally, the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall not issue a license of video or mechanical devices
to any person who has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition, for
possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, within three years of the date of application.
Any video or mechanical amusement device used or possessed in violation of the Crimes Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or this chapter, may be deemed contraband and forfeited in
accordance with the provisions set forth in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501(d) (relating to scattering rubbish).
§ 144-15. Suggestion or promise of nonprosecution prohibited.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 28/339
Because the Borough of Pleasant Hills intends to prosecute the illegal possession or use of unlawful
gambling devices, no Borough employee or agent may promise, suggest or insinuate, either expressly
or by implication, that the applicant, licensee, proprietor or owner, who either illegally possesses or
uses a per se, modified or other illegal gambling devices, shall not be prosecuted.
§ 144-16. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person or persons, firm, partnership
or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a summary offense, and
upon conviction by the issuing authority for the magisterial district which includes the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $300, and costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, may be committed by the issuing authority to the
Allegheny County Jail in conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for a period not
to exceed 10 days. Each and every day that any machine or device is used and operated in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this chapter and shall be subject to
separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
§ 144-17. When effective; effective date of license fees.
This chapter shall become effective on the date of its enactment but the license fees shall go into effect
on July 1, 1999.
Chapter 150. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals running at large declared nuisance — See Ch. 248, Art. I.
Nuisance properties — See Ch. 247.
Animals in parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 254.
Rodent control — See Ch. 290.
Trapping — See Ch. 340.
Article I. Dog Licensing; Dog Control
[Adopted 9-8-1947 by Ord. No. 12]
§ 150-1. License required.
[Amended 3-13-1972 by Ord. No. 466; 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792; 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 903]
The owner of any dog within the Borough of Pleasant Hills is required to obtain a license as of the first
day of January of each year and every year thereafter. The owner of any dog more than six months old
shall make application to the properly authorized officer of the Borough for a license for each dog
owned or kept. A license must be obtained as of the date the dog is six months of age. Therefore, if the
dog turns six months old after the first day of a year, a license must be obtained for the remainder of
that calendar year. The application shall stated the breed, sex, approximate age and general colors
and markings of the dog for which a license is desired and the name and address of the owners. The
application shall also include a telephone number to contact the owner of the dog in the event the need
arises to do so. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee per license, per year, as set forth in
the current Fee Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough
Manager.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 29/339
[1]
A.
B.
§ 150-2. Rabies inoculation required.
No application shall be valid for procuring a license for any dog unless a certificate of a duly authorized
veterinarian accompanies the same certifying that the particular dog was inoculated against rabies
within the past three months.
§ 150-3. Term of license.
[Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 903]
All licenses issued as aforesaid shall become effective as of the first day of January in the year in
which issued and shall expire on the 31st day of December of the same year.
§ 150-4. Tag to be affixed.
The Borough by its duly authorized officers and agents shall have prepared and ready an official metal
tag which together with the license shall be issued to the applicant. It shall thereafter be the duty of the
applicant to affix the metal tag upon a collar or harness attached to the dog, and no dog shall at any
time be permitted within the limits of the Borough unless it shall wear the metal tag securely attached
to a collar or harness.
§ 150-5. Running at large prohibited.
[Amended 3-8-1948 by Ord. No. 28; 8-17-2015 by Ord. No. 984]
As set forth in Code § 248-2, it shall be unlawful for any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to run at
large on any street, highway or other public place within the Borough of Pleasant Hills without being
under the control of the owner or attendant of the dog. Any dog which is seized as a result of a
violation of this section shall be subject to impoundment as described in § 248-2 and the penalties
referenced therein. Licensed dogs which are placed in a kennel that the Borough has a contract with
for animal control shall be held for a period of five days, and those dogs not retrieved shall be offered
for placement in a home or destroyed humanely as defined in the agreement for kennel services and
animal control.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 248, Nuisances, Article I, Animals Running at Large; Garbage;
Obstructions.
§ 150-6. Redemption procedures.
[Amended 3-8-1948 by Ord. No. 28]
The Borough of Pleasant Hills has entered into an agreement with a kennel to provide various
services. The terms of the agreement with the kennel may be amended from time to time. The
kennel the Borough contracts with is also subject to change in the future and the enactment of this
subsection does not extend the term of the existing contract with Ferree Kennel. The current
agreement provides that licensed and unlicensed dogs shall be held for a period of five days after
capture before they are placed or humanely destroyed. Any kennel that the Borough contracts
with shall agree to a contractual provision to hold dogs, whether licensed or unlicensed, for a
period of at least five days after capture.
[Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 889]
In the event that the owner or other person entitled to the possession of any dog seized and held
in compliance with the provisions of this article shall not redeem such dog within the periods
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 30/339
prescribed for, the Borough authorities by their proper officer shall have authority to destroy said
dog or to sell the same by public or private sale for payment of all costs.
§ 150-7. Kennel license.
[Amended 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 927]
Animal kennels, for keeping, storing, breeding, training or other purposes are permitted within the M-1
Zoning District provided any such kennel is properly licensed and in compliance with all state and
county regulations that may apply.
§ 150-8. Duplicate licenses and tags.
The Borough shall provide and its duly constituted officers are hereby empowered to so provide in
cases where dog licenses or tags have been lost or stolen to issue duplicate tags in lieu thereof an
affidavit of the owner or keeper of the dog to the effect of such loss or theft.
§ 150-9. Unlicensed dogs.
Where it is known by the officers authorized to enforce this article that any person or persons possess
or harbor an unlicensed dog, notice shall be given to such person, and if he shall fail to take out a
license within five days after notice thereof he shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 150-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons failing to comply with the provisions of this article, upon conviction before any
District Justice of the Borough, shall pay a fine not exceeding $10, pay the costs of prosecution, arrest
and custody or impounding of the dog, as the case may be, and in default of payment of such fines
and costs shall be sentenced to the Borough lockup for not more than five days or to the County Jail
for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Article II. Sale of Pets
[Adopted 3-13-1967 by Ord. No. 389]
§ 150-11. Restriction on sale of baby fowl and rabbits.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell, offer for sale, barter or give away baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three weeks of age
or rabbits under two months of age as pets, toys, premiums or novelties.
§ 150-12. Dyeing of feathers or fur prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain or otherwise
change the natural color of baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits, or to bring or transport the
same into the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 150-13. Applicability.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 31/339
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of baby chickens,
ducklings or other fowl, or such rabbits, in proper facilities by breeders or stores engaged in the
business of selling for purposes of commercial breeding and raising.
§ 150-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine not
to exceed $100. Each and every day that a violation of this article exists shall be deemed to be a
separate offense punishable by a like fine.
Article III. Depositing of Dog Waste
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 749]
§ 150-15. Deposit on public and private property prohibited.
[Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 881]
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog waste to be deposited on any public property owned or controlled
by the Borough of Pleasant Hills or on any other private property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 150-16. Cleanup of dog waste.
[Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 881]
In the event that dog waste should be deposited on any public property of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills or on any other private property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills, the person having control of
said dog shall forthwith remove such dog waste into a plastic bag or other appropriate container and
shall thereafter dispose of such dog waste in a sanitary manner.
§ 150-17. Construal of term "public property."
The term "public property" used in this article shall refer, inter alia, to all public parks of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, all sidewalks in the Borough of Pleasant Hills and all streets in the Borough of Pleasant
Hills and the grassy area between the sidewalk and the street.
§ 150-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction before the District Justice for the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 for each individual violation of the
provisions of this article.
Article IV. Exotic Animals
[Adopted 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
§ 150-19. Applicability.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 32/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
This article applies to wild or exotic animals which are prohibited or protected by Title 50, Code of
Federal Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 150-20. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EXOTIC ANIMAL
Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the United States or is wild by nature. Exotic
animals include, but are not limited to, any or all of the following orders and families, whether bred
in the wild or in captivity, and also any or all of the hybrids with domestic species. The animals
listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples and are not to be construed as an
exhaustive list or to limit the generality of each group of animals, unless otherwise specified.
Nonhuman primates and posiminans (monkeys, chimpanzees, baboons);
Felidae (lions, tigers, bobcats, cougars, leopards, jaguars, mountain lions and nondomesticated
cats);
Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, nondomesticated dogs);
Ursidae (all bears);
All venomous and constricting snakes, including, but not limited to, all members of the families
Vilperiidae (vipers and pit vipers), Elapidae (cobras), Hydrophidae (sea snakes), venomous
Colubridae (boomslang, twig snake and keel back snake genus); all members of the order
Crocodilia, including alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gharials, venomous fish other than those
commonly kept in small aquariums and posing no significant hazard to humans or domestic
animals;
Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles);
Proboscidas (elephants);
Hyaenidae (hyenas);
Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine, sheep or goats);
Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums);
Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses, donkeys or mules);
Edentata (anteaters, sloths, armadillos);
Viverridae (mongooses, civets and genets).
§ 150-21. Keeping, transportation and handling of reptilian
species.
All reptilian species not prohibited as pets or specimens must be contained within habitats designed to
prevent escape; shall be transported in escape-proof containers; shall not be handled openly in public
places unless the handler is conducting an educational meeting or is demonstrating a reptile for sale
within a commercial animal establishment; and shall not be released or abandoned except for native
reptiles which have wandered near human habitation and may be relocated to nearby natural habitat.
Any captive reptile secured by or forfeited to the Borough shall be released to a zoo, humane society
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 33/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
or reptile rescue organization, or euthanized at the discretion of the Borough Police, Zoning Officer or
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 150-22. Keeping of exotic animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, bring, or have in one's
possession an exotic animal(s) within the Borough limits.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or any other person in control of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land within the Borough limits or any residence or business premises situated thereon to
knowingly permit any other person to be in possession of an exotic animal upon the property,
residence or premises.
§ 150-23. Violations and penalties; seizure and injunctive relief.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each separate day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may, at its sole discretion, cause to be seized any animal
which is located in Pleasant Hills in violation of this article. Furthermore, the Borough may seek
injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County requiring any animal located in
the Borough of Pleasant Hills in violation of this article to be removed. These remedies available to
the Borough are not mutually exclusive, and the Borough may, at its sole discretion, fine any
person, cause to be seized any animal and/or request injunctive relief regarding the same for
violations of this article,
§ 150-24. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park or educational institution incorporated or
authorized to do business in Pennsylvania, such as:
A humane society or animal park;
A veterinary hospital, clinic or office;
A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research;
Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association; or
Animals sold at pet stores recognized as domestic pets as defined herein.
§ 150-25. Existing ownership; permit required.
Any person owning or possessing a wild or exotic animal at the time of enactment of this article may,
pending the approval of the Zoning Officer, obtain a permit for said wild or exotic animal, provided that:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 34/339
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A permit application is filed with the Borough of Pleasant Hills Police Department and/or the
Zoning Officer within 45 days of the effective date of this article. Such application is to include:
Species, age and sex of said wild or exotic animal.
A plan for the housing and containment of said wild or exotic animal.
The plan and facilities for the housing and containment of wild or exotic animal must be reviewed,
inspected and approved by the Zoning Officer as adequate to prevent such animal from escaping
or injuring the public.
An annual permit fee in the amount of $25 for each wild or exotic animal shall be paid by the
owner or possessor of such animal to the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The fee for the year must be
paid by January 5 of that year.
Upon the death, sale, adoption, exchange, transfer or disposal of said wild or exotic animal, the
animal may not be replaced. However, wild or exotic animals which are used for educational
purposes or which are the source of one's livelihood may be replaced upon the death or sale of
said animal(s), subject to the discretion of the Zoning Officer and registration of the replacement
animal(s).
Article V. Keeping of Chickens
[Adopted 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 971]
§ 150-26. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the words and phrases used in this article:
APPLICANT
A person who has applied for a residential chicken permit. Each such person must be a resident
and/or property owner within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
APPLICATION
The form approved by the Borough Manager and/or the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills for the erection or construction of a permit for the keeping of chickens and/or the application
for a residential chicken permit.
CHICKEN
Poultry or fowl of the species Gallus domesticus/G.gallus domesticus. The species includes many
different breeds of chicken.
CHICKEN COOP
A structure for sheltering of female (pullets or hens) chickens. An existing shed or garage may be
used for this purpose, provided that it meets the standards for chicken coops set forth in this
article. A chicken coop shall be considered an accessory structure, which may require a separate
permit(s). Such permits shall only be used to house female chickens and not roosters, as the early
morning noise a rooster makes is recognized to be a nuisance.
CHICKEN PEN
An enclosure that is connected to or surrounding a chicken coop for the purpose of allowing
chickens to leave the coop while remaining in an enclosed predator-safe environment. The
purpose of the pen shall be to allow the chickens to move about in a controlled environment.
CO-PERMITTEE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 35/339
A.
A lessee or tenant of a residential dwelling who has received a residential chicken permit in
conjunction with the property owner for the keeping of chickens.
DWELLING
A house, apartment building or other structure designed or used primarily for human habitation.
The word "dwelling" shall not include boardinghouses or rooming houses, hotels, motels, tents,
trailers, or any structure designed or used for transient business.
PERMITTEE
A residential property owner who has received a residential chicken permit for the keeping of
chickens.
RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN PERMIT
A permit issued under the provisions of this article for the keeping of chickens as accessory to the
primary residential use of a property.
§ 150-27. Number and type of chickens restricted.
After the effective date of this article, those property owners who have previously obtained a permit for
a chicken coop and who currently have chickens may continue to house up to six chickens on their
property. The ability to house up to six chickens shall only apply to those property owners who lawfully
obtained a permit for the construction of a chicken coop on their property and obtain a residential
chicken permit as described in § 150-32 of this article. Therefore, any resident who desires to continue
to keep up to six chickens must obtain these permits prior to the effective date of this article. If the
permits are not obtained by that time, no chickens shall be housed at any residential property within
the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and it is hereby recognized that chickens are farm animals and
prohibited in residential neighborhoods except as described herein.
§ 150-28. Roosters prohibited.
For the purposes of this article, only female (pullets or hens) chickens are permitted. Roosters are
expressly prohibited from being kept in the Borough of Pleasant Hills as the early morning noises
roosters make are hereby recognized to be a nuisance.
§ 150-29. Housing of chickens as accessory to residential
dwellings.
The keeping of chickens, in accordance with the standards of this article, shall only be permitted at a
property on which a residential dwelling is the primary use, and the keeping of chickens shall be
considered a use accessory to the residential use. Chickens shall not be housed or kept in any zoning
district except where the permits described herein were first lawfully obtained. If the necessary permits
are not obtained by the date of enactment of this article, it shall be illegal to house any chickens in the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 150-30. Sale of products associated with accessory use
prohibited.
The following items generated by or kept as a result of the keeping of chickens shall not be offered for
sale or sold within the Borough of Pleasant Hills:
Eggs, chicks or chickens;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 36/339
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Chicken manure or compost containing chicken manure; and
Produce which has been grown in an accessory garden fertilized with chicken manure or compost.
The sale of eggs or other farm products from a residential home is expressly prohibited and a
violation of this article.
§ 150-31. Standards for construction and maintenance of chicken
coop.
Chickens shall be housed in a chicken coop which has access to a chicken pen. From dusk to
dawn, chickens shall be secured in the chicken coop.
Construction and design of chicken coop. The chicken coop shall comply with all applicable
setback requirements for residential accessory uses and structures. The setback requirements
that apply to sheds shall also apply to chicken coops, and no chicken coops shall be erected any
closer to the property line than a shed or accessory structure is permitted to be placed. The coop
shall be stationary, enclosed with solid material on all sides and have a solid roof and door(s). The
coop shall be at least 18 inches high and provide at least 2.5 square feet of floor area per chicken.
The coop shall provide no less than one square foot of window per coop, with at least one square
foot of window per 15 square feet of floor. In addition, the coop shall provide vents as necessary to
ensure adequate ventilation. The materials for each element (walls, roof, windows and doors) shall
be uniform and blend with the surrounding area. Doors shall be constructed so that they can close
and lock. Windows shall be constructed so they can close. Windows and vents shall be covered
with wire mesh with a maximum spacing of one inch by one inch. The coop shall be impermeable
to rodents, wild birds, dogs, cats, and other predators. The coop shall provide adequate shelter
from moisture and extremes of temperatures. Existing accessory structures may be used as
chicken coops, provided they meet the standards set forth herein.
Construction and design of chicken pen. The chicken pen shall be constructed of wood or metal
posts with wire mesh fencing material (wire mesh with a maximum spacing of one inch by one
inch). The pen shall contain at least 10 square feet of area per chicken. The fence shall rise at
least four feet above the ground and be buried at least one foot below the ground. The pen shall
be covered with wire mesh, aviary netting or solid roofing. The pen shall serve as an area for the
chickens to run, yet prevent the chickens from running loose or becoming a nuisance. Chickens
that are permitted to run loose shall be considered a violation of this article.
Maintenance of chicken coop, chicken pen and surrounding area. The chicken coop, chicken pen
and surrounding area shall be kept clean, dry and odor-free, and in a neat and sanitary condition
at all times. All manure, uneaten feed and other trash shall be removed in a timely manner and
disposed of by using an approved sanitary method, including composting or double bagging
manure and placing the manure in the trash for collection. Under no circumstances shall chicken
manure be placed into the sanitary sewer system. The permittee and co-permittee shall take any
and all necessary action(s) to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential
infestation of insects and parasites. Slaughter of chickens is permitted. If a chicken dies it shall be
disposed of in accordance with the Domestic Animal Law, 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., as may be
amended.
Living conditions. Chickens shall have access to feed and clean water at all times, and such feed
and water shall be inaccessible to rodents, wild birds and predators. Chickens shall be provided
adequate bedding in the coop, and perches are encouraged.
§ 150-32. Permit required.
Any person who keeps chickens in the Borough of Pleasant Hills as an accessory to a residential
use must first obtain a residential chicken permit from the Borough prior to acquiring the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 37/339
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
chicken(s) and/or constructing the coop or pen. All applicable permits for the accessory structure
(i.e., the coop) must also be obtained. Every Borough resident who currently has chickens must
apply for and be approved for a permit in order to keep the chickens they currently have, with up
to a maximum of six chickens. The residential chicken permit application shall be on a form
established by the Borough Manager and/or Zoning Officer and may be amended from time to
time. If the Zoning Officer or designee determines that the residential chicken permit application is
administratively complete, the Zoning Officer will issue a conditional approval of the residential
chicken permit application. After the applicant receives conditional approval, the applicant must
notify the Zoning Officer when the chicken coop and chicken pen have been placed on the subject
property and are ready for inspection. If, upon inspection, the Zoning Officer or his/her designee
determines that the chickens will be kept in compliance with the requirements of this article, a final
residential chicken permit shall be issued to the applicant. All permit applications must be filed with
the Borough no later than the effective date of this article. Following the effective date of this
article, it shall be a violation of this article to obtain or house chickens in the Borough of Pleasant
Hills, except those individuals who previously obtained the necessary permit to house up to six
chickens.
Residential chicken permits shall only be valid for three years after the date of issuance. A
permittee and/or co-permittee who wishes to continue keeping chickens shall apply for a new
residential chicken permit on or before the expiration date of the previous residential chicken
permit. Applications for a new residential chicken permit shall be reviewed in accordance with the
procedures and requirements that are applicable at the time the person applies for a new
residential chicken permit. An inspection by the Borough will be required prior to the residential
chicken permit renewal, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, which inspection
is a condition precedent to the issuance of a new residential chicken permit.
Notwithstanding the issuance of a residential chicken permit by the Borough, private restrictions
on the use of land/property shall remain enforceable as provided by law, and the Borough's
issuance of a residential chicken permit does not remove or supersede private restrictions in
effect. No person shall make application for a residential chicken permit who knows, or has reason
to know, that private restrictions prohibit the keeping of chickens. Private restrictions include but
are not limited to: rental contracts, deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions,
neighborhood associations' bylaws, and covenant deeds. A residential chicken permit issued to a
person whose property is subject to private restrictions that prohibit the keeping of chickens is
void. The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction is the sole responsibility of the
private parties involved.
§ 150-33. Application requirements, process and procedure.
A residential chicken permit application shall be submitted on the form established by the Borough
Manager and/or Zoning Officer and at a minimum shall contain the following information:
A notarized signature of the landowner of the subject property;
The notarized signature of any lessee or tenant who will be responsible for the keeping of
chickens (co-permittee);
The address of the subject property;
A verification that, to the owner's knowledge, there is no private restriction against the
keeping of chickens;
A verification that the applicant is familiar with and agrees to be bound by the requirements
set forth in this article for the keeping of chickens.
The Borough Council shall from time to time establish by resolution an application fee for the
residential chicken permit application for the keeping of chickens. The application shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 38/339
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
accompanied by the applicable fee, and the application will not be processed until the fee has
been paid. The initial fee for the application is set at $50. Thereafter, the application fee may be
amended from time to time at the discretion of Borough Council. The amount of the application fee
will be included in the Fee Resolution that is adopted by Borough Council.
A separate permit may be required for all accessory structures associated with the keeping of
chickens, and no such structure may be erected without the permit for the accessory structure first
being obtained.
§ 150-34. Responsibilities of permittee and co-permittee.
A person engaged in the keeping of chickens on his/her property shall comply with all of the following:
Such person shall have been issued the residential chicken permit required under this article.
Such person shall keep no more than six female chickens.
The principal use of the property must remain as a residential dwelling.
No person shall keep a rooster(s).
The chickens shall at all times be provided a chicken coop and chicken pen in accordance with
this article.
A person shall not keep chickens in any location on the property other than the rear yard. For the
purpose of this article, "rear yard" means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot
line and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line
established by the rear of the single-family structure and extending to the side lot lines.
Notwithstanding the applicable residential accessory setbacks, the chicken coop and chicken pen
shall be located no closer than 30 feet to any residential structure on an adjacent property. For the
purposes of this section, "adjacent property" means all parcels of property that the applicant's
property comes into contact with at one or more points, except for parcels that are legally adjacent
to, but are in fact separated from, the applicant's property by a public or private street.
All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens that are likely to attract or to
become infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent
rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them.
If the above requirements or any other requirements of this article are not complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Zoning Officer may revoke any permit granted under this article and/or
initiate appropriate actions at law or equity to abate or restrain the violation.
A person who has been issued a residential chicken permit shall make such permit available for
examination upon demand by any police officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning Officer,
the Borough Manager or any other employees of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Permittees and co-permittees shall be jointly and severally liable for compliance with the
provisions of this Code.
§ 150-35. Permit revocation; removal of items.
Compliance with the requirements of this article shall create a presumption that the permitted
keeping of chickens does not create a public nuisance or threat to public health or safety under
the nuisance provisions of this Code.[1] The residential chicken permit shall, however, be revoked
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 39/339
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
if the Code Enforcement Officer or Zoning Officer, in his/her sole discretion, determines that the
permittee or co-permittee is in violation of this article.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Nuisances.
Violation of the provisions of this article shall result in the revocation of the permit and may result
in the initiation of the enforcement proceedings and the assessment of the penalties described
herein.
Misrepresentation by a permittee or co-permittee shall result in the subject permit being revoked,
voided, or denied.
If a violation of this article occurs, the Zoning Officer is authorized to order the immediate removal
of all disposable items associated with the keeping of chickens. Stationary structures associated
with the keeping of chickens may remain, provided the structure is not creating a nuisance and is
not in violation of any provision of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Any permittee or co-permittee who has a residential chicken permit revoked, removed, or voided
will not be eligible for consideration for another residential chicken permit in the future.
§ 150-36. Permits obtained through misrepresentation, fraud or
forgery.
If the applicant obtained the residential chicken permit through misrepresentation, fraud, or forgery, the
permit shall automatically become null and void. Such a determination shall be made by the Zoning
Officer, and the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be considered final.
§ 150-37. Nuisances prohibited.
The permitted keeping of chickens shall be conducted in a manner that does not disturb the use or
enjoyment of adjacent properties. Odor generated by the chickens shall not be perceptible at the
property boundaries, and noise generated by the chickens shall not disturb people of reasonable
sensitivity at the property boundaries. A permittee or co-permittee shall not, under any circumstance,
keep chickens in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance or results in a violation of Chapter 247
or 248 of the Borough Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills or any other ordinance or law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 150-38. Appeal process.
If any applicant, permittee, co-permittee, or landowner adjacent to a permitted chicken coop or chicken
pen is aggrieved by the determination of the Zoning Officer or his/her designee or the Code
Enforcement Officer, such aggrieved person may appeal the determination to the Borough Council of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The appeal shall be in writing and must be received at the Borough
office no later than 20 days from the date of the determination of which such person(s) are aggrieved.
A timely appeal shall stay any order to remove chickens until the determination of the appeal, unless
the order specifies that it was issued due to the keeping of chickens causing an immediate public
health or safety hazard. The written appeal must describe in detail the reason for appeal. The Borough
Council may then notify the aggrieved person of when the matter will be considered by Council at a
public meeting. Any decision of Council shall be final and binding.
§ 150-39. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 40/339
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Any violation of this article may result in an action being brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The fine for such violation shall not be less than $100
nor more than $1,000 for each violation. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion of a
day in which a violation is found to exist, or for each section of this article which is found to have
been violated.
This article may be enforced through an action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County.
Any person found guilty of violating this article may be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings brought in accordance with
this article.
§ 150-40. When effective; housing of chickens after effective
date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective 30 days from the date of enactment by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Property owners who wish to house chickens must
apply for the residential chicken permit and/or obtain approval for the chicken coop as described herein
to lawfully continue to house chickens after the effective date of this article. Following the effective date
of this article, no new permits shall be issued, and only those property owners who obtained the
necessary permits by the effective date of this article shall thereafter be permitted to house chickens in
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Article VI. Housing of Farm Animals Within Residential
Zoning Districts
[Adopted 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 973]
§ 150-41. Farm animals in residential zoning districts prohibited.
On or after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any property owner, person, firm or
corporation to maintain, keep, raise or house horses, ponies, cows, calves, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs,
pot-bellied pigs or other livestock, including but not limited to ducks, turkeys, geese, chickens, guinea
fowl, pigeons, doves, or fowl, within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and/or R-4 Zoning Districts. Racing and show
pigeons are, however, excluded from this article. The prohibition against chickens, however, is subject
to the terms and provisions of Ordinance 971, which was enacted on July 21, 2014.[1] Those residents
who lawfully obtain a residential chicken permit may continue to house chickens so long as the
requirements of Ordinance 971 are satisfied.
Editor's Note: See Art. V of this chapter.
§ 150-42. Purpose.
The express purpose of this article is to prohibit the keeping of farm animals which would constitute a
nuisance within the residential zoning districts of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. For purposes of this
article, certain fowl described herein, including pigeons, other than racing or show pigeons, doves, etc.,
are recognized to be the type of animals/birds which are prohibited.
§ 150-43. Effect on other provisions; severability.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 41/339
The express purpose of this article is to enact the limited changes described above. No other section
of the existing Code shall be changed as a result of this article. In the event that any section, clause or
part of this article is found to be illegal, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, then only that portion of this
article shall be restricted and the remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 156. Billiard and Pool Rooms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 10-11-1948 by Ord. No.
33. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 144.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
§ 156-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own or operate a billiard or pool room for pay as a
business without first having made application for and having received an annual license to own and
operate the same.
§ 156-2. Application for license.
The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the owner of the building, the owner of the billiard
or pool room, the manager thereof, if any, the previous occupation of the owner and manager, if any,
thereof, the location of the said billiard or pool room proposed to be licensed, number of tables to be
used, the number of rooms, the character and use of the building in which said billiard or pool room is
to be located, and the part of the building such billiard or pool room shall occupy.
§ 156-3. Fee.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
No license shall be issued upon any application made unless a license fee for the calendar year shall
accompany the application for the license. The license fee shall be as set forth in the current Fees
Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 156-4. Operational restrictions.
No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to participate in or play billiards or pool in any
billiard or pool room so licensed, nor shall the playing of billiards or pool be permitted during the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor on Sundays. No license shall permit drunken or disorderly persons to
frequent or congregate on the premises for which a license has been granted.
§ 156-5. Disorderly conduct.
The Police Department shall have and is hereby given power and authority in any case of any disorder,
drunkenness, disturbance or other annoyance in any billiard or pool room to enter upon and into such
place and arrest on view all persons acting in a disorderly manner, or who have disturbed the public
peace.
§ 156-6. Authority to close business.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 42/339
The Mayor shall have and he is hereby given the right, power and authority to close any licensed place
violating the provisions of this chapter and to revoke the license thereof in case of violations.
§ 156-7. Unlawful acts.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
It shall be unlawful for any person to play billiards or pool in a licensed place between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or to frequent such billiard or pool rooms in a drunken or disorderly manner, or to
otherwise cause a disturbance or annoyance of any kind upon the licensed premises.
§ 156-8. Penalties for operating unlicensed business.
Every person engaged in keeping an unlicensed billiard or pool room for the use of the public and for
profit, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $100 for each and every day such
billiard or pool room shall be kept open and in operation. The fine or fines shall be recovered
summarily before any District Justice of the Borough.
§ 156-9. Violations and penalties.
Every person otherwise, than in the preceding section, violating any of the provisions of this chapter
and its regulations shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5, nor more than $25 upon conviction
before any District Justice of the Borough, and in default of payment of fine and costs shall be
committed to the Borough lockup for a period of not more than six days or to the Allegheny County Jail
for a period of not more than 30 days.
Chapter 162. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 162, Brush, Grass and Weeds, adopted 9-12-1960 by Ord. No. 232, was
repealed 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 829. See now Ch. 268, Property Maintenance, and specifically
Chapter 3, § 302.4, of the International Property Maintenance Code, for current provisions.]
Chapter 166. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 166, Building Construction, consisting of Art. I, CABO One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code, adopted 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 738, and Art. II, BOCA Building Code, adopted 11-15-
1999 by Ord. No. 772, was repealed 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 827. See Ch. 180, Construction Codes,
Uniform, for current provisions pertaining to building construction.]
Chapter 170. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 4-12-1948 by Ord. No.
29. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
§ 170-1. Plan to be maintained; numbering of lots.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 43/339
A.
B.
A plan of the entire Borough showing all streets, highways, roads, driveways, lanes, ways and alleys
thereof, and indicating the lots thereon shall be prepared, and at all times be kept up to date by the
Borough Engineer. It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to number said lots in such manner as
to secure a uniform system for the purpose of numbering houses and buildings within the Borough.
§ 170-2. Numbers to be displayed.
Upon approval of this chapter it shall be the duty of the owner, owners, trustees, lessees and
occupants of each and every house and building erected upon the lots as numbered in said plan,
to place and maintain numbers assigned to said lots designating the house or building erected on
said lot, in a reasonably conspicuous manner.
After January 1, 2010, all newly constructed houses and buildings numbers and letters shall
conform to the most recent edition of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted by
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 921]
§ 170-3. Notification of number and duty to display.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 921]
The Zoning Officer shall notify the owner or owners of all lots having houses or buildings erected
thereon of the numbers which have been assigned to said lots and the requirement to have said
number placed conspicuously in front of each house or building.
§ 170-4. Time limit to display number.
Within 30 days from the service of said notice, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners of each lot of
the Borough wherein a house or building is erected to place and maintain in front of each house and
building in reasonably conspicuous figures the numbers assigned to said lot.
§ 170-5. New buildings.
Upon the completion of any new house or building hereafter, the owner or builder shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter and place the number assigned to said lot in a conspicuous manner before
said house or building shall be used for the purposes for which it was intended.
§ 170-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 921]
Any person or persons who shall number or attempt to number any house or building contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail or neglect to number a house or building when required to
do so by the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to change the number of any house or building
upon notification by the Zoning Officer or Borough Manager, or who alter, deface, remove or destroy
any number required to be displayed by this chapter shall, upon conviction before the District Justice
within the Borough pay a fine of not more than $100 or undergo imprisonment for a period of not more
than five days in the Borough lockup or the county jail.
§ 170-7. Preexisting building numbers.
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 921]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 44/339
A.
All numbered or lettered building numbers prior to January 1, 2010, shall be considered nonconforming
and may remain; preexisting numbers, if replaced, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-8. Definitions.
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 921]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSPICUOUSLY OR REASONABLY CONSPICUOUS
Plainly legible and visible from the street or road.
Chapter 174. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 9-13-1954 by Ord. No.
121. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
§ 174-1. Definitions.
[Added 7-9-1962 by Ord. No. 278]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
WASTE MATTER
Combustible rubbish, such as paper, wood, leaves and similar materials, but does not include
garbage, glass, crockery, dishes, bottles, floor sweepings, metals, cans, rubber, linoleum, asphalt
or tarry products, grease, and animal or vegetable wastes.
§ 174-2. Restrictions.
From and after the effective date of this chapter it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to set fire
to, burn or cause to be burned, anywhere within the Borough of Pleasant Hills, whether such be on
private or public premises, or lots or upon streets, roadways or rights-of-way, any material or
substance so as to produce any smoke or offensive or noxious odors by reason thereof; provided,
however, that the burning of clean and offenseless matter on weekdays, except holidays, during the
hours from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., and on Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 noon, will be
permissible when properly supervised, regulated and controlled.
§ 174-2.1. Chimeneas, portable fireplaces and covered fire pits.
[Added 7-21-2008 by Ord. No. 891]
Section 174-2 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby amended, in limited part, to
recognize an exception for the use of chimeneas, portable fireplaces and covered fire pits at
residential property only. Burning at parks and public places remains subject to the existing
Borough ordinances. The restrictions found in the International Fire Code and in the Allegheny
County Rules and Regulations shall remain applicable in the Borough. The use of chimeneas,
portable fireplaces and covered fire pits is approved for use at residential property within the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, so long as they do not result in excessive smoke or interfere with the
use and enjoyment of a neighbor of their own property. Burning which results in excessive smoke
or smoke which is noxious is prohibited. The material placed in chimeneas and similar devices
shall follow the manufacturers' recommendations and shall not result in offensive smoke. Under no
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 45/339
B.
C.
D.
circumstances should plastic or other types of material be burned which will result in offensive
smoke. These devices should also be kept a minimum distance of at least 15 feet from any
structure or combustible material, and a method of extinguishment must be kept within 30 feet of
the device. Acceptable methods of extinguishment include a garden hose, fire extinguisher or
mound of dirt or dry sand. At all times burning is ongoing in these devices a responsible adult
must be present. The remaining portions of the existing Ordinance 278 remain in effect which
prohibits burning that results in noxious or offensive smoke. Restrictions against offensive smoke
are also found in Sections 307 and 308 of the International Fire Code and these restrictions are
incorporated by reference herein as if set forth in their entirety.
Section 174-2 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby amended to create an
exception for the use of chimeneas, portable fireplaces and covered fire pits in the Borough of
Pleasant Hills between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight).
Open burning shall remain regulated by Section 2105.50 of Allegheny County Ordinance No.
16782 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations of Allegheny County Article XXI, as
amended and effective as of the date of this section and the International Fire Code as adopted by
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. The Borough of Pleasant Hills incorporates these
restrictions by reference as if set forth in their entirety in this section. The purpose of this section is
to incorporate the Allegheny County Regulations, and the International Fire Code, as they may be
amended, in their entirety. The Allegheny County Regulations recognize the ability of a
municipality to enact reasonable restrictions on certain types of burning. The express purpose of
this section is to place reasonable restrictions on the hours for certain types of burning and to
ensure that this type of burning shall be done safely and without interfering with the ability of a
neighbor to enjoy their own property. In the event that a conflict exists with the terms of the
International Fire Code, the Allegheny County rules and this section, the terms of the International
Fire Code shall prevail, followed by the terms of the Allegheny County Ordinances and Rules and
Regulations.
Common residential burning devices such as chimeneas, portable fireplaces and covered fire pits
are exempt from the open burning regulations referred to in Subsection C above. However, such
activities shall be tended to by a responsible person at all times and shall be subject to the
limitations set forth in Subsection A above against excessive, noxious or offensive smoke and
shall be subject to the time limits defined in Subsection B.
§ 174-3. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 447]
Every person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the District Justice of
the Borough, be liable to a fine of not more than $300 for each offense, and in default of payment of
said fine or costs be liable to be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days.
Chapter 178. Construction Activity
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Article I. Time Limitations
[Adopted 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 846]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 46/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 178-1. Restriction on construction activity.
[Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 875]
Construction activity performed by construction crews and contractors within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills, including but not limited to new construction, home remodeling and demolition work, is hereby
limited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. An exception exists
for work performed by the homeowner. Homeowners may perform such work on their own property
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day and are not prohibited from working on
Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 178-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article are subject to a fine of $300 for each occurrence. Each violation incurred
shall be considered a separate violation for purposes of this article.
Failure to pay the fine may result in a lien being placed on the property and/or referral to the
District Justice for prosecution, including an award of court costs and/or sentence of up to 30 days'
imprisonment for failure to pay the fine.
§ 178-3. Exceptions.
[Added 2-15-2016 by Ord. No. 994]
From and after the date of enactment of this section, it is recognized that certain constructionrelated
activity may not result in a disturbance to the neighbors. An exception may he granted by
the Code Enforcement Officer for this type of activity such that this activity may occur during
prohibited hours. The request for such an exception should be submitted to the Zoning
Officer/Code Enforcement Officer, in writing. These requests are to be submitted prior to the
building permit being issued. Exceptions will be granted upon demonstration to the Zoning Officer
that the proposed work will not involve hammering, power tools or equipment, earth-moving
equipment or any other type of activity which reasonably would result in a disturbance to the
neighbors. In the event the Zoning Officer denies the request, an appeal of this determination may
be requested by submitting a written request to the Borough Manager for Borough Council to hear
the appeal. Any such appeal shall he filed with the Borough Manager within 10 days of the
determination of the Zoning Officer.
The regular monthly meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is held on
the third Monday of each month. Any appeal is to be made in writing and delivered to the Office of
the Borough Manager by 12:00 noon on the second Monday of the month to be placed on the
agenda for that month's Council meeting. Those appeals submitted after 12:00 noon on the
second Monday of the month will be heard at the time of the next month's Council meeting.
All requests for exceptions and the appeal are to define the nature of the work and proposed
hours when the work will be completed as well as the estimated date when the project will be
finished.
Chapter 180. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 170.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 47/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 326.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
Article I. Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 827]
§ 180-1. Election to administer and enforce.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to
time, and its regulations.
§ 180-2. Adoption of code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 180-3. Means of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be undertaken in
any of the following ways as determined by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills from
time to time by resolution:
By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Pleasant Hills to serve as the municipal code
official to act on behalf of the Borough;
By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf
of the Borough of Pleasant Hills;
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of
this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and enforcement of this
Act on behalf of the Borough of Pleasant Hills;
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and industry for plan
review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 180-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended
from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established
by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 180-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 48/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by the Borough of
Pleasant Hills on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code
shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date of
this article and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are
hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code. This provision shall not,
however, render the remainder of said ordinances as invalid.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not governed by the code shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 180-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Pleasant Hills for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the Borough of Pleasant Hills by resolution
from time to time.
Article II. Municipal Code Officials
[Adopted 1-18-2010 by Ord. No. 915]
§ 180-7. Fire Code Official.
The Borough Fire Marshal is hereby appointed as the Fire Code Official for the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
The Fire Code Official shall have all authorities and duties as provided for in the International Fire
Code, most current edition, as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Article III. Unavailability of Fire Marshal
[Adopted 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 961]
§ 180-8. Authorization to perform duties.
Members of the Pleasant Hills Volunteer Fire Company who hold the appropriate certification to
perform the duties defined in Section 103 of the International Fire Code and the Pennsylvania
Construction Code are hereby authorized to perform these duties in the absence or in the event of the
unavailability of the Fire Marshal.
§ 180-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit members of the Pleasant Hills Volunteer Fire Company who
hold the appropriate certification to perform these duties only in the event that the Borough Fire
Marshal is not available.
§ 180-10. Description of duties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 49/339
[1]
[1]
In the event of the unavailability of the Borough Fire Marshal, the members of the Pleasant Hills
Volunteer Fire Company who hold the appropriate certification are hereby authorized to perform these
duties as described in the most current edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 180-11. Scope; severability.
This article is intended to be limited in scope. As a result, all the terms and provision of Ordinance No.
827 and Ordinance No. 915[1] of the Borough of Pleasant Hills which do not conflict with the terms
described herein shall remain in full force and effect. In the event that any section, clause or part of this
article is found to be illegal, unconstitutional or unenforceable, then only such part of this article shall
be stricken. It is the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills that the remainder
of this article and the existing Code shall remain in full force and effect.
Editor's Note: See Arts. I and II, respectively.
Article IV. Maintenance of Fire Inspection Records
[Adopted 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
§ 180-12. Record-keeping.
From and after the date of enactment of this article, all inspection reports provided through a third-party
inspection reporting system shall be maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the 2009
International Fire Code, as may he amended in the future. Such records shall be maintained on the
premises for a minimum of three years. Such records shall be provided to the Fire Department by the
company performing the inspections and maintenance, via the Fire Department's third-party inspection
reporting system. The third party is currently Brycer, LLC, but any change in the third-party provider in
the future shall not modify the record-keeping requirement of this article.
§ 180-13. Standards established by International Fire Code.
The intent of this article is enact record-keeping requirements which are consistent with the
requirements of the International Fire Code, as may be amended in the future. These requirements are
recognized in the Pennsylvania Construction Code and are recognized in Ordinance 915 of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills which was enacted on January 18, 2010.[1]
Editor's Note: See Article II.
Chapter 186. Drug Paraphernalia
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 10-15-1980 by Ord. No.
571. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed
for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 50/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 to 780-144 ("The Controlled Substance
Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act").
It includes, but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing
or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a
controlled substance can be derived;
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing
the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances;
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and
lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed
for use in compounding controlled substances;
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for
use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use
in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
Water pipes;
Carburetion tubes and devices;
Smoking and carburetion masks;
Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette,
that has become too small or to too short to be held in the hand;
Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
Carburetor pipes;
Chamber pipes;
Electric pipes
Chillums:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 51/339
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
CC.
DD.
EE.
FF.
GG.
HH.
II.
JJ.
KK.
LL.
MM.
NN.
A.
B.
C.
Bongs;
Ice pipes or chillers.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should
consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or
federal law relating to any controlled substances;
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 to
780-144.
The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the
object to facilitate a violation of 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 to 780-144; the innocence of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 to 780-144
shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia;
Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
National and local advertising concerning its use;
The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related
items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the
business enterprise;
The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 186-2. Offenses.
Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of 35
P.S. §§ 780-101 to 780-144.
Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with
intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of 35 P.S. §§ 780-101 to 780-144.
Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 52/339
where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is
to promote the sale of objects designed or intended to use as drug paraphernalia.
§ 186-3. Civil forfeiture.
All drug paraphernalia as defined by § 186-1 of this chapter shall be subject to forfeiture to the
Borough of Pleasant Hills and no property right shall exist in them.
§ 186-4. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the civil forfeiture provisions contained herein, any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $300. Each day that an offense exists
shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty for each
separate violation.
Chapter 189. Dumping
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 234.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
Article I. Dumping of Earth and Fill
[Adopted 5-13-1963 by Ord. No. 304]
§ 189-1. Unlawful acts.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation,
either intentionally or unintentionally, to dump or deposit upon any lands within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills any quantity of earth, dirt, stones, rocks or other materials having a volume greater than
27 cubic yards, unless a permit to so deposit and dump is first obtained from the Borough of Pleasant
Hills.
§ 189-2. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Borough Engineer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby charged with the duty and
responsibility of supervising and regulating the dumping and depositing of earth, dirt, stones, rocks or
other materials within the Borough of Pleasant Hills and he is hereby empowered to make such rules
and regulations as he may deem necessary to protect the lives and property of the residents of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills. Any rules or regulations made by the Borough Engineer shall be in
conformity with generally accepted engineering principles and standards.
§ 189-3. Filing of rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the Borough Engineer of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills shall be maintained on file in the office of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 53/339
A.
B.
Pleasant Hills and shall be available for inspection by any person during regular business hours.
§ 189-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who may violate the provisions of this article shall first be notified by
the Borough Engineer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills to correct, remove or abate such violation within
a period of 72 hours. In the event such condition is not corrected at the expiration of 72 hours after
receipt of proper notice, then such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to a fine of $10 per day
for each day that such condition exists in violation of the provisions of this article. Each day shall be
considered a separate violation subject to a separate fine as herein provided. The proper Borough
officials are hereby authorized to enforce the penalty provisions of this article before any of the District
Justices of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as in such cases made and provided.
Chapter 192. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 192, Electrical Standards, adopted 7-11-1966 by Ord. No. 374, was repealed
6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 827. See now Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.]
Chapter 194. Emergency Services
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
Fees — See Ch. 206.
Cleanup costs for hazardous wastes — See Ch. 225.
Article I. Reimbursement for Costs
[Adopted 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 806]
§ 194-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INDIVIDUALS AND/OR THEIR INSURANCE COMPANIES
Refers to a natural person or persons, partnership, corporation, association, firm or other legal
entity as well as insurance companies providing coverage to these individuals and/or entities.
§ 194-2. Authorization to submit bills.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny Count, Pennsylvania, authorizes the
Pleasant Hills Volunteer Fire Company and Relief Association, Inc., to submit bills to recover the cost
of fire fighting, materials used and the actual costs associated with vehicle and equipment use. For
purposes of this article, bills may be submitted in the following situations:
Responding to fire calls;
Extricating individuals;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 54/339
C.
[1]
Where materials are actually used or expended in responding to emergency and/or hazardous
situations.
§ 194-3. Schedule of fees and costs.
[Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 985]
From and after the date of enactment of this section, the fees and costs set forth in the fee schedule
attached hereto as Exhibit A[1] and incorporated herein by reference shall be charged to individuals
and/or their insurance carriers for reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to fires and/or
emergency/hazardous situations. These fees and costs shall also be included in the schedule of
charges contained within the Fee Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and may be amended in
the future by and through an amendment to said Fee Resolution.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the emergency services fee schedule, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 194-4. Collection of costs.
The costs and fees outlined above in Exhibit A shall be billed directly by the Pleasant Hills Volunteer
Fire Company and Relief Association, Inc., either by direct billing or through an arrangement that
Pleasant Hills Volunteer Fire Company and Relief Association, Inc., may enter into with a third-party
administrator.
Chapter 196. Evacuations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 7-17-1995 by Ord. No.
724. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 196-1. Police authorized to order evacuation.
Borough Council of Pleasant Hills hereby authorizes any uniformed police officer of the Pleasant Hills
Police Department to order the evacuation of all persons from any building or structure located within
the Borough of Pleasant Hills when the Pleasant Hills Police Department is made aware of any bomb
threat, fire threat or other similar type threat against said building or structure.
§ 196-2. Criteria to issue order; disclaimer of personal liability.
The police officers of the Pleasant Hills Police Department may order such evacuation when they
reasonably believe that such bomb threat, fire threat or other similar type threat exists. The police
officer, while acting under authority of this chapter, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally for
ordering such evacuation even if the said bomb threat, fire threat or other similar type threat proves to
be false.
§ 196-3. Penalties for refusal to obey evacuation order.
Any person who shall disregard or refuse to obey an evacuation order given by a uniformed police
office of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, upon conviction before the District Justice for the Borough
of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $500.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 55/339
[1]
Chapter 202. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 202, Fallout Shelters, adopted 11-30-1961 by Ord. No. 263, was repealed 5-
17-2004 by Ord. No. 824. See now Ch. 374, Zoning.]
Chapter 206. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 4-16-2001 by Ord. No.
792. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Sewer and solid waste fees and charges — See Ch. 298, Art. III.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 326.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
§ 206-1. Removal of fees from ordinances.
Prior ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills which set forth various fees for services, hearings,
violations and the operation of and enforcement of the ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, of
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, are amended in limited part to the extent the fees referenced therein
are in conflict with the Fee Resolution which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference as
Appendix A.[1]
Editor's Note: The current Fees Resolution is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, where it may
be examined during regular office hours.
§ 206-2. Effective date of fees.
The effective date of the establishment of any such fees shall remain unchanged by the enactment of
this chapter as well as the Fees Resolution attached hereto or any fees resolutions adopted in the
future.
§ 206-3. Enactment of fees resolutions.
Recognizing that certain fees may be subject to change in the future, said changes may be
accomplished by the enactment of future fees resolutions which will serve as a reference source for
Borough residents, staff and/or officials.
§ 206-4. Effect on legislation.
Any and all provisions of prior ordinances remain unchanged by the enactment of this chapter with the
exception of certain fees set forth herein.
Chapter 210. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 210, Fire Prevention, adopted 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 771, was repealed 6-21-
2004 by Ord. No. 827. See now Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 56/339
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Chapter 216. Floodplain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 7-21-2014 by Ord. No.
970.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 216, Floodplain Management, adopted 2-2-1977
by Ord. No. 534, as amended.
Article I. Statutory Authorization
§ 216-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978,[1] delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of their
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills does hereby order as follows.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 216-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 216-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Borough of Pleasant Hills
unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 216-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 57/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 216-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the
Chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 216-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Pleasant Hills or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 216-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees, or C) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant
to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code
of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Borough Manager.
§ 216-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 216-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 58/339
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
A.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and
all other applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended);[1] the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);[2] the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[3] and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC
and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
§ 216-10. Application procedures and requirements.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 59/339
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
C.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location, including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred, where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any other pertinent information as
may be required by the Floodplain Administrator, to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale,
showing the following:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 60/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
D.
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within any identified floodplain area
(see § 216-17) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 216-24F Storage, and
§ 216-25, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 216-24F and 216-25 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 216-25 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality, based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 216-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 216-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 61/339
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 216-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 216-14. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development permit does not refer to the zoning
approval.
The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request,
and the original permit is compliant with this chapter and the FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 216-15. Enforcement.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his/her agent, as the case may require; provided,
however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this state;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 62/339
(5)
B.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
(1)
A.
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Borough of Pleasant Hills of not less than $25 nor more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 216-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance
with the Municipal Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article IV. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 216-17. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Borough of Pleasant Hills, classified as special
flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by Borough of Pleasant Hills and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 216-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 63/339
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary
of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the municipality.
§ 216-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as
soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a
community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or
scientific data. See § 216-21B for situations where FEMA notification is required.
§ 216-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 216-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article V. Technical Provisions
§ 216-22. General requirements.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: any development that
causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 64/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
B.
Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges):
The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12) apply to FEMA for conditional approval of
such action prior to permitting the encroachments to occur.
Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 216-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Residential structures.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 216-
18A(1) of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In A Zones, where there no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 216-
18A(1) of this chapter, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations," published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 65/339
(3)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
E.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic Structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 66/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 216-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill.
If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring,
or settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages," and "The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall
be utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems, shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 67/339
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 216-25, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine
or water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 68/339
(1)
(2)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
A.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition thereof: Sections 801, 1202,
1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest edition thereof: Sections
R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
§ 216-25. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A, below, shall
be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,[1] and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulfur and sulfur products.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 69/339
(17)
(18)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 216-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals in identified floodplain areas where base flood
elevation data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision
and letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 216-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any
improvements thereto, shall:
Be placed on a permanent foundation;
Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above
base flood elevation;
Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump, elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers'
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building
Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapter 401
through 405 shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC, or
the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or
applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were
not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 216-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. No variance shall be
granted.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 70/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Article VI. Prohibited Activities
§ 216-29. General provisions.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,[1] the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article VII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 216-30. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 216-31 shall apply.
§ 216-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 216-18A(1).
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the definition of
"repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 71/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
Article VIII. Variances
§ 216-32. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Borough of Pleasant Hills may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 216-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Pleasant Hills in accordance with
the procedures contained in § 216-16 and the following:
No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that would cause any
increase in BFE. In an A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in § 216-
18A(1).
No variance shall be granted for any development regulated by the provisions pertaining to
prohibited activities (Article VI), development which may endanger human life (§ 216-25), or
recreational vehicles (§ 216-28).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall consider, at a
minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor
Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Borough of Pleasant Hills. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall
be included in the annual report to FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 72/339
Article IX. Definitions
§ 216-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 216-35. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-or-greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 73/339
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, and structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has
selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special
flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 216-17 and 216-18 for the specifics on what
areas the community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant,
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of a
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 74/339
A.
B.
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation
of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar
piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after October
4, 1995, and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the
permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility, or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated October 4, 1995,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated October 4, 1995,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 75/339
C.
D.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage or repetitive
loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 76/339
A.
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)
(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Article X. Enactment
§ 216-36. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014, and shall remain in force until modified,
amended or rescinded by Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 222. Grading and Excavations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 9-15-1986 by Ord. No.
635. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Dumping of earth and fill — See Ch. 189, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 206.
Mining — See Ch. 242.
Excavation and construction nuisances — See Ch. 248, Art. II.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch. 316, Art. VI.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 222-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
To provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, protect property and promote the general
welfare by preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment production and
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 77/339
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
other soil and water management problems by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, use, location, and maintenance of grading, excavations and fills.
To establish performance standards which insure land use practices respectful of the natural
topography and capabilities of the land.
To encourage maximum retention of natural topography and vegetative features on hillsides.
To prevent earthflow and rockfall landslides.
To prevent soil erosion and increases in stormwater runoff which result in stream siltation,
flooding, and damage to the property of others.
To encourage imaginative and innovative site development to building design that adapts to, and
takes advantage of the best use of the natural terrain.
§ 222-2. Scope; administration.
This chapter concerns new grading, excavation and fills; and changes, additions or alterations
made in existing excavations, fills and embankments which shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
The Borough Council shall designate an Administrator for review, approval and granting of grading
permits and to make inspections of the grading work.
A separate grading permit shall be required for each site. One permit shall cover all grading,
excavation, and any fills made on the same site.
Only one permit shall be required for the grading of a large continuous parcel of land for a major
planned development, such as a planned subdivision development or a planned commercial
development, when the standards for the grading of the entire parcel are satisfactory to and
approved by the Administrator.
Unless the project qualifies for an exception pursuant to § 222-3 of the Code of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, an approved site plan and grading permit shall be required before a building permit
may be issued. In all cases, applications for grading permits and/or building permits will not be
accepted and the time for a decision will not begin to run until the applicant first submits each and
every document required for consideration and approval.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
All grading, excavations and fills, whether or not a grading permit is required, shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 222-3. Exceptions.
A grading permit shall not be required for any of the following:
An excavation which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured
from the natural ground surface and cover a surface area of less than 1,000 square feet, provided
that the surfaces of such excavation do not have slope at any point steeper than four horizontal to
one vertical. However, this subsection shall not be deemed to nullify the application of this chapter,
or any requirement for obtaining a grading permit, with respect to any fill made with material from
such an excavation, unless otherwise excepted by Subsections B and C of this section.
A fill which does not exceed 10 cubic yards of material on any one site.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 78/339
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Fill which is not intended to support structures and does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at
its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface and does not cover an area of more
than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surface of such fills do not have a slope at any point
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical and does not obstruct a drainage course.
An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, swimming pool, or
underground structure authorized by a building permit and an excavation of a driveway between a
building site and the street. However this Subsection D shall not be deemed to nullify the
application of this chapter, or any requirement for obtaining a grading permit, with respect to any
fill made with the material from such an excavation unless otherwise excused by Subsections B
and C of this section.
Soil excavated under the authorization of a properly issued building permit which is temporarily
stockpiled on the same site as the excavation. If, however, excavated material is stockpiled on a
site for a period of longer than 120 days, then a permit shall be necessary when disposing of the
fill material.
A building site improved under authorization of a properly issued building permit where the
maximum natural gradient between property lines or the maximum excavation or fill, exclusive of
the situations referred to in Subsection D above, do not exceed the grades or quantities set forth
in the following table:
One-Family House Site
(square feet)
Maximum Gradient
WithoutPermit
Maximum Excavation or Fill Without
Permit Exclusive of Basements and
Foundations
(cubic yards)
Less than 10,000 15 in 100 feet 100
10,000 to 24,000 15 in 100 feet 200
24,000 to 44,000 15 in 100 feet 250
Over 44,000 20 in 100 feet 250
Exploratory excavations under the direction of a soils engineer or engineering geologist.
Excavations for wells, tunnels, public utilities or cemetery graves.
Work performed by the Borough, or of contractors employed by the Borough in a public street or
alley, Borough park, playground or recreation area or on other Borough property.
Article II. Terminology
§ 222-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herein defined:
ADMINISTRATOR
The person qualified and officially appointed by Council to manage this chapter, or his authorized
representative.
APPLICANT
Any landowner or agent of a landowner who proposes to make or cause to be made any
excavation, fill or any combination thereof pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
ARCHITECT
A registered architect licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 79/339
BEDROCK
Natural rocklayer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or beneath unconsolidated surficial
deposits.
BUILDING CODE
The Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania, as may be amended.[1]
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
ENGINEER
A registered professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and knowledgeable in
civil engineering.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST
A person who holds a degree in geology from an accredited college or university and who has
training and experience in the field of engineering geology.
EROSION
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity, including
such processes as gravitational creep.
EXCAVATION
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXCESSIVE SLOPE
Either of the following; those slopes as identified on the soil group map as steep slopes of 25% or
more; or any virgin area where, in a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, the average slope
exceeds 25%.
FILL AND EMBANKMENT
Any act by which earth sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed,
dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location, including the condition resulting
therefrom.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING REPORT
A report prepared by a soils engineer or engineering geologist.
GRADE
The elevation of the existing or proposed ground surface at the location of any proposed
excavation or fill.
GRADING
Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, including the conditions resulting from any
excavation or fill.[2]
GRADING OPERATION
A project that requires a grading permit, as determined by the Borough Engineer, unless this
project satisfies one of the exceptions of § 222-3 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. To
qualify for an exception, the applicant must submit a geotechnical engineering report, regardless
of the size of the project.
[Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
GRADING PERMIT
Any permit required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.[3]
HAZARD
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 80/339
Any danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or any adverse effect or potential adverse
effect to the safety, use or stability of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and
storm sewers, including stream pollution.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
A landscape architect licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSLIDE-PRONE SOILS
Those soil formations whose characteristics are classified as being landslide-prone in the Soil
Survey of Allegheny County. Specific soils found in the Borough and so identified as landslideprone
include:
Ck - Clarksburg Silt Loams
Do - Dormont Silt Loams
Lb - Library Silty Clay Loams
Gu - Gurnsey Silt Loams
GQF - Gilpin Upshur complex
GSF - Gilpin-Wiekert and Culleoka Shaly Silt Loams
Sm - Strip Mines
UG - Urban land, Guernsey complex
PERMIT HOLDER
Any landowner, agent of said landowner, or tenant with the permission of said landowner who has
been granted a grading permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
RETAINING WALL
A structure composed of concrete, steel or other building material constructed for the purpose of
supporting a cut or filled embankment which would otherwise not comply with the requirements or
standards set forth in this chapter. However, the Administrator has the discretion to exempt certain
walls from the permit requirements. For example, the Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania
at Section 403.62(c)(ii) exempts walls that are four feet or less in height from the permit
requirements. The Administrator has discretion to exempt those walls which are excluded from the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code of Pennsylvania, as may be amended from time to
time.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
SITE
A lot, tract or parcel of land, but may be a series of lots, tracts or parcels of land which are
adjoining and with respect to which grading work is to be continuous and performed at the same
time.
SLOPE
The angle of the existing or proposed ground surface plane to the horizontal expressed as the
ratio of the horizontal to the vertical, or in percentage of slope (rise or fall per hundred feet).
SOILS ENGINEER
A registered professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania having training and
experience in soils engineering.
SOIL SURVEY
The Soil Survey of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation
Service, et al, and accompanying text, issued August 1981.
SOLID WASTE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 81/339
[1]
[2]
[3]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Any and all parts or combination of ashes, garbage, refuse, radioactive material, combustible
demolition materials and industrial wastes such as food processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal
scrap, and other such materials whose disposal is regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
STEEP SLOPES or EXCESSIVE SLOPES
Slopes where, in a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, the average slope exceeds 25%.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Chapter 322, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, as
amended.
ZONING ORDINANCE
Chapter 374, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, as amended.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Editor's Note: The former definition of "grading, engineered," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “grading, regular,” which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899.
§ 222-5. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms and words shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meaning herein indicated. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the
plural include the singular; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; and the
word "building" includes the word "structure" and the word "structure" includes the word "building."
Article III. General Procedures and Requirements
§ 222-6. Application procedure.
Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application, plans, specifications and a soil
conservation report therefore with the Administrator in a form prescribed by the Administrator. The
application shall indicate that the proposed grading is to be regular grading or engineered grading
and shall:
Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and street
address, or similar description which will readily identify and definitively locate the proposed
work.
State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of grading work.
State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
State whether or not a building, structure or other improvement, the construction of which will
require a building permit pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code, is intended to be
erected on the land on which the grading is to be done.
In the event that a project requires both a grading permit and a building permit, the application
for building permit will not be considered until all of the requirements for the grading permit
have been satisfied and the grading permit issued. The Borough Engineer is the Administrator
of the Grading Ordinance and shall have a final say in all matters related to the process
described in this chapter after the grading permit has been issued. The initial application for a
grading permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall make an
initial determination of whether a project may require a grading permit. The review of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 82/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
C.
D.
Zoning Officer is only an initial review and the Borough Engineer shall make the final
determination of whether a grading permit is required. The Borough Engineer shall also make
a final determination on all matters related to compliance. The application for the building
permit will only be processed after all of the requirements to issue the grading permit have
been satisfied and all fees related to the grading permit have been paid.
[Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
The plans and specification shall accurately portray and describe the site and proposed soil
erosion controls. Plans shall be submitted in triplicate, one set of which shall be of a reproducible
nature, and shall include:
The name of the applicant.
The name of the owner of the land.
The permission and approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is an agent or
tenant.
Accurate location by lot, block, tract, street address, a location map or other similar
information.
A contour map showing the present contours of the land and the proposed contours of the
land after completion of the proposed grading at two-foot intervals where the average slope is
10% or less and at five-foot intervals where the average slope exceeds 10%.
Cross-sections of the proposed cut or fill on fifty-foot intervals which show the method of
benching, both cut and/or fill; provided, however, that there shall be not less than two crosssections
for each site.
A plot plan showing the location of the grading boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets, or
ways, buildings, surface and subsurface utilities and waterways, drainage patterns, and
sufficient dimensions and other data to show all work.
A description of the type and classification of the soil from the soil survey, other standard
surveys, or from other methods.
Details and location of any proposed drainage, stormwater management structures and pipes,
walls and cribbing.
Seeding locations and schedules, debris basins, diversion channels.
The nature of fill material and such other information as the Administrator may require to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
The name and seal of the professional engineer who prepared said plans, except that the
Administrator may waive the preparation or approval and signature by the professional
engineer, an architect, or a landscape architect, only when it is self-evident that the proposed
work is simple, clearly shown on the plans submitted, creates no potential nuisance to the
adjacent property or hazardous conditions and does not include the construction of a fill on
landslide-prone soils or upon which a structure may be erected.
A soil conservation report shall be required and include existing site description of the topography,
drainage, cover and soils; major problems such as soil limitations, erosions and sediment potential
and surface runoff changes; and recommendations to minimize soil limitations, erosion and
sediment and surface water disposal problems.
Trees and natural ground cover shall be retained wherever possible to minimize the impact of the
development on the site and environment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 83/339
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance are incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 222-7. Responsibility of the administrator.
The Administrator shall require that a geotechnical engineering report be submitted by the
applicant if the site is, has been, or is likely to become hazardous to persons or property. The
overlay maps such as the Coal Resource Maps prepared by USGS, 1975, for the Greater
Pittsburgh Region shall be used to locate hazardous areas. The report shall contain a detailed
description of the geological conditions of the site and shall include conclusions and
recommendations that will demonstrate the relationship of the geological conditions to the
proposed development, including hazardous conditions, water resources, mineral resources and
environmental impact.
In special cases, when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone soil, or rock fall prone areas as
recognized by the soil survey, or other standard surveys, the Administrator may require special
precautions prior to issuing a permit from the applicant. The results of all soil tests and core
borings made relative to the site shall be submitted to the Administrator.
The Administrator may deny a grading permit if the use of land to be graded, either excavation or
filling, is not specifically known except for the intent of improving the site. The Administrator shall
review the application, plans specifications and reports and determine whether the project will
improve the site, is in the best interest of the Borough, and is not detrimental to the environment.
The applicant may appeal the Administrator's decision to the Council by preparing and submitting
to the Council a site plan showing the development of the land in accordance with the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
When the requirements of this chapter for obtaining a permit have been met, the Administrator
shall approve the application and proposed plan and grant a grading permit to the applicant.
The Administrator may waive the requirement of any of all plans and specifications listed in this
chapter, if he finds that the information on the application is sufficient to show that the work will
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 222-8. Special agreement for large projects.
In the event that the applicant will move or grade an area of more than 50,000 square feet, or grade
more than 10,000 cubic yards, then a formal agreement may be required by Borough Council, and said
agreement will be prepared by the applicant at his own cost and expense, and must be approved as to
form by the Borough Solicitor.
§ 222-9. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by said permit has
not been commenced within six months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue;
provided that the Administrator may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time; and provided, further, that the application for the extension of time is
made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 222-10. Denial of permit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 84/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
If the Administrator shall determine that the work proposed by the applicant is likely to endanger
any property or person, or any street or alley, or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit
shall be denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger property or streets
or alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the Administrator shall consider, among other relevant
factors, the following: possible saturation by rains, earth movements, surface water runoff, and
subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock, aquifers, mine conditions,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
Any person who is aggrieved by the application of the provisions of this chapter may within 15
days from the date of the denial of the permit or such other adverse determination by the
Administrator, file a written appeal therefrom to the Borough Council. The Council shall grant a
hearing upon such an appeal within 30 days after the receipt of the written appeal.
If any appeal is taken from the issuance of a building permit where a grading permit has also been
issued and if such appeal shall, pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, operate as a
stay of all proceedings under any such building permit, then such appeal shall also operate to stay
all proceedings under any such grading permit.
§ 222-11. Inspections.
The Administrator shall make the inspections thereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work which has been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to
comply with provisions of this chapter.
Grading and drainage plans approved by the Administrator shall be maintained at the site during
the progress of the grading and drainage and until the work has been approved.
The permit holder shall submit to the Administrator an "as built" drawing of the project before the
issuance of a grading certificate of completion.
The permit holder shall notify the Administrator in order to obtain inspections in accordance with
the following schedule and such notification shall be made by the permit holder at least 24 hours
before the inspection is to be made:
Initial inspection: when work is about to be commenced and stake out is completed.
Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
Drainage facilities:
All drainage facilities that connect to or shall become public drainage facilities shall be
continuously inspected during construction.
Other drainage facilities shall be inspected before such facilities are backfilled.
Additional inspection: when in the opinion of the Administrator other inspections are
necessary.
Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all drainage, landscaping and
other structures has been completed.
If at any stage of the work the Administrator shall determine by inspection that the nature of the
excavation or fills is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger
any property, or streets, or alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the Administrator may require,
as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken
as the Administrator considers acceptable to avoid such likelihood of danger.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 85/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 222-12. Plan changes.
Any physical changes from the original plan uncovered in the site during the construction, such as
surface water drainage, soil and bedrock dislocations, alteration of ground water discharge or any
other natural or man-made modification which would tend to undermine the basis upon which the
permit was issued, must be immediately reported to the Administrator by the permit holder. If the
circumstances dictate, the Administrator shall revoke the permit or otherwise modify the conditions
upon which the permit was initially issued.
§ 222-13. Fees and bonds.
At the time of application the applicant shall pay an application review fee to cover the Borough
cost of reviewing application documents. Any additional charges incurred by the Borough to
review the application of an excavation permit shall be borne by the applicant. Any application
fees not expended by the Borough shall be returned to the applicant within a reasonable period of
time.
Fees for review of application and inspections of regular grading permits shall be in accordance
with the current Fees Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
Fees for review of application and inspections of engineered grading permits shall be in
accordance with the current Fees Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
Plan checking fee;
Inspection fee: An inspection fee as set forth in the current Fees Resolution shall be collected
by the Administrator prior to the issuance of a grading permit. Inspection costs incurred by the
Borough in excess of the initial fee collected shall be paid for by the applicant prior to final
inspection of the work.
Should a special agreement be required by the Borough Council as described in § 222-8 of
this chapter, a review fee of $75 will be required.
The plan checking fee for an amendment to a grading permit authorizing additional work to that
under a valid permit shall be the difference between such fee paid for the original permit and the
fee required for the entire project; however, a minimum fee of $20 will be charged.
As a condition of approval of a grading application under this chapter, the applicant shall post a
cash or performance bond or other security acceptable to the Borough in the amount of 50% of
the estimated cost to perform the work. The cost estimate shall include the complete scope of
work needed to be performed by the applicant to comply with this chapter and shall be prepared
and certified by the applicant's engineer or architect and accepted as reasonable by the
Administrator. The Administrator shall be the final arbiter as to the reasonableness of any cost
estimates.
Upon completion of the grading work, a maintenance bond in amount of 15% of the cost estimated
as determined in Subsection E shall be posted (payable to Pleasant Hills Borough) for a period of
18 months.
No bond shall be required if another bond or approved security is posted for construction and/or
site improvements which already covers the cost of grading and other control facilities.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 86/339
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 206, Fees.
§ 222-14. Certificate of completion.
If, upon final inspection of the site for which a permit has been issued, it is found that the work
authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate of completion covering such work and stating that the
work is approved shall be issued to the permit holder by the Administrator.
§ 222-15. Maintenance.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made shall maintain in good
condition and repair the excavation or fill permitted, and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage
structures, fences, ground cover, and other protective devices as may be a part of the permit
requirements.
The continued use of said area shall be contingent upon the proper maintenance and upkeep of
all the above-mentioned items, satisfactory to the Borough and subject to such further conditions
as the Borough may prescribe from time to time to keep the site in proper condition.
The grading certificate of completion may be revoked by the Borough Council at any time, upon
the recommendation of the Administrator, where the conditions of the permit are not being
observed, the work covered by the permit has been materially extended or altered without a permit
to do so, or conditions exist which prejudice the health, safety and welfare of any person, persons
or property. Before such revocation, the Administrator shall first give written notice to the permit
holder and to the owner of the property involved, specifying the defect or unsatisfactory condition
involved, and advising that unless such defect or unsatisfactory condition is remedied, the
certificate shall be revoked. If the defect or unsatisfactory condition is remedied within 30 days of
notice to the permit holder to correct same, the certificate shall not be revoked.
If the permit holder shall fail to correct such defect or unsatisfactory condition within such thirtyday
period the Borough may undertake the necessary work and the costs thereof shall be borne
by the permit holder and collected in any manner authorized by law, including the imposition of a
lien against the property.
§ 222-16. Hazardous condition to constitute nuisance.
Whenever the Administrator determines that any existing excavation, embankment or fill has
become a hazard, as defined in this chapter, the owner of the property upon which the grading is
located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from
the Administrator shall, within the time specified in such notice, repair, reconstruct or remove such
excavation, embankment, or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
If the permit holder shall fail to correct such hazardous or unsatisfactory condition within the
specified time period, the Borough may undertake the necessary work and the costs thereof shall
be borne by the permit holder and collected in any manner authorized by law, including the
imposition of a lien against the property.
Any excavation not completed within 180 days from the date of initial grading shall constitute a
nuisance and a hazard.
The property owner shall restore, repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation, embankment or
fill as directed by the Administrator within 30 days of receipt of said written notice.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 87/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
§ 222-17. Working conditions.
The following general working conditions will apply to all grading sites.
Dust control. During grading operations, acceptable measures for dust control will be exercised.
Cleanup. All soil washed or carried onto public streets during grading operations shall be cleaned
up as it accumulates. Temporary hard surface driveways or roadways surfaces shall be provided
as soon as possible. The owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to protect and
clean up lower properties of silt and debris which have washed down into the lower properties as a
result of the grading work on the higher property.
Workdays. None of the work or activity covered by a grading permit shall be conducted on a
Sunday or legal holiday.
[Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 875]
Work hours. All of the work and activity covered by a grading permit shall be conducted between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
[Amended 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 222-18. Environmental protection.
Live stream crossings. Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams. Provision will
be made for the installation of culverts or bridges for such crossings. Permits shall be obtained
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for temporary and permanent
encroachments, relocations, enclosures and temporary crossings of streams.
Excessive slopes. Grading on excessive slopes shall be avoided so as to minimize erosion and
storm runoff, to protect watersheds, to discourage erosion of soils by maintaining adequate foliage
cover on excessive slopes, and to promote the perpetuation of open space on hillsides. The areas
considered to have excessive slope may be revised or modified by the Borough Council where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need or possibility
for such revision.
§ 222-19. Exceptions and variances.
[Added 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 672]
Because the land comprising the Borough of Pleasant Hills is, for the most part, hilly and of uneven
terrain, a literal enforcement of all provisions of this chapter may not always be practical or reasonable.
An applicant for a grading permit may petition Borough Council for an exception to the provisions of
this chapter or for a variance from a specific section of this chapter. The Borough Council, before
granting an exception or variance, shall cause a study to be made, at applicant's cost, to determine the
effect of such exception or variance on all the lands involved or surrounding the affected area. Upon
receipt of such study and after public hearing, Borough Council may grant exceptions and variances to
the provisions of this chapter.
Article IV. Performance and Design Standards
§ 222-20. Excavation.
All topsoil shall be removed from the area to be graded and stockpiled and preserved for possible
reuse on the site.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 88/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Maximum slope steepness of a cut shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical for
minimizing erosion and landslide hazards. However, a governmental review agency, professional
engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist may determine the types of soil on the sites to be
graded from the soil survey, geological surveys or core borings. Maximum slopes can then be
determined as follows:
Landslide-prone soils or unstable rock formations where existing slopes are greater than 25%
shall have proposed cut slopes no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
Landslide-prone soils where existing slopes are less than 25% shall have proposed cut
slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.
Soils which are not, or have a low probability of being, landslide-prone shall have a slope no
steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical.
Cut slopes of up to one horizontal to one vertical may be allowed under a grading permit, provided
that two or more of the following conditions is satisfied:
The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable to sustain a slope steeper
than the slope specified above for recognized soil conditions on the site. An acceptable
geological report signed and sealed by a soils engineer, certifying that the steeper slope will
have sufficient stability, and that it will not endanger any property, or result in property damage
and that creation of a hazard will be minimal, shall be submitted to and may be approved by
the Administrator.
A retaining wall or other approved support, designed by a professional engineer and
approved by the Administrator is provided to support the face of the excavation or to provide a
fall zone at rock faced slopes.
The proposed slopes demonstrated on a site plan which is presented to the Planning
Commission and Borough Council to be absolutely necessary to permit the reasonable
development of the site, subject to other requirements of this section.
The Administrator may require that the excavation be designed so that a line having a slope of
1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical measured from the bottom of the cut slope will be entirely inside the
property lines of the property on which the excavation is made, if conditions exist which, under
applicable engineering practice, the excavation may not be deemed to be stable or safe.
The Administrator may require an excavation to be made with a cut slope flatter than those
specified above if he finds the material in which the excavation is to be made is subject to erosion,
is prone to landslides, or if other conditions exist which, under applicable engineering practices,
make such flatter cut slope necessary for stability and safety.
Excavation adjacent to any footing, foundations or structure shall not extend below the minimum
angle of repose or natural slope of the soil under the nearest point of same unless such footing,
foundation or structure is first properly underpinned or otherwise protected against settlement.
Before commencing any excavation which will affect physically in any way an adjoining property or
structures thereon, the permit holder shall notify, in writing, the owners of the adjoining property or
structures not less than 30 days before such excavation is to be made informing them excavation
is planned. A copy of such notice(s) shall be submitted to the Administrator. Adjoining properties
and structures shall be protected as provided in the Building Code and/or as required by the
Administrator.
The top or bottom edge of final slopes shall normally set back five feet from adjacent property
lines or street right-of-way lines in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property.
§ 222-21. Blasting.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 89/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(a)
(2)
E.
No person, firm or corporation may store, handle or use any explosive in the Borough of Pleasant
Hills without first obtaining a special permit from the Administrator. The Administrator shall have
the authority to impose reasonable regulations and restrictions upon the storage, handling and use
of explosives. Any violation of any regulation or requirement imposed by the Administrator, or
imposed under any section of this chapter shall be grounds for the revocation of any permit
theretofore issued.
All blasting which is conducted in the Borough shall be in conformity with State requirements and
shall be in compliance with the Act of July 10, 1957, P.L. 685, 73 P.S. §§ 164 to 168, as amended,
and the Department of Labor and Industry Rules and Regulations promulgated pursuant to the
aforesaid statute.
The Administrator shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to any blasting.
§ 222-22. Fill and embankments.
All topsoil shall be removed from the area to be graded and stockpiled and preserved for possible
reuse on the site.
The site shall be prepared by cutting toe benches and other keyways so as to provide a firm base
on which to place the fill. No fill or embankment shall be made on landslide-prone soils without
adequate engineered preparation and drainage of the area to be filled.
No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two horizontal to
one vertical, except under one or more of the following conditions:
The fill, in the judgment of the Administrator, is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion
of the fill material will not result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys, buildings, storm drains or drainage ways.
Soils capability and geological report, signed and sealed by a professional engineer,
experienced in erosion control and soils analysis, certifying that he has inspected the site and
that the proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not endanger any property or
result in property damage, and that creation of a hazard will be minimal, shall be submitted to
and may be approved by the Administrator.
The Administrator may require that an embankment or fill be constructed with an exposed surface
flatter than two horizontal to one vertical if he finds that under the particular conditions such flatter
surface is necessary for stability and safety.
Fills, embankments and finish grading shall be designed in accordance with the following:
Where fills are located so that earth movement may result in personal injury or damage to
adjacent property, streets, alleys or buildings, the bearing value and stability of the material
under proposed fills and embankments shall be determined by subsurface investigation
performed by a soils engineer or engineering geologist.
The type of fill material available in each stage of the grading operation shall be determined in
order to plan proper filling procedures.
Rock may be incorporated in fills and embankments but only in layers 24 inches thick,
maximum, as per the latest edition of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications Publication 408, with voids filled and a blanket of compacted fill separating
one layer of rock from the next. Rock fill shall not be placed near the bottom of proposed
foundations, building caissons and subsurface utility installations. Suitable earth shall be
reserved or provided to cover rock fill under proposed seeded or planted areas.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 90/339
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
A.
B.
No unsuitable material, such as coal, boney, red-dog, expansive shale and cinders, shall
be placed in fill areas.
Wood or other solid waste material shall not be placed in fill areas.
No fill of any kind shall be placed over topsoil, trees, stumps or other material which would
create a nuisance, potential fire hazard, or sanitation problem which would attract rodents,
termites or other pests.
On major fills or embankments, a toe bench shall be constructed below mantle on bedrock
under the toe of fill.
Benching of the existing surface shall be required and indicated on the cross-sections.
A porous drain shall be installed on the bottom and back wall of the toe bench; together with a
drain pipe and suitable discharge pipe to the existing nonerosive surface beyond and below
the toe of the proposed fill.
Overfilling of slopes is desirable to permit final shaping of surface to proposed grade without
the addition of loose fill over the surface of the slope, provided that no fill shall be higher than
10 feet vertically before the slope is shaped to proper grade.
At the end of each work day, the horizontal surface of the fill shall be shaped, compacted and
rolled to provide for drainage.
All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of materials and to prevent undesirable
settlement. The fill (excepting rock) shall be spread in a series of layers, each not exceeding
12 inches in thickness and shall be compacted by a sheepsfoot roller or other approved
method after each layer is spread. Fill shall be placed at the optimum moisture content for the
specified degree of compaction. The Administrator may require tests or other information if, in
his opinion, the conditions or materials are such that additional information is needed. Where
fills are to have streets structures, or public utilities placed in or on them, a modified proctor
density of 95% shall be achieved (ASTM test designation D 1557).
The top or bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back five feet from adjacent property lines
or street right-of-way lines in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property or street and to allow for location of proper drainage
facilities and protective devices.
§ 222-23. Minimization of erosion and sediment.
Guidelines for minimizing erosion and sediment in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook
for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, should be followed. One or a combination of guidelines
should be used to minimize hazards, depending on the site conditions and the proposed grading.
The Administrator may approve grading plans not meeting the above guidelines if the proposed
grading plans are approved by the Allegheny County Soil Conservation Service.
§ 222-24. Slope treatment and ground cover.
In order to prevent erosion, the permit holder shall be required to provide adequate ground
covering of such kind and character as may be approved by the Administrator.
For slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the ground covering shall be an approved
variety of erosion resistant vegetation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 91/339
C.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
[1]
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The completion of finish grading should be done during a season of the year when turf or ground
cover can best be established.
§ 222-25. Retaining walls and fences.
[Amended 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 986]
If a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy a requirement of this chapter, a building permit shall not
be required. The grading permit shall include the retaining wall, and the requirements for approval
and inspections, as stated herein shall be complied with.
Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practice.
The plans submitted for approval shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer.
The backfilling of retaining walls and the construction of subterranean drainage facilities shall be
done in accordance with sound engineering practice.
In general, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical face of the wall shall be at
least three feet back from the adjoining property.
This requirement may be waived when the proposed retaining wall is a joint venture between
adjacent property owners, and documents evidencing the same are filed with the application
for the permit.
A waiver of the requirements of this section may be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills for consideration upon satisfying the filing requirements.
A fence not less than four feet in height, of a design approved by the Administrator and meeting
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,[1] shall be placed at the top of all new cuts and fills made
when the cuts or fill slopes are steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 374, Zoning.
§ 222-26. Drainage facilities.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of
excavations and/or the sloping surface of fills and/or adjacent properties. Interception and
diversion facilities for stormwater and surface water runoff, both above and below the cut and fill
slope areas during and after construction shall be included in the design. As a minimum, drainage
facilities to proposed detention areas shall be designed to accommodate the severest storm that
might occur during a ten-year period.
The drainage pattern prior to construction shall be indicated on the plans. Adequate measures
shall be taken to prevent any erosion and water runoff damage to adjacent properties during the
construction and after completion of construction.
Storm sewers, catch basins, drainage ditches and swales necessary to protect adjacent
properties, whether they be permanent or temporary in nature, shall be constructed before any
excavation or filling is started. The storm sewers, catch basins, drainage ditches and swales shall
be maintained, cleaned, cleared and open during construction. If the above is not complied with,
the Administrator shall stop all clearing and grading on the site until the necessary drainage
facilities are completed or the permit will be revoked and the required bond forfeited.
New storm sewers and utilities traversing a proposed fill area shall be buried a minimum of three
feet from top of pipe to proposed grade. Fill shall be constructed in that area prior to installation of
said sewers and utilities. The minimum size storm sewer exclusive of toe or bench drains, shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 92/339
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
15 inches in diameter unless a variation in size is approved by the Administrator. All storm sewers
located under pavement areas shall be reinforced concrete pipe.
Slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and of more than 20 feet in vertical height shall
be separated by a level berm of at least 10 feet in width at intervals of no more than 20 feet
vertically if the slope is potentially hazardous due to easily erosive material.
On slopes of two horizontal to one vertical or less steep, the 10 feet level berms will not be
required unless deemed necessary by the Administrator.
Drainage ditches with a grade of 5% or greater shall be paved with concrete, bituminous mixture,
brick, half pipe, rubble or other hard nonerodable material.
Drainage ditches with a grade of less than 5% shall be grassed and sloped in such a manner that
they can be conveniently cut and maintained.
Drainage structures, storm sewers, detention ponds, sedimentation ponds and appurtenances
shall be of proper design and so constructed as to carry surface water and any subsurface water
encountered to the nearest practical storm drain or natural watercourse approved by the
Administrator as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters. Approval by the Administrator in
no way relieves the owner of his legal responsibilities to adjacent property owners. The owner
shall also comply with all state laws and regulations dealing with enclosing or discharging into
existing streams, channels or storm sewers.
As a guide for the prevention of damage, grading plans shall follow vegetative control methods
and ditch and conduit control methods in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. The Administrator may approve methods and materials
recommended by governmental agencies, professional engineers and architects, when they are
more suitable to the site in preventing damage. Private drainage facilities of any nature shall be at
least designed to accommodate the largest size storm that would occur on the average of every
10 years. The site design shall provide a safe floodway for flows from storms of greater intensity.
No rock fill shall be placed around or over storm sewers, or drainage facilities other than that
designed as part of the site drainage facilities.
§ 222-27. Periodic inspections and maintenance of facilities.
[Added 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 672]
The Borough Council is aware of the possibility of long time wear and tear on slope treatment and
ground cover provided in § 222-24; on retaining walls and fences provided in § 222-25 and on
drainage facilities provided in § 222-26 (collectively referred to as the "facilities"). In order to protect the
involved land and the surrounding areas with long term protection against the loss, destruction, or
deterioration of the facilities set forth in §§ 222-24, 222-25 and 222-26, the Borough Council may, at
the time of approval of any grading permit, add any or all of the following conditions to the grading
permit:
The present and any future landowner on which any of the facilities are located shall be required
to inspect the facilities at periodic intervals and submit a report of the physical condition of the
facilities to the Borough.
The present and any future landowner on which any of the facilities are located shall be required
to maintain the facilities in good repair at all times.
The present and any future landowner on which any of the facilities are located shall be required
to replace any facilities which are in such a state of disrepair that they no longer serve the purpose
intended.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 93/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Article V. Liability; Penalties
§ 222-28. Responsibilities of permit holder.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the
provisions hereof or with any condition imposed by the Administrator hereunder, shall relieve any
permit holder from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as
otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Borough, its employees, and its
consultants for damages to persons or property.
The permit holder shall be fully responsible for any noncompliance with approved plans. He shall
carry the responsibility both for his own employees and for all subcontractors from the first day of
grading until released by the Borough. The use of qualified personnel experienced and
knowledgeable in the practice of excavation and landscape restoration shall be required.
§ 222-29. Violation and penalties.
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or
cause same to be done contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter.
When notice of any violation of, or noncompliance with, any provision of this chapter has been
given by the Administrator, such violation shall be discontinued immediately or within a reasonable
time limit specified in such notice. If such violation is not discontinued, or extends beyond the
specified time limit, the Administrator shall revoke the grading permit and the violator shall be
subject to the applicable penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions, of this chapter shall be liable on conviction thereof, to a
penalty not exceeding $300. Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Administrator,
by service or summons in a prosecution, or in any way, that he is committing such violation of this
chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after such notification, shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by the like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected
as like fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 222-30. Remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
proper officers of the Borough, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Borough,
an appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful
work and to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 225. Hazardous Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 11-15-1993 by Ord. No.
706. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 189.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
§ 225-1. Deposit prohibited.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 94/339
The Borough of Pleasant Hills does hereby prohibit the depositing or dumping of any hazardous
materials or substances upon or into private or public properties, roads or any other areas within the
municipal boundaries of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES
Any material or substance which may have a direct or identifiable effect on persons or property
within the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, or any such substances or
materials in a quantity or from which in the determination of the Pleasant Hills Borough Secretary,
or his authorized representative, poses an unreasonable or imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include,
but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammable, corrosives or materials listed in the
Hazardous Substance list of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, the Solid Waste
Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.103, and the Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act, 35 P.S.
§ 7303.
PERSON
Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership or other legal entity.
§ 225-3. Cleanup.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Borough of Pleasant Hills, acting through its employees and municipal agencies such as the
Pleasant Hills Volunteer Fire Department and the ambulance service providing service within the
Borough of Pleasant Hills at any given time, and the Borough of Pleasant Hills, acting through thirdparty
contractors, is hereby empowered to forthwith clean up and abate, or cause to be cleaned up and
abated, any hazardous materials or substances deposited or dumped upon or into private or public
property or facilities within the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 225-4. Liability for costs of cleanup.
Any person who shall have caused or contributed to such dumping operation, either directly or as a
partner, agent, corporate officer or any other person in charge, shall be liable for all costs and charges
incurred by the Borough of Pleasant Hills in abating such condition.
§ 225-5. Calculation of costs.
For purposes of this chapter, costs incurred by the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall include, but are not
limited to, actual labor cost of Borough personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe
benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of special fire extinguishing agents
used and cost of any contracted labor and materials; and further, it shall include any costs incurred by
volunteer fire companies, emergency medical companies, the Department of Police of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills and any other third-party agency or contractor engaged in the abating or cleaning up the
effects of any such hazardous materials or substances deposited upon or into properties, facilities,
roads or streets of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 225-6. Remedies not exclusive.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 95/339
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by any
federal, state, county or Borough laws or ordinances dealing with this subject.
Chapter 228. Heaters
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
917.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 228, Heaters, adopted 11-13-1961 by Ord. No.
258.
§ 228-1. Applicable codes.
The installation, maintenance and appurtenances for various types of vented and unvented gas
heaters, including but not limited to unit and space heaters, shall conform to the following most current
adopted editions of the International Construction Codes of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code:
International Building Code.
International Residential Code.
International Fire Code.
International Mechanical Code.
International Fuel Gas Code.
§ 228-2. Enforcement.
The Fire Marshal of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall have the power and duties to enforce and
administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 228-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon
judgment of the District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to pay a fine not exceeding
$300, plus costs, for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 231. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 12-15-2008 by Ord. No.
894. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Fire Insurance Claims
§ 231-1. Statutory authorization.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 96/339
[1]
This article is enacted pursuant to the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of
1992 and Act 93 of 1994, providing for the payment of certain proceeds from fire loss claims to the
Borough. (See 40 P.S. § 631 et seq.[1])
Editor's Note: 40 P.S. §§ 631 and 632 were repealed 12-21-1998 by P.L. 1108, No. 150, § 2.
§ 231-2. Appointment of officer.
The Borough Secretary or his/her designee is hereby appointed as the officer of the Borough to
manage all responsibilities set out herein.
§ 231-3. Payment of claims; certificate required.
No fire insurance company, association or exchange doing business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of an insured for fire damage to a structure located within the Borough
where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500,
unless said company, association or exchange requests and receives a certificate pursuant to Section
508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 as amended by Act 93 of 1994 and unless there is compliance with Section
508(c) and (d) of said Act(s) pursuant to the provisions of this article. (See 40 P.S. § 638.)
§ 231-4. Escrow provisions.
When the Borough issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties or user charges against the damaged property, the company, association or exchange shall
pay the claim of the insured; provided, however, that if the loss equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all policies covering the building or structure, the escrow provisions set
out in Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended by Act 93 of 1994, shall be followed; and
Section 508(c) and (d) of said Act(s) are incorporated within this article as though fully set out herein.
(See 40 P.S. § 638.)
§ 231-5. Fees.
The Borough shall set fees for the issuance of certificates and bills, the performance of inspections, the
opening of escrow accounts and other services provided pursuant to this article.
§ 231-6. Provision of notice.
Any person issued a certificate pursuant to § 231-3 of this article shall be given notice of the existence
of this article.
§ 231-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person and the principal of any firm or the chief executive of any corporation violating any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum penalties provided by
law.
Chapter 234. Littering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 97/339
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 189.
Littering as nuisance — See Ch. 248, Art. I.
Littering in parks — See Ch. 254, Art. II.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Article I. Litter Control
[Adopted 9-19-1979 by Ord. No. 559]
§ 234-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL PLACE
Any store or building or group thereof, including shopping centers, shopping plazas and other
similar places wherein mercantile activities and services are offered to the public, and includes all
parking areas thereat.
GARBAGE
Putrescible, animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
LITTER
Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or
deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PRIVATE PREMISES
Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used, either wholly or in part, for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings owned and/or operated by any public agency.
REFUSE
All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH
Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE
Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon
a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 234-2. Public places.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 98/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
For the control of litter in public places, the following regulations shall be applicable:
No person shall deposit or throw litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within
the Borough except in public or private receptacles for collection.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or litter from any public sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
The owner or person in control of any public property shall at all times maintain the premises free
from litter; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
§ 234-3. Vehicles.
For the control of litter thrown from vehicles, the following regulations shall apply:
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or
public place within the Borough or upon private property.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough unless such vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street, alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 234-4. Parks and bodies of water.
For the control of litter in parks and bodies of water, the following regulations shall apply:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any public park or playground within the Borough except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or playground or upon any street or other
public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from
the park or playground by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere as provided herein.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any stream or other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the Borough.
§ 234-5. Private property; commercial premises.
For the control of litter on private property and commercial premises, the following regulations shall
apply:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property or commercial place within
the Borough regardless of whether the property is owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of such private property or commercial place may maintain private
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 99/339
B.
C.
D.
[1]
receptacles for collection in such manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon any private property.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including shopping centers and delivery
and parking areas thereat, shall keep said place, parking fields, parking areas, delivery areas and
other open areas which are a part of such commercial place free from litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free
from litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the Borough,
whether owned by such person or not.
§ 234-6. Notice of violation; failure to respond.
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby authorized and empowered to notify
the owner, tenant or person in control of any private property or commercial place within the Borough
whenever any accumulation of litter is found to exist. Such notice shall be delivered by hand or mailed
by certified mail to the owner of the premises or the person in control of the premises directing that the
violation be remedied within a period of 24 hours after receipt of notice. If the owner or the person in
control of the premises shall fail to remedy the violation within the twenty-four-hour period, the Borough
Secretary of Pleasant Hills is authorized to proceed to have the violation corrected and to charge the
costs thereof against the property and if such charge is not paid within 30 days, to file a lien in the
office of the Prothonotary of Allegheny County. The right to file a lien shall be at the option of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and shall be in addition to the penalty provisions
contained in this article.
§ 234-7. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 234-7, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824; its
provisions are superseded by state law.
Article II. Handbills and Advertising Materials
[Adopted 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 803]
§ 234-8. Restrictions on placement.
No person shall within the Borough of Pleasant Hills distribute or cause to be distributed handbills or
other advertising material at buildings, houses, dwellings, stores or other structures other than by
placing such material inside screen doors or in the jambs of doors or securely affixing the material to
exterior door handles.
§ 234-9. Vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill/advertising material in or
upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 234-10. Placement prohibited on posted premises.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 100/339
[1]
No person shall throw, distribute or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill or advertising
material upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position a sign bearing the words "no trespassing" or "no handbills" or
any similar notice indicating in any manner that the owner or occupant of such premises desires not to
have such material left upon said premises.
§ 234-11. Secure delivery required; throwing of material
prohibited.
No person shall throw, distribute or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill or advertising
material in or upon private premises which are inhabited except by handing the material to the
occupant/owner of the premises or by placing the material inside screen doors, in the jambs of doors
or securely affixing the material to the exterior door handle. In all such cases, it shall be the
responsibility of the individual distributing the material to prevent such material from being blown or
drifted about such premises or sidewalks, driveways, streets or other places except that mailboxes
may not be so used for the holding or deposit of such material. Under no circumstances shall
advertising material/handbills be distributed by being thrown from a vehicle or thrown in any manner.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal
Service or the distribution of newspapers.
§ 234-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, organization or corporation who shall be found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the sum of $300. Each and every day that a
violation of this article shall occur shall be considered to be a separate offense punishable by the fine
as prescribed herein.
§ 234-13. Construal of provisions.
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this article shall be and the same
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict only. This article is to be read in conjunction with
Article I, Litter Control, of this Chapter 234, and this article does not repeal those sections of Article I,
Litter Control, which are not in conflict with the terms of this article.
Chapter 238. Loitering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
823.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Billiard and pool rooms — See Ch. 156.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 238, Loitering, adopted 2-13-1961 by Ord. No.
247.
§ 238-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the unlawful loitering of persons on public property, public
places or business property which impedes, obstructs or otherwise interferes with access to places
open to the public or public rights-of-way. This chapter also prohibits loitering for the purpose of
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 101/339
A.
B.
engaging in drug-related activity. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit orderly picketing,
demonstrating or other forms of free speech.
§ 238-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
BOROUGH
Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS PROPERTY
Any property used for the purpose of operating a commercial business and which, during business
hours, is open to the public.
LOITERING
Remaining idle or gathering in one location, including sitting or standing in or out of a motor
vehicle or walking around a location aimlessly.
PERSON
Every natural person, association, partnership or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing or imposing a fine or penalty of imprisonment in default thereof, the term, as applied to
associations, shall mean any partner thereof and, as applied to corporations, shall mean the
president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any place customarily open to the public.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Any property that, by right or custom, is open and available to the public. Examples of such places
include any public street, highway, sidewalks, parking lot or garage within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills.
§ 238-3. Loitering on public property.
No person shall, at any time, loiter on the exterior of any public property.
§ 238-4. Loitering in public places.
No person shall, at any time, loiter in or at any public place in such a manner as to impede or interfere
with the conducting of legitimate business within such public place. No person may be found guilty of
loitering in a public building if such person was not first asked by an authorized person of the public
building or a police officer to leave the premises.
§ 238-5. Loitering on business property.
No person shall, at any time, loiter on private property that is customarily used by the public as an
integral part of a commercial business in such a manner as to:
Obstruct the free, unadulterated passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully seeking access to or use of the commercial
business.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 102/339
C.
A.
B.
Make unreasonable noise, engage in tumultuous behavior, use profane language, or create a
physically offensive condition that causes or is likely to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm.
§ 238-6. Signs or notice required.
No person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter unless:
The property owner, tenant or other responsible and authorized person posts the property with
"NO LOITERING" signs or other notices of like meaning at the entrance or entrances to the
property and at intervals of, at a maximum, every 75 feet measured from the side of the building
which contains an entrance(s). Property of 75 feet or less, measured on the entrance side of
building, may contain only one sign; or
The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the property owner, tenant, police
officer or other responsible and authorized person to leave the property and has failed to leave.
§ 238-7. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 238-3, 238-4 or § 238-5 of this chapter shall, upon
convictions thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600 plus costs
and, upon default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 242. Medical Marijuana
[Adopted 6-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1010]
§ 242-1. Definitions.
The following definitions are incorporated by reference throughout this chapter:
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER
An accredited medical school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute
care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.
CAREGIVER
The individual designated by a patient or, if the patient is under 18 years of age, an individual
under Section 506(2); to deliver medical marijuana.
DISPENSARY
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (DOH) of the
Commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA
The characteristics of the medical marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient,
including the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety and quantity or
percentage of medical marijuana or particular active ingredient.
GROWER/PROCESSOR
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and process medical
marijuana.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 103/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Marijuana for certified medical use as legally permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
with Act 16.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE
Any facility used to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one or more
marijuana grower/processors and/or dispensaries.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION
A dispensary or a grower/processor. The term does not include a health care medical marijuana
organization under Chapter 19.
REGISTRY
The registry established by the DOH for all medical marijuana organizations and practitioners.
§ 242-2. District regulations.
Academic clinical research centers are permitted in the Commercial (C4), and Manufacturing (M1)
Districts with consideration for the applicable performance standards found in § 242-3A, pursuant
to § 374-45 and § 374-52, respectively.
Medical marijuana grower/processors are permitted in the Manufacturing (M1) District with
consideration for the applicable performance standards found in § 242-3B pursuant to § 374-52.
Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices are permitted in either a Commercial (C4) and/or
Manufacturing (M1) District, with consideration for the applicable performance standards found in
§ 242-3C pursuant to § 374-45 and § 374-52, respectively.
Medical marijuana dispensaries are permitted in either a Commercial (C3 or C4) and
Manufacturing (M1) District, with consideration for the applicable performance standards found in
§ 242-3D pursuant to § 374-40, § 374-45 and § 374-52, respectively.
§ 242-3. Use regulations.
The use criteria for medical marijuana facilities shall be governed by the requirements of § 605 of the
Pennsylvania MPC. The following shall apply to the uses listed below:
Academic clinical research centers.
Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in § 374-88, Off-street parking,
and/or as listed for other supporting commercial uses and shall require one parking stall for
each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
An academic clinical research center may only grow medical marijuana in an indoor,
enclosed, and secure building which includes electronic locking systems, electronic
surveillance and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility shall not
be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
All external lighting serving an academic clinical research center must be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
A buffer planting is required where an academic clinical research center adjoins a residential
use or district.
Medical marijuana grower/processor.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 104/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical marijuana in an indoor,
enclosed, and secure building which includes electronic locking systems, electronic
surveillance and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility shall not
be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall be limited to 20,000
square feet, of which sufficient space must be set aside for secure storage of marijuana
seeds, related finished product, and marijuana related materials used in production or for
required laboratory testing.
There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into the environment from
any facility where medical marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs.
Marijuana remnants and byproducts shall be secured and properly disposed of in accordance
with the DOH policy and shall not be placed within any unsecure exterior refuse containers.
The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to other medical marijuana
facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of medical marijuana and related products is prohibited
at medical marijuana grower/processor facilities.
Grower/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the property line of a public, private, or
parochial school or day-care center.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/processor must be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in § 374-88, Off-street parking,
for light manufacturing. A minimum of one parking stall is required for each employee on shift.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana grower/processor adjoins a
residential use or district.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/processor must be designed to
accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to service the facility.
All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit;
The entrances must be designed to satisfy sight distance requirements; and
The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§ 322-49 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed it should be from within a secure environment.
Medical marijuana transport vehicle service.
A traffic impact study is required where the office is operated.
Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in § 349-88 and shall include a
minimum of one parking space for each employee on shift.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport vehicle service must be shielded in
such a manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana transport vehicle service adjoins a
residential use or district.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 105/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
(8)
(9)
D.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport vehicle service must be designed
to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to enter and exit the premises.
All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit;
Entrances must be designed to satisfy sight distance requirements; and
The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§ 322-49 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be temporarily stored at a medical
marijuana transport vehicle service facility, the facility must be secured to the same level as a
medical marijuana grower/producer and dispensary.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed it should be from within a secure environment.
Medical marijuana dispensary.
A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in the commonwealth and possess
a current valid medical marijuana permit from the DOH.
A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical marijuana in an indoor, enclosed,
permanent, and secure building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a facility used for
growing and processing medical marijuana.
Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public entrance and shall
implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and
unauthorized entrance into areas containing medical marijuana.
Permitted hours of operation of a dispensary shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. [of the same
calendar day].
A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a maximum of 3,000 gross square feet, of which no
more than 500 square feet shall be used for secure storage of product, and shall have an
interior customer waiting area equal to a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
Not have a drive-through service;
Not have outdoor seating areas;
Not have outdoor vending machines;
Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of medical marijuana on the premises;
and
Not offer direct or home delivery service.
A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical marijuana to certified patients
and caregivers and shall comply with all lawful, applicable health regulations, including but not
limited to all of the requirements of the Medical Marijuana Act of 2016 as may be amended.
A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a
public, private or parochial school or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in a
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 106/339
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(15)
(16)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
straight line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
business is conducted or proposed to be conducted, to the closest property line of the
protected use, regardless of municipality in which it is located.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from the next
nearest medical marijuana facility. This does not include complementing or supporting
businesses covered by different definitions. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior walls of the buildings or portions thereof in which the businesses are
conducted or proposed to be conducted, regardless of municipality in which it is located. This
separation distance does not apply to the distance between the grower/processor or
academic clinical research centers and the specific dispensary they serve, or with which they
partner.
Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be rendered in violation of these
provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care
center.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary must be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in § 374-88, Off-street parking, as
listed for professional or business offices.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana dispensary adjoins a residential use
or district.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary must be designed to
accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to service the facility.
All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit;
Entrances must be designed to satisfy sight distance requirements; and
The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§ 322-49 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed it should be from within a secure environment.
§ 242-4. Administration and enforcement.
Building and zoning permits/approvals.
A zoning permit shall be required prior to obtaining a building permit. For the construction or
erection of a building; the alteration of a building or portion thereof; the use or change in use
of a building or land; or any adjustments to a nonconforming use.
The (municipal) zoning permit application must be completed.
Permit fees shall be as stipulated in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Municipal
Governing Body in effect at the time of application.
Permits may be denied if the applicant, in the reasonable opinion of the Borough Council, is
failing to comply with any state or local law or regulation.
In the case of new construction meeting the PA MPC definition, land development plan
application is required to be submitted and an approval secured, prior to establishment of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 107/339
(6)
(7)
use.
If the application is to change the use of a building, or needs to demonstrate allocation of
space within a structure, the applicant shall provide sealed architectural drawings prepared by
an architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A medical marijuana grower/processor must be legally registered in the commonwealth and
possess a current valid medical marijuana permit from the DOH.
§ 242-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion thereof.
§ 242-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, operator, or other person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, pay
to Pleasant Hills Borough a fine of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough of Pleasant Hills on account of such violation. No
penalty or cost shall be imposed until the date the determination of the violation by the Magisterial
District Judge becomes final. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough of Pleasant Hills may enforce the judgment as provided by law. Each day a violation exists
after final judgment shall constitute a separate offense. The amount of the fine imposed shall be
multiplied by the number of such days and may be charged and collected by the Borough without
further judicial proceedings. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Borough are hereby
authorized, to issue a cease and desist notice and/or to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith. No bond will be required if injunctive relief is sought by the Borough. A
person who violates this chapter shall also be responsible for the Borough of Pleasant Hills' attorney's
fees, engineering fees, expert fees and court costs reasonably incurred by the Borough of Pleasant
Hills on account of such violation.
§ 242-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this ordinance.
§ 242-8. Enactment.
The express purpose of this chapter is to enact the limited changes referenced herein and therefore
the scope of this chapter is specifically intended to be limited. As such, this chapter is not intended to
amend the remaining ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills except as expressly set forth herein.
In the event that any section, clause of part of this chapter is found to be illegal, unconstitutional or
unenforceable, then only that portion of this chapter shall be restricted and the remainder shall remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 247. Nuisance Properties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-16-2005 by Ord. No.
844. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 108/339
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 150.
Open burning — See Ch. 180.174.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 186.
Dumping — See Ch. 189.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 225.
Littering — See Ch. 234.
Nuisances — See Ch. 248.
Paintball guns — See Ch. 251.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
§ 247-1. Costs of abatement.
The charges referenced in this chapter for the cost of abatement of a nuisance property shall be
charged back to the property owner. These charges shall be the responsibility of the property owner
and shall be payable within 30 days or accrue interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month. This financial
obligation is imposed on the property owner in an effort to deter repeat violations of state and local
laws and to ensure restoration of the common health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills. These costs shall be determined by the actual cost of abatement and shall
also include administrative costs which may be amended from time to time. The initial administrative
cost/fine for properties that are determined to be nuisance properties shall be set at $300. Such fees
will offset the administration and/or actual costs of enforcing the chapter.
§ 247-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter:
ADMINISTRATION
Refers to the activities and costs of enforcing the chapter. This function shall be carried out by the
Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
COST OF ABATEMENT
The reasonable costs of abatement of one or more of the infractions set forth in § 247-3 below and
as calculated by the Chief of Police, and shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of police
and/or emergency personnel responding to the infraction, such as personnel/labor costs, as well
as actual costs and/or actual expenses incurred to abate the infraction.
COSTS
Include the cost of abatement of each of the infractions described herein as well as fees charged
to the property owner for the administration of this chapter. The initial administrative fee/penalty
shall be $300. This charge may be amended in future fee resolutions adopted by the Borough
Council.
NUISANCE PROPERTY
Any residentially zoned property with five or fewer units that generates at least a combined three
or more citations for one or more of the infractions described herein on three separate occasions
within any six-month period or any residentially zoned property with more than five units that
generates at least a combined three citations from one unit or five citations from the entire building
for infractions that occur within any six-month period.
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH
Any person who, whenever engaged in any infraction, is physically present at the subject property,
enters, patronizes, or attempts to enter, patronize, or visit, or waits to enter, patronize, or visit a
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 109/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
[1]
K.
L.
M.
(1)
A.
property or person present on a property, including any officer, director, customer, agent,
employee, or independent contractor of the record owner of the subject property.
PROPERTY OWNER
Any person or business entity listed as the record owner of any property within the boundaries of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills as set forth in the records of the Allegheny County Recorder of
Deeds and as published on the Allegheny County Real Estate Website.
§ 247-3. List of infractions.
The infractions subject to this chapter shall include any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct,
whenever engaged in by the owner(s), operator(s), tenant(s), occupant(s) or their invitee(s):
Violations of Chapter 150 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to animals;
Violations of Chapter 162 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to brush, grass and
weeds;
Violations related to Chapter 174 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to open
burning;
Violations related to Chapter 186 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to drug
paraphernalia;
Violations of Chapter 189 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to dumping;
Violations of Chapter 225 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to hazardous waste;
Violations of Chapter 234 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to littering;
Violations of Chapter 248 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to nuisances;
Violations of Chapter 251 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to paintball guns;
Violations of Chapter 258 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills related to peace and good
order;
Violations of the Pet/Exotic Animal Ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills;[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Animals, Art. IV, Exotic Animals.
Violations of any existing ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills which results in a disturbance
of the quiet use and enjoyment of the neighboring property.
Violations under Pennsylvania law, which are designated as a summary offense, misdemeanor or
felony.
§ 247-4. Notices; log; designation; subsequent infractions.
Service of notice.
Notice of the citations referenced herein shall be reported to the property owner within 72
hours of their discovery and/or confirmation. Notification to the property owner shall be
provided by First Class U.S. Mail addressed to the property owner's last known address or by
delivery of a notice to the property owner's usual place of business or residence. This notice
shall be sent by the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills with a copy provided
to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 110/339
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
D.
E.
notify the Police Department when they issue a citation so the number of infractions may be
tracked.
The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by First Class Mail to the
property owner's last known address or if delivered in person to the property owner. If the
property owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if a
copy of the notice is hand-delivered at the property owner's usual place of abode in the
presence of some competent member of the family at least 17 years of age or a competent
adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the content of the notice. If a
current address cannot be located, notice shall be deemed sufficient if posted on the potential
nuisance property, and a copy of the notice is sent via First Class Mail to the last known
address of the property owner.
The Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall maintain a log of each of the
infractions that are the subject of this chapter. The log shall be maintained for the purpose of
recording the subject infractions from diverse sources who would not otherwise know of other
departments' activities with the subject property and/or reports of violations/disturbances at the
subject property.
Whenever the Police Department determines that a residentially zoned property with five or fewer
units has been cited for one of the above-referenced infractions on at least three separate
occasions within any six-month period or a residentially zoned property with more than five units
has been cited for one of these infractions involving one unit at least three times or at least five
times for infractions involving the entire building on separate occasions within any six-month
period, the Police Department shall notify the property owner in writing that the property has been
designated as a nuisance property. A copy of this notice shall be provided to the Zoning Officer at
the time the notice is issued.
The notice described in Subsection C above shall contain the following information:
The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property;
A description of the infraction(s) that have occurred, and the date of their occurrence at the
property and a statement indicating that the property is declared as a nuisance property due
to repeated violation of the relevant Borough ordinance and/or state laws;
Notice of the property owner's right to appeal the determination as described in § 247-6 of this
chapter; and
A statement that the property owner shall, within 10 days, respond to the individual who
issued the notice, in writing, with either:
The intent of the property owner to appeal the finding referenced above; or
A proposal detailing a course of action by which the subject infractions/activities will be
abated at the property. The Police Department shall, within 10 days of receipt of said
proposal, either approve or disapprove of the proposal at its discretion. In the event the
Police Department disapproves a proposal, the property owner may appeal by following
the procedure set forth in § 247-6 below.
Upon a determination by the Police Department that an additional infraction has occurred at a
property for which notice has been issued as described in this chapter, and either the infraction
has occurred not less than 14 days after notice has been issued or an approved course of action
as described herein, has not been completed, the Police Department shall issue a notice to the
property owner setting forth the actual charge for the cost of abatement of the subject infraction(s).
This notice may also include the cost of administration of this chapter as described herein.
§ 247-5. Costs charged to owner.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 111/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
The cost to abate the infractions and the administrative cost/penalty shall be charged to the
property owner following the designation of the property as a nuisance property. These charges
shall become due within 30 days of the notice of the charges being mailed to the property owner.
Interest shall accrue, as described herein, if these costs are not satisfied within 30 days.
The Police Department shall bill the owner of a nuisance property the costs/penalties described
herein. Any cost imposed upon the property owner shall constitute a lien against the property and
may be enforced and/or collected in such fashion.
Each subsequent incident or subsequent infraction shall be deemed a separate violation subject to
this penalty/cost.
§ 247-6. Appeal.
An appeal of the determination referenced herein must be submitted to the District Magistrate within 30
days or the recommendation/costs shall become final.
§ 247-7. Exceptions.
In the event any property owner, after implementation of a plan to abate the violations,
demonstrates that representatives of the Borough have not responded to an infraction at a
nuisance property for at least a period of six months, that property shall no longer be considered a
nuisance property, until such time that the criteria to establish a property as a nuisance property
are again satisfied.
Any citation issued as a result of the action of a tenant who is already in the process of being
evicted, shall not count toward the number of citations necessary to be deemed a nuisance
property if the property owner can prove that an eviction action has been commenced in a court of
law and if the property owner is actively prosecuting said eviction action against the nuisance
tenant.
Chapter 248. Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal regulations — See Ch. 150.
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 234.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Article I. Animals Running at Large; Garbage; Obstructions
[Adopted 8-18-1947 by Ord. No. 6]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 150, Animals, Art. I, Dog Licensing; Dog Control, §§ 150-5 and 150-6.
§ 248-1. Farm and other animals.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 112/339
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
To permit any horse, mare, gelding, mule, hog, cow, goat, or any other animal or fowl to run at large
within this Borough shall be unlawful, in addition to the possible fine and penalty for violation of this
section. Each and every of the said animals or fowls so running at large is hereby declared to be a
public and common nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the police or Zoning Officer to seize and take
into custody and impound every one of the said animals or fowls, so found running at large; and if,
after four days' public notice by 10 handbills, posted in public places, no person shall come forward,
claim the same and pay the fine, and all costs and charges attending the seizing and keeping of the
same, every such animal shall be sold at public sale by the said police officer or proper Borough
official, and after retaining all reasonable costs and expenses, he shall pay the balance into the
treasury for the use of the Borough.
§ 248-2. Dogs.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824; 8-17-2015 by Ord. No. 984]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such dog or dogs to run at
large within the Borough of Pleasant Hills. If a violation of this section occurs, a police officer or
employee of the kennel which contracts with the Borough for animal control services is hereby
authorized to capture such dogs for purposes of impounding the dogs in the kennel that contracts
with the Borough for these services. Licensed dogs shall be held for a period of no more than five
days after capture and the owner being notified. Stray dogs or those appearing to be unlicensed
shall also be held for a period of up to five days as defined by the agreement with the kennel that
provides these services. The fee that is provided for in Section 302 of the Dog Law Act of 1982[1]
shall be paid by the owner of the dog(s) to the kennel which provides these services. A Boarding
Fee for each day the dog remains in the custody of the kennel must be paid by the owner of the
dog.
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-302.
Those dogs determined to be dangerous under Section 502-a of the Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-502-a,
shall be restrained or otherwise kept in accordance with Article V-a of the Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-
502-a et. seq. Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be subject to the
imposition of a fine in the amount of $100 per occurrence and further responsible for the payment
of the kennel fees.
§ 248-3. Waste.
To cast any paper or store offal, garbage, refuse, earth, brick, stone, coal, wood, ashes, mortar,
lime shavings, rubbish, salt, salt water, sweepings, manure, filth or substance of any kind,
excepting for the purpose of immediate loading or removing on any street, sidewalk, highway, or
alley within this Borough shall be unlawful.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance, and any person violating the
same shall, in addition to paying the fine and costs imposed, pay the cost of removing the same
by the Zoning Officer, provided that this section shall not apply to building material or other
obstruction authorized by proper permit from the Borough Secretary, nor materials used in the
repair or laying of sidewalks.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 234, Littering.
§ 248-4. Obstructions.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 113/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
To obstruct, with coal, wood, barrels, boxes, wagons, carts, automobiles, or any other obstructions
whatsoever, excepting for the purpose of immediate loading, removing or storing away, any of the
public streets, sidewalks, highways, or alleys in the Borough shall be unlawful. Any violation of this
section is hereby declared a public nuisance, and the person violating the same shall, in addition to
paying the fine and costs imposed, pay the cost of removing the same by the Zoning Officer, provided
that this section shall not apply to building materials or other obstructions authorized by proper permit
from the Borough Secretary, nor materials used in the repair or laying of sidewalks.
§ 248-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 447; 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
Any person, or persons, violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine as permitted by state law, and in
default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced and
committed to serve jail time for a period not exceeding that permitted by state law.
Article II. Excavation and Construction Nuisances
[Adopted 11-29-1948 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 248-6. Conditions constituting nuisance after 90 days.
For the purposes of this article the following are hereby declared to be nuisances when the same shall
have existed for a period of 90 days during which time proper safeguards and protections have not
been provided, as approved by the Borough Engineer:
Excavations;
Foundations and other similar constructions in the ground of whatever material;
Unfinished buildings or structures;
Unused and partially destroyed buildings and structures, whether by fire, explosion, natural
elements or in any otherwise; and
Noncommercial storage or placement of any materials or debris.
§ 248-7. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to maintain a nuisance as declared in § 248-6 of this
article upon any land within the limits of the Borough.
§ 248-8. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 447]
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before any District Justice in the Borough, be liable for each offense to a fine of not more than $300, or
upon failure to pay the same and costs, to be confined in the Borough lockup or within the discretion[1]
of the District Justice.
Editor's Note: Wording so in original.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 114/339
A.
B.
§ 248-9. Additional remedy by removal.
As an additional remedy, where a nuisance shall have existed for a period of 90 days without
safeguards and protections as approved by the Borough Engineer, the Borough Council, may, in each
instance, declare the same to be a nuisance for the purpose of directing the removal or abatement of
the same, and shall thereupon direct the Zoning Officer to proceed with the removal or abatement
thereof in the following manner:
By notifying the owner or occupier of such grounds of the existence of the nuisance and requiring
such owner or occupier to abate the same within the period of 30 days from the date of said
notice; or
Thereafter, upon expiration of 30 days, the Zoning Officer shall cause or procure the removal or
abatement of said nuisance at the cost of the Borough and certify such action and cost to the
Borough Secretary. The Borough Secretary shall thereupon proceed to give proper notice to the
owner or occupied of said ground of the cost thus incurred, in the same manner as is provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims. The Borough Secretary shall thereupon proceed to
collect the cost, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost as is provided by law. Upon failure to
collect such amount, the Borough Secretary shall turn over to the Borough Solicitor the collection
of the same, who shall proceed to collect such cost and 10% thereof in the manner provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims, or by action of assumpsit.
§ 248-10. Relief by bill in equity.
Nothing contained in the foregoing provisions shall be deemed to be in lieu of the right of the Borough
or its proper officers to seek relief by a bill in equity as is by law provided.
Chapter 251. Paintball Guns
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-17-2003 by Ord. No.
814. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 248.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
Recreational safety — See Ch. 282.
§ 251-1. Paintball devices recognized as nuisance devices.
Any paintball gun/device which is designed or intended to expel a projectile containing paint, ink, or
similar material which can cause injury to people or property shall be recognized as a nuisance device
and be subject to this chapter.
§ 251-2. Violations; disorderly conduct.
Any person discharging a paintball gun or similar device within the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall,
upon hearing, be subject to a finding of violation of this chapter and/or disorderly conduct.
§ 251-3. Discharge prohibited on public property.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 115/339
A.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, on any public property, including but not limited to
public parks, public streets, playgrounds, open space, recreation facilities or any other public facility,
discharge or cause to set off a paintball gun.
§ 251-4. Business exclusion.
This chapter specifically excludes any business engaged in the operation of paintball games operating
within the appropriate zoning district in which the discharge of paintball guns is carried out in an
approved controlled environment.
§ 251-5. Exclusion on private property.
This chapter specifically excludes the operation of a paintball gun on private property contingent upon
the use of such paintball device being limited to a target which is protected by an appropriate barrier
from other private property and prevents damage to same. Under no circumstance shall paintball guns
be permitted to be aimed at other human beings and/or animals; this exclusion applies only to an
appropriate target on private property.
§ 251-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $300 for the first offense and not more than
$1,000 for any subsequent offense. The cost of prosecution before the District Justice, and restitution
in an amount determined by the court for damages to person or property suffered by victims as a result
of violation of this chapter, shall be the responsibility of the individual who violates this chapter.
Chapter 254. Park and Recreation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 150.
Open burning — See Ch. 174.
Loitering — See Ch. 238.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 258.
Trapping — See Ch. 340.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 356.
Article I. Establishment of Park and Playground
[Adopted 8-3-1953 by Ord. No. 104]
§ 254-1. Description of area.
There is hereby established a park and playground in the Borough of Pleasant Hills of all of that area
of land more particularly described as follows, to wit:
BEGINNING at a point on the southerly line of Lot No. 843 in the Pleasant Hills Plan of Lots No. 7,
of record in the Recorder's Office of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, in Plan Book Vol. 36, pages
58 to 61 inclusive, said point being common the line dividing lands now or late of A. J. Farrell and
the land of H. A. Beam; thence along the southerly line of Lot No. 843 in said Plan, North 83º 38'
East a distance of One Hundred Fifty-four and 90/100 (154.90) feet to a point on the southwesterly
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 116/339
[1]
B.
side of Bruceton Road (Fifty (50) feet wide), (Said Bruceton Road having been dedicated by Deed
of Dedication of record in the Recorder's Office of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, in Deed Book
Vol. 36, pages 58-61); thence along the southwesterly side of Bruceton Road by a line curving to
the left in a southeasterly direction having a radius of Three Hundred Ten (310) feet, a arc
distance of Thirty-three and 61/100 (33.61) feet to a point; thence continuing along the
southwesterly side of Bruceton Road, South 50º 58' East a distance of Three Hundred Sixty-two
and 68/100 (362.68) feet to a point in the westerly line of property now owned by the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, which land is used for sewage treatment plant purposes (formerly and before date
of the Borough incorporation owned by the Township of Jefferson); thence along the Westerly line
of property owned by the Borough of Pleasant Hills South 23º 22' West a distance of One Hundred
Eighty-seven and 58/100 (187.58) feet to a point; thence by a line curving left in a southeasterly
direction having a radius of Six Hundred (600) feet, an arc distance of Two Hundred Forty and
29/100 (240.29) feet to a point; thence continuing along said line South 66º 38' East a distance of
Twenty-six and 10/100 (26.10) feet to a point; thence continuing along said line North 23º 22' East
a distance of One Hundred Twenty and 30/100 (120.30) feet to a point on the Southwesterly side
of Bruceton Road aforesaid; thence along the southwesterly side of Bruceton Road aforesaid
South 40º 18' 10" East a distance of Forty-six and 61/100 (46.61) feet to a point; thence continuing
along the southwesterly side of Bruceton Road aforesaid by a line curving to the left in a
southeasterly direction having a radius of Five Hundred Twenty-five (525) feet, an arc distance of
One Hundred Ninety and 81/100 (190.81) feet to a point; thence continuing along the
southwesterly side of Bruceton Road aforesaid South 60º 7' 35" East a distance of Three Hundred
Eighty-eight and 13/100 (388.13) feet to a point; thence continuing along the southwesterly side of
Bruceton Road aforesaid by a line curving to the right in a southeasterly direction having a radius
of Seven Hundred Fifty (750) feet, an arc distance of One Hundred Seventy-three and 02/100
(173.02) feet to a point; thence leaving Bruceton Road aforesaid and by a line South 40º 44' 30"
West a distance of Four Hundred Twenty-six and 44/100 (426.44) feet to line of land now or
formerly of D. B. Logan; thence continuing along the line of land now or late of D. B. Logan North
51º 36' 50" West a distance of One Thousand Eighty-five (1085.00) feet to a point; thence still
continuing along the line of lands now or late of D. B. Logan by a line South 33º 12' 10" West a
distance of Five Hundred Seventy-one and Ninety-five (571.95) feet to a point common to line of
land now or late of M. Razumic; thence along line of land now or late of M. Razumic North 38º 31'
West a distance of Five Hundred Forty-eight and 34/100 (548.34) feet to a point in the line of lands
now or late of R. J. Askin; thence along the line of lands now or late R. J. Askin, North 50º 26' East
a distance of Fifty-five (55) feet to a Black Oak; thence continuing along the line of lands now or
late of R. J. Askin North 69º 1' 40" East a distance of Five Hundred Fifty-six and 70/100 (556.70)
feet to a point; thence still along the line of lands now or late of R. J. Askin and as same goes
along the line of land now or late of H. A. Beam North 21º 46' 30" West a distance of Three
Hundred Forty-six and 74/100 (346.74) feet to a point at the place of beginning and containing
Sixteen and 202/1000 (16.202) acres.
In addition to those areas specifically identified in §254-1A, the rules and regulations and
regulated uses defined in Chapter 254 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall also
apply on all public land within the Borough of Pleasant Hills, including, but not limited to, all land
owned by the Borough. From the date of enactment of this subsection, the prohibited uses defined
in § 254-4 of the Code and the regulated uses defined in § 254-5 of the Code shall apply to all
areas within the Borough as described herein.
[Added 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 912[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that its express purpose is to amend existing § 254-1
by the addition of Subsection B. The addition does not abolish the restrictions in the area
described in § 254-1A, rather, it is intended to supplement and clarify existing language.
§ 254-2. Exercise of eminent domain.
Said land is hereby taken as a park and playground by the Borough of Pleasant Hills in accordance
with the authorization contained in the provisions of law for the exercise of eminent domain by the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 117/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
[2]
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Boroughs of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and the proper officers are hereby authorized to
enter upon and use the same for the purposes of this taking.
§ 254-3. Petition authorized.
If damages are not agreed upon, the Borough Solicitor is directed to petition the Court of Common
Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, for the appointment of viewers for the assessment of same.
The Borough Solicitor is further empowered and authorized to do any matter or thing necessary for the
accomplishment of this taking.
Article II. Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 4-21-1997 by Ord. No. 746]
§ 254-4. Prohibited uses.
Grass areas must not be used for roadways, parking or other purposes which may injure or
destroy the turf or landscaping.
Trees, shrubs, hedges, berries, wild flowers or other flowers must not be picked, cut, broken or
injured in any way whatsoever. No person shall climb any tree or attach any swing thereto.
Buildings, structures, fences, statuary, fountains, benches or signs must not be injured or defaced
in any way.
Paper, rubbish, litter or any refuse whatsoever must not be scattered, but must be deposited in
receptacles provided for that purpose.
Birds, squirrels, rabbits, deer, ducks or any other wild creatures may not be hunted, injured, killed
or in any manner molested. Abandonment of any domestic animals (dogs, cats and the like) is
likewise forbidden. Any animal found at large may be seized and impounded.[1]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 150, Animals; Ch. 248, Nuisances, Art. I, Animals Running at Large
(etc.); and Ch. 340, Trapping.
Drunkenness, disorderly or indecent conduct and profane language are prohibited.[2]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 258, Peace and Good Order.
No person shall clean, polish, grease, lubricate or make repairs to any vehicle, except those of a
minor nature and then only in cases of emergency.
The serving or drinking of beer, liquor or other intoxicating beverages is restricted to the shelter
areas and is prohibited on the ball fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, playground areas and
any other location other than the shelter area which has been reserved.
No person shall disturb any picnic or intrude himself or herself on such picnic, without the consent
of the parties composing the picnic.
No person shall post or fix any notice or bill or other writing or printing of any kind on any tree,
lamppost, hydrant, curb stone, coping, flagstone, fence, wall, building or other place.
Loud or excessive noise by using radios, tape recorders, record players or other electronic
amplification is hereby prohibited.
§ 254-5. Regulated uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 118/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
J.
K.
A.
Dogs or any other domesticated animals are not permitted at any time, except when held in leash
and under the control of the owner or other person having such animal in charge. Dogs on leash
shall not be permitted to use any area normally traversed, such as walks, paths or shelter areas or
near benches. Places used for this purpose should be in remote sections of the park.
Firearms, air rifles, BB guns, bows and arrows, slingshots or any device that can launch a
projectile which may do bodily injury are strictly prohibited. This section shall not apply to police or
other authorized personnel.
Recreational fires are prohibited except in stoves or fireplaces provided for that purpose. No
person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar or cigarette.
No public meeting, assemblage, parade or procession may take place without written permission
of the Borough Secretary.
Riding or driving bicycles or any other vehicle is not permitted except on roads and trails provided
for such purposes.
No person shall establish any booth, table or stand for the sale of, nor hawk or sell any article
whatever, without the written permission of the Borough Secretary.
Games, contests or sports are permitted only in areas designed for such use, and in no case shall
such use be permitted in areas where lawns or planting may be injured or where such games or
contests may interfere with any of the regulations in this article.
To reserve a shelter, a permit must be obtained from the Borough Secretary. No picnic or other
gathering shall be held by citizens of communities other than Pleasant Hills, or by organizations
from communities other than Pleasant Hills or any group whose makeup is predominantly of
persons from without the Borough of Pleasant Hills without first obtaining a written permit from the
Borough Secretary and depositing a fee according to the schedule of fees and policies established
by Borough Council. The cost of repairing any damage, cleaning the shelter area or replacing
equipment and tables shall be the burden of the citizen making the reservation. No shelter shall be
reserved by a group that is larger than can be accommodated by the size of the shelter.
Shelters may be reserved on a first-come basis on the first working day of the year by citizens of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills according to the schedule of fees and policies established by
Borough Council. The cancellation policy will be:
If canceled at least 60 days prior to the event, a full refund will be made.
If canceled between 20 and 59 days of the event, 50% of the deposit will be refunded.
No refund shall be made if canceled less than 20 days before the event.
All public parks and park areas and structures located thereon shall be closed between the hours
of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except to authorized personnel, individuals engaging in official
business and those individuals or groups who have obtained a permit from the Borough Secretary
permitting them to remain in any such parks, on such lands, or within such structures beyond the
regular closing hour.
Persons lying on, sleeping on, or walking on picnic tables or benches is prohibited.
§ 254-6. Traffic.
No motor vehicle shall be permitted to park except in such areas as shall be designated and
marked for that purpose.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 119/339
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A rate of speed for any motor vehicle exceeding 15 miles per hour is prohibited.
Operating any vehicle in a reckless or negligent manner or in excess of the posted speed limit is
prohibited.
The use of motor scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, unlicensed motor vehicles, or the like, is
forbidden.
§ 254-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons or organizations violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine as permitted by state law, to be recovered by the Borough before any District Justice.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
Each violation hereunder shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the penalty provided in the
preceding subsection.
Chapter 258. Peace and Good Order
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 150.
Billiard and pool rooms — See Ch. 156.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 186.
Loitering — See Ch. 238.
Nuisance properties — See Ch. 247.
Paintball guns — See Ch. 251.
Behavior in parks — See Ch. 254, Art. II.
Article I. General Provisions
[Adopted 8-18-1947 by Ord. No. 2]
§ 258-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or persons:
To be guilty of a breach of the peace, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, or to engage in fighting or to
incite others to fight, or to engage in any unlawful act tending to imperil the personal security or to
endanger or injure property within the Borough;
To use loud boisterous, profane, blasphemous, or indecent or immoral language upon or near any
of the public highways or public places or in a manner so as to annoy residents in the
neighborhood, or to make any unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the residents
near by.
To commit any act of lewdness or public indecency or exposure of person, or to become
intoxicated.
To loaf, loiter or stand upon any of the sidewalks or other public highways or places, so as to
interfere with the free and full passage of residents or travelers.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 120/339
E.
[3]
[4]
(1)
[1]
[2]
F.
G.
To set up, maintain, open or conduct any gambling place or device; immoral show, entertainment,
or exhibition, unlawful drinking place, resort or house of prostitution; or to be gathered in or
participate in the operation of the same, or to be a patron thereof.
To carry concealed any deadly weapons, unless authorized by law, or to discharge any gun or
firearm, unless in defense of person or property; to possess, use or offer for sale any fireworks of
any character except those fireworks which are permitted as consumer fireworks subject to the
definition of "consumer fireworks" as set forth in Act 43 of 2017,[1] and further subject to the
conditions and prohibitions set forth in Section 2404 of Act 43 of 2017, as may be amended,
subject to the exceptions as described in Subsection F(1) below.[2] Further, it shall be unlawful for
any person, at any time, to throw on or into any highway any stones, snowballs or other material,
or to raise any false alarm of fire.
[Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 905; 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1023]
Exclusions. Those fireworks which satisfy the definition of "consumer fireworks" as well as
those which are set forth in Section 2401 of Act 43 of 2017,[3] as may be amended, are
hereby recognized as being excluded from the prohibition of fireworks set forth above.
Further, consumer fireworks shall include any ground and hand-held sparkling devices,
novelties or toy caps, as set forth in APA 87-1 or any successor standard as the sale,
possession and use of such items is recognized as permitted under Pennsylvania law, as may
be amended.[4]
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 258, Art. V, Consumer Fireworks.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 258, Art. V, Consumer Fireworks.
To interfere with Borough police officers, resist arrest or fail to render assistance to the police
officer when called upon by him; or to tamper with, destroy, or otherwise interfere with any lights,
guard rails, signs or other property or materials placed in public places by the Borough or any of
its officials.
§ 258-2. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 447]
Any person, or persons, violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine of not more than $300; and in
default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced and
committed to the Borough lockup for a period of not exceeding five days, or the county jail or
workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Article II. Destruction of Property; Obscenity
[Adopted 9-22-1947 by Ord. No. 13]
§ 258-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the bounds of said Borough voluntarily and
maliciously to break or take off door knockers or door bells, or to take down, destroy or deface any sign
put up by any inhabitant of this Borough denoting his name, occupation or place of residence; or to cut,
break or otherwise destroy any part of any dwelling house, store, shop, fence, or other building or
enclosure, be the same public or private property; or to draw upon the walls of buildings, fences, etc.,
any obscene picture or delineation, or to write thereon any indecent or immodest words; or in any way
to mutilate or destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, which may be planted on any
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 121/339
private ground, or on any of the streets, or rights-of-way of the Borough where the same is, are, or may
hereafter be by law allowed to be planted.
§ 258-4. Obscene materials.
The loan, gift, sale or offering for sale, exhibition, distribution, circulation, advertisement or publication
of indecent, obscene, lewd, lascivious or other immoral writings, printings, pictures, photographs or
representations of all matters of an indecent, obscene, lewd, lascivious or other immoral character, by
any person, shall be and the same is hereby prohibited.
§ 258-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person offending against this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice in the
Borough, pay to the person or persons injured the full value of the property destroyed and in addition
shall be subject to pay a fine not to exceed the sum of $100 and costs of prosecution, and in default
thereof, be committed to the Borough lockup for a period not exceeding five days, or the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
Article III. Handling of Machinery and Weapons
[Adopted 8-8-1949 by Ord. No. 43]
§ 258-6. Unlawful acts while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to handle, wield, manipulate, or in any manner whatsoever to use or
employ any machine, mechanical device, vehicle, weapon, tool or any other instrument while
influenced or affected by alcohol or hypnotic drugs in such manner as would or may endanger or place
in jeopardy the life, limbs or property of any one, including the property of any association or
corporation.
§ 258-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any District Justice
within the Borough, be liable to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $50 for each offense, or to
imprisonment in the Borough lockup for a period not exceeding five days, or in the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days, or either fine or imprisonment or both within the discretion of the District
Justice.
Article IV. Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 10-13-1969 by Ord. No. 431]
§ 258-8. Enumeration.
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose to cause public danger, alarm,
disorder, nuisance or if with the knowledge that he is likely to create such public danger, alarm,
disorder or nuisance he willfully:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 122/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by any act likely to produce
violence; or
Engages in fighting or in violent, threatening or tumultuous behavior; or
Makes any unreasonably loud noise; or
Addresses abusive language or threats to any person present which creates a clear and present
danger of violence; or
Causes likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal
by a police officer, where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the
immediate vicinity; or
Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or property of another so as to create a hazardous,
unhealthy or physically offensive condition; or
Commits a trespass on residential property or on public property. "Trespass" for the purpose of
this article shall mean:
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 446]
Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any residential property of another, either where such NO
TRESPASSING signs, or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, notice
is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that such entry or continued presence,
is prohibited.
Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any public property in violation of regulations,
promulgated by the official charged with the security, care or maintenance of the property and
approved by the governing body of the public agency owning property, where such
regulations have been conspicuously posted or where immediately prior to such entry, or
subsequent thereto, such regulations are made known by the official charged with the
security, care or maintenance of the property, his agent or a police officer.
Refusing to leave any commercial property when directed to do so, either orally or in writing,
by the owner of such property, or by the agent in charge thereof. This subsection shall relate
to any person, whether or not he is doing, or intends to do, any business on such commercial
property. This article shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other lawful
expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.
§ 258-9. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct in the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 258-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violation of this article shall, upon the judgment of any District Justice of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills determining such violation, be subject to pay a fine not exceeding $300, and
costs for each offense, and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the
Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Article V. Consumer Fireworks
[Adopted 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1023]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 123/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
§ 258-11. Use permitted.
The use of consumer fireworks is recognized as permissible so long as the individual who is using
them is a person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the requirements of Act 43 of 2017.[1] Such
persons who use or possess such consumer fireworks are permitted to do so lawfully subject to the
prohibition set forth in Section 2404(b) of Act 43 of 2017 which provides a person using consumer
fireworks may not ignite or discharge:
Consumer fireworks on public or private property, without the express permission of the owner(s).
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw consumer fireworks or sparkling devices
from, a motor vehicle or building.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle or building, or at another
person.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under the influence of alcohol, a
controlled substance or another drug.
Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 258-12. Violations and penalties.
Any individual using consumer fireworks in violation of the provisions of Act 43 of 2017[1] and the terms
of this article shall be subject to a summary citation and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 per occurrence. Any person selling consumer fireworks in violation of the
provisions of Act 43 of 2017, as may be amended, shall be subject to prosecution for the commission
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 258-13. Limited amendment.
This article is intended to be limited in scope as set forth herein and unless expressly stated otherwise,
this article is not intended to amend or repeal any other provision of the other existing ordinances of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills. If any section, clause or portion of this article is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal, unenforceable, invalid, or inconsistent with the requirements of the state law,
then the intention of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is that only those portions of
the article which are in conflict with existing law shall be stricken. The remaining portions of this article
not in conflict with the existing law shall remain in full force and effect as if such unconstitutional,
illegal, unenforceable or invalid provision or provisions had not been included herein. Further, this
article is not intended to modify or amend any other ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 258-14. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon the date of signing.
Chapter 262. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-17-1986 by Ord. No.
630. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 124/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
§ 262-1. License-permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, solicitor or canvasser, as defined in § 262-2, to engage in
such business within the Borough of Pleasant Hills without first obtaining a license-permit therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 262-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PEDDLER, HAWKER, CANVASSER or SOLICITOR
Any individual traveling either by foot, automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance
from place to place, house to house or from street to street within the Borough of Pleasant Hills,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of
such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and including any
individual traveling as aforesaid and requesting contributions or the payment of money or goods
by any resident of the Borough of Pleasant Hills to any religious, charitable or eleemosynary
group, corporation or purpose.
§ 262-3. Application for license-permit.
[Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
Applicants for a license-permit under this chapter must file with the Borough Manager a sworn
application, in written form, on a form to be provided by the Borough, which shall give the following
information:
Name of applicant;
Permanent home address and full local address of applicant;
Brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold;
If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the
exact relationship with the employer;
Length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
Place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time said application
is filed and the proposed method of delivery;
In the case of solicitation for contributions or payment of money or goods to a religious, charitable
or eleemosynary group or purpose, the full name and address of the true beneficiary and a
statement of the eleemosynary purpose;
The type of vehicle(s) to be used, including the make, model, year, color and license plate of each
such vehicle;
The number of helpers to be used by the applicant;
A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any helper has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 125/339
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
§ 262-4. Fees.
[Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880; 7-21-2008 by Ord. No. 892]
The Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, from time to time, by resolution, set a schedule of
fees to be charged for the issuance of a license-permit, and such schedule shall be available for review
in the office of the Borough Manager. The fee schedule shall be subject to change from time to time at
the discretion of the Borough Council with the reasonable expectation that the administrative costs
related to the administration of this chapter shall be covered. Nonprofit religious, political and/or
charitable organizations are not required to pay a fee and/or obtain a permit to engage in door-to-door
solicitation for purposes of religious and political organizations or charitable organizations.
§ 262-4.1. Investigation.
[Added 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall immediately
institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as the Chief of Police
deems necessary for the protection of the public safety.
§ 262-5. Issuance of license-permit; possession and display.
[Amended 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found
to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall indicate his or her approval of the applicant and return the
application to the Borough Manager who shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, including the
administrative costs related to the permit, approve and issue to the applicant his or her license-permit.
The license-permit shall be carried upon the person to whom it is issued at all times when such
solicitation is occurring and shall be displayed on any vehicle to which it is issued.
§ 262-6. Prohibited hours and days.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 791]
No person licensed under this chapter shall engage in the licensed activity at any time prior to 10:00
a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Further, no license-permit shall be issued for a period longer than 30 days.
§ 262-7. Crying of wares; use of loudspeaker devices.
No person licensed under this chapter shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks
in the Borough nor shall he use any loudspeaker, horn or other device for announcing his presence.
§ 262-8. Parking of vehicles.
Any vehicle used by any person licensed under this chapter shall, when stopped to exercise any right
or privilege granted by a license-permit issued under this chapter, be parked abutting the curb, and no
vehicle shall be stopped in the middle of any street, alley or roadway.
§ 262-9. Use of fixed locations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 126/339
No person licensed under this chapter shall occupy any fixed location upon any of the streets, alleys or
sidewalks of the Borough for the purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
§ 262-10. Use of vehicles.
No person licensed under this chapter shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys of the
Borough in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor may any
such person place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any such person
maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle on any street or alley in the
Borough for longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 262-10.1. Restricted residence listing.
[Added 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
A resident, upon written request to the Borough Manager, may ask to be placed on a restricted listing
which will be given to all applicants being issued a peddling and soliciting license-permit. Persons to
whom licenses-permits are issued shall not call upon any residents named on the restricted listing.
§ 262-11. Record of licenses-permits; enforcement.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 791; 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
The Chief of Police shall cause a record of all licenses-permits issued under this chapter to be kept on
file. Should the Chief of Police determine that a license-permit should be suspended or revoked as a
result of the conduct of the applicant, then the Chief of Police shall present a recommendation to the
Borough Manager that the license-permit should be suspended or revoked for cause.
§ 262-12. Suspension of license-permit.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 791; 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
The Borough Manager is authorized to suspend any license-permit issued under this chapter upon
his/her determination that such suspension shall be beneficial to the public health, safety and welfare
before any violation(s) of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or as a result of providing false
information during the application process.
§ 262-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $300 for each day that a violation occurs.
§ 262-14. Persons exempted.
[Amended 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 669]
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any persons who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, milk, butter, eggs, baked goods and the like (excluding the sale of frozen products from
vehicles) or represent any church, school, school group or service club, the majority of whose
members reside within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 268. Property Maintenance
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 127/339
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
829.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 268, Property Maintenance, adopted 11-18-1996
by Ord. No. 737.
§ 268-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 982; 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1011]
The document known as and designated as "The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided. A copy of the 2018 Edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code shall be retained in the Borough Office for purposes of enforcement. Each
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth therein. It is the express
purpose of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills that the terms and provisions of the
Property Maintenance Code shall be adopted as the requirements of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and
that the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall adopt such amendments to the International Property
Maintenance Code as said Code may be amended.
§ 268-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ord. Nos. 737 and 232 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.[1]
Editor's Note: Ord. Nos. 737 and 232 were codified as former Ch. 268, Property Maintenance, and Ch.
162, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 268-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 982; 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1011]
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in the following respects:
Section 101.1 (page 1, second line) Insert: Borough of Pleasant Hills
Section 103.5 (page 2, entire section) Delete
Section 111 (page 6, entire section) Delete
Section 302.4 (page 11, third line) Insert twelve (12) inches
Section 304.14 (page 13, first and second lines) Insert: April 1 – November 30
Section 602.3 (page 23, fifth line) Insert: October 1 – April 30
Section 602.4 (page 23, third line) Insert: October 1 – April 30
Except as set forth herein, it is the intention of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills to follow the International Property Maintenance Code as said Code may be amended in the
future and that the ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall maintain consistency with the
terms and provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code.
§ 268-4. Recovery of costs of abatement.
[Amended 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 938]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 128/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
In case any owner or occupant shall fail to comply with any notice to correct or abate any condition
which may adversely affect the health and welfare of the public pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or Zoning Officer may elect to enter the property
and proceed to have the condition removed, corrected or abated and shall charge said owner or
occupant the actual cost to the Borough for the labor involved, the material involved, and the use
of equipment, together with a penalty of $500. Any charges remaining unpaid after 30 days'
written notice shall be turned over to the Borough Solicitor for collection in the manner provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims or in an action at law before the District Judge or the
Court of Common Pleas.
The charges described above for labor, material and equipment, together with a penalty of $500
shall only apply in the event that the Borough elects to enter the property and proceeds to have
the condition removed, corrected or abated. The Borough is not required to remediate any such
violations, but rather may elect to notify the property owner that the property owner is responsible
for such abatement of violations.
[Added 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1009]
In the event a violation of The International Property Maintenance Code 2009 Edition, or a
violation of a subsequent edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be
amended, has been found to occur, rather than impose the above procedure and charges, the
Borough may issue a citation for each such violation, and the fine for each violation shall be $100
per occurrence. Each day that the condition/violation continues to exist shall be recognized as a
separate violation and subject to an additional $100 per each day the violation remains. Violations
of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be determined by the requirements of the
current edition of said code in existence at the time the violation occurs.
[Added 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1009]
§ 268-5. Means of appeal.
Appeal process. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal a decision under this Code
pursuant to the following procedure:
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order issued under this code may appeal to Borough
Council within 10 days after the date of the decision, notice or order was served. Such appeal
shall be considered by Council, employing such professional assistance as Council shall, in its
sole judgment, require, within 30 days. The decision of Council shall be made within 30 days after
consideration, and the decision of Council shall be final.
In any case where Council determines the appeal is not well founded, any person aggrieved
thereby may, within 10 days thereafter or such other time as may be set by Rules of Court, appeal
therefrom by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County as provided by law.
§ 268-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any Act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
§ 268-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
Chapter 273. Property Registries
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 129/339
[1]
[1]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 330.
Article I. Real Property Deed Registry
[Adopted 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Real Property Deed Registry, adopted 11-29-
1954 by Ord. No. 125.
§ 273-1. Requirements.
The Real Property Deed Registry shall conform to the provisions of Act 110 of 2008 of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 273-2. through § 273-7. (Reserved)
Article II. Notice of Occupancy
[Adopted 2-9-1970 by Ord. No. 438]
§ 273-8. Notice of tenants to be supplied.
It shall be the duty of all owners of property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills who may rent or lease
property to others for occupancy to file with the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills a
notice containing the name and address of each tenant within a period of 30 days of the occupancy of
such property by a tenant.
§ 273-9. Exemption for short-term tenancy.
This article shall not apply to any tenancy for a period of less than 30 days.
§ 273-10. Forms; filing charges.
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall provide forms whereby the name and
address of each new tenant may be supplied by the landlord to the Borough of Pleasant Hills. There
shall be no charge made by the Borough of Pleasant Hills regarding the filing of this notice.
§ 273-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon being found guilty thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300.
Article III. Registration of Leased Residential Dwelling Units
[Adopted 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 987[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Rental Property Registry, adopted 3-8-
1971 by Ord. No. 455.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 130/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
§ 273-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LANDLORD
The record owner of real property as designated in the public records of the Department of Real
Estate of Allegheny County, formerly the Recorder of Deeds, for real property which is being
utilized as the residence of one or more persons other than the landlord and the landlord's
immediate household. A landlord shall include natural persons, corporations, trusts, associations
and/or partnerships.
TENANT
An individual who resides at residential property and with whom a legal relationship with the
owner/landlord is established by a lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A
tenant may include an occupant, whether or not actual monetary rent is being paid to the landlord.
§ 273-13. Duties of owner/landlord.
From and after the date of enactment of this article, it shall be the duty of every owner of property
which is leased in the Borough of Pleasant Hills to keep and maintain all rental units in compliance with
the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as well as local ordinances such that the
property is maintained in a proper and safe condition. The owner/landlord shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the property and for any necessary repairs in and around the premises to ensure
compliance with local ordinances and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 273-14. Registration requirements.
Each and every owner/landlord of residential property is required to register the leased property
with the Zoning Officer. The landlord is required to complete the registration form that is available
at the office of the Zoning Officer and have this form on file with current information. As such, the
landlord/owner is required to update this information as tenants/occupants move into and out of
the property. Updated information must be provided within 30 days of the date when a new tenant
occupies the property. The registration information which shall be provided by all owners/landlords
includes the following:
The name, current address, home telephone number and emergency contact/cell phone
number of the record owner of the leased property;
The property address and number of rental units;
Driver's license or state-issued identification number;
Emergency telephone number for the tenant/occupant;
The actual number of occupants residing at the unit;
The name, address, contact phone number and the last four digits of the social security
number of each occupant/tenant.
This information shall only be required of all occupants 18 years of age or older. This information
is not required of occupants under 18 years of age, but minors shall be counted in the total
number of occupants on the registration form.
§ 273-15. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 131/339
Any person, partnership, trust, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of $300 per violation, and this penalty may be collected by
suit or summary proceedings brought in the name of the Borough before the District Judge.
Chapter 278. Realty Transfer Warranty
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 12-10-1973 by Ord. No.
489. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Sewer certificate of compliance — See Ch. 298, Art. II.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
§ 278-1. Residential dwellings.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation who shall erect or
construct any residential dwelling house in the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, before an occupancy
permit therefor is issued by the Zoning Officer of Pleasant Hills, issue to the buyer, assignee or
occupant of said dwelling house, a written warranty that all ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills
relating to the construction and erection of said dwelling house have been complied with fully and
completely. This warranty shall be delivered to the buyer, assignee or occupant of said dwelling house
prior to the actual transfer of occupancy of said dwelling house. The said warranty shall be for a period
of 10 years, and shall run to the immediate buyer, assignee or occupant and to his successors and
assigns during the ten-year period of the warranty. Notwithstanding any other part of this chapter, the
said warranty required herein shall be deemed to expire and cease 10 years after the original
construction of said dwelling.
§ 278-2. Record of occupancy permits.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall maintain a record of all occupancy permits
issued and of the name and address of the person issuing the warranty required by this chapter and a
copy of the warranty so issued. These records shall be open and available to the public during all
business hours of the Borough.
§ 278-3. List of applicable ordinances to be maintained.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Zoning Officer of Pleasant Hills shall maintain a list of the Borough ordinances to which the
warranty shall apply. These ordinances shall be listed on the warranty as given. If any person shall
believe that one or more of the ordinances contained in the Zoning Officer's list of applicable
ordinances is improper or illegal, he shall have a right of appeal to Borough Council, whose decision in
this matter shall be final and conclusive.
§ 278-4. Effect on existing provisions.
This chapter shall in no way be deemed to supersede or repeal any existing ordinance of the Borough
of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 282. Recreational Safety
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 132/339
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
119. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Paintball guns — See Ch. 251.
§ 282-1. Permit required.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
No person shall directly or indirectly make, assemble, possess, sell, lend or give away, or use or
employ within public range, any instrument, equipment, contrivance, appliance, implement, apparatus,
mechanism or any other device, which may be used as a form of amusement, entertainment,
recreation, diversion, pastime, sport, contest, exhibition or game and which at the same time is or may
be a source, medium or instrumentality by which or through which the public or any part thereof may
be harmed or injured, except only when a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Borough
Secretary in accordance with the provisions herein contained.
§ 282-2. Permit conditions.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Borough Secretary is hereby empowered and authorized to issue permits to any responsible
person, group of persons, association or organization for the manufacture, assembly, sale, possession,
use or employment of any article enumerated in § 282-1 hereof, for the purpose of providing or
furnishing amusement, entertainment, recreation, diversion, pastime, sport, contest, exhibition, or
game, when supervised, regulated and provided with such safeguards as may be required therefor;
provided that where any group of persons, association or organization is granted a permit, a specific
person or persons shall be designated in charge and responsible therefor.
§ 282-3. Rules and regulations.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
The Borough Secretary is further empowered and authorized to provide rules and regulations and
require such protective safeguards as he may deem feasible under the circumstances. He shall have
power to revoke, eo instante, any permit which in his discretion he shall consider detrimental to the
safety or general welfare of the public or any part thereof; and upon revocation thereof, all rights
thereunder shall cease and determine.
§ 282-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 together with costs, and in default of the payment of
such fine or costs shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 290. Rodent Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 11-14-1960 by Ord. No.
235. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 133/339
§ 290-1. Borough contract authorized.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
When advised to be in accordance with law by the Borough Solicitor, the Borough Council and the
Secretary attesting shall execute such contract as prepared or prescribed by the Borough Solicitor for
the extermination and control of rodents within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 290-2. Ratification of prior action.
All acts heretofore done by the proper officers are hereby authorized and ratified in the performance
and accomplishment of the purpose of this chapter.
Chapter 295. Secondhand Dealers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 2-28-2011 by Ord. No.
932. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 295-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other business organization or entity who
or which purchases precious metals from the general public for resale or refining or any individual
who acts as an agent for such individual, partnership, association, corporation or other business
organization or entity. Excluded from this definition are financial institutes licensed under federal or
state banking laws; the manufacturers of jewelry or of other items composed, in whole or in part,
of gold, silver or platinum; and the purchaser of precious metals for his, her or its use or ownership
and not for resale or refining.
PAWNBROKER
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other business organization or entity which
lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property or who deals in the
purchase of such property on the conditions of selling the property back again at a stipulated
price. The business of pawnbroker does not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge to
title of property.
PRECIOUS METALS
Items containing or being of gold, silver or platinum, including but not limited to jewelry and silver
services, but excluding ingots, bullion or photographic film or any article containing less than 5% of
gold, silver or platinum by weight.
SECONDHAND DEALER
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other business organization or entity which
is regularly engaged in the business of purchasing or taking upon consignment precious metals,
secondhand or used goods for resale or refining, or an individual who acts as agent for such
individual, partnership, association, corporation, or other business organization or entity.
§ 295-2. Recordkeeping requirements.
All pawnbrokers, and/or secondhand dealers dealing in precious metals within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills shall keep a legible record in the English language at the time of acquiring or selling articles in the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 134/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
course of business of each transaction in which they acquire, sell or loan goods which are the subject
of this chapter as described by § 295-1, Definitions, and the Acts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Each record shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of the transaction
and shall be available for inspection by law enforcement authorities of the state, local and federal
governments. The records shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
The name and address of the person selling the article, together with proof that photo identification
of the person was provided. The driver's license number and/or a government-issued identification
with the date of birth of the individual providing said photo identification shall be photocopied and
recorded in the ledger;
The name and address of the person buying any such article and information along with proof of
identity as described in subpart A above;
The purchase price of any such article; and
A description of the article purchased, pawned, loaned or sold, including any and all identifying
marks such as inscriptions, engraving, serial numbers, manufacturer, the color of the item or
identity of the gemstone included, etc.
§ 295-3. Delivery of records.
A full, complete, accurate and legible copy of all records described above shall be delivered to the
Chief of Police of the Borough of Pleasant Hills or the designee of the Chief of Police at the office of
the Chief on or before 10:00 a.m. each Tuesday and at any such other times as may be requested by
the Police Department. Upon demand, an inventory of records shall be open to the Borough of
Pleasant Hills Police Department for their review.
§ 295-4. License fee.
The fee for the license required herein shall be $50 annually, subject to modification at the discretion of
Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills by an appropriate amendment in the document
known as the Borough of Pleasant Hills Fee Resolution.
§ 295-5. Penalties for offenses.
In the event any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other business organization or
entity is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, said individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other business organization or entity, upon being found in violation of said provisions
before the District Judge, shall pay a maximum fine of $300 per violation, plus costs.
Chapter 298. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Realty transfer (building construction) warranty — See Ch. 278.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Article I. Connections; Use
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 135/339
[1]
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 298-1. Use of sanitary sewer required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnerships, association or corporation to permit the flow
of waste, sewage, used water, or other similar foul matter except into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 298-2. Connection required.
Hereafter no building, residence, dwelling, commercial establishment, or any other structure shall be
erected on property abutting along any line of the sanitary sewer system, unless the same shall have
proper connection by lateral sewers as hereinafter provided to the sanitary sewer system for the
disposal of all sewage; and where any such property is now or hereafter may be connected to any
other sewage system, or to any septic tank, except as hereinafter set forth, or the sewage of which is
disposed of otherwise than through the Borough sewage system, 30 days' notice, duly mailed, shall be
given to any such owner of a dwelling or other establishment, or the resident or the lessee thereof, to
disconnect the same and make proper connections for the disposal of sewage through the sanitary
sewer system as herein provided.
§ 298-3. through § 298-4. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 298-3, Application for connection, and § 298-4, Approval procedure, were
repealed 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 909. See now §§ 298-29, 298-30 and the Borough Fee Resolution.
§ 298-5. Applicant to agree with sewer laws.
Every application shall provide that the applicant accept the provisions of law and the ordinances
governing the use and service of said connection and disposal of sanitary waste.
§ 298-6. Prohibited flows and discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation connected to said sanitary sewer
system to permit the flow of any water from the roofs of any building or structure, or surface water,
whether occasioned by rains or otherwise, to flow into said system, or to allow or cause to enter into
said sewer system any insoluble solids of any kind, or to permit or cause to enter or flow into said
system any inflammable or volatile liquids or matter of any kind.
§ 298-7. Construction of private sewers and laterals.
The construction of all private sewers and laterals and all connections into the sewer system shall be
at the expense of the applicants or property owners, and all private sewers and laterals thereafter shall
be maintained by the property owners.
§ 298-8. Separate offenses.
Each day in which a connection shall continue to exist after its illegal installation, or without application
having been made, or without inspection or approval of the Borough Engineer shall be considered to
be a separate offense.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 136/339
§ 298-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, partnership, or any agents or executive officers of any corporation violating the
provisions of this article and every violation be subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than
$100 and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs, the defendant or
defendants may be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding five days.
§ 298-10. Stormwater and surface water prohibited.
[Added 9-30-1963 by Ord. No. 309]
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to connect or to permit to be
connected to said sanitary sewer system, any pipes, drains, conduits or other similar or related means
of access, which shall permit the entry or access into said sanitary sewer system of any stormwater, or
surface water, regardless of where said storm- or surface water shall originate.
Article II. Certificates of Compliance
[Adopted 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 695]
§ 298-11. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings set forth as follows:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH LIEN LETTER
A written letter from the Borough concerning municipal liens or municipal property taxes.
COMPLIANCE OFFICER
Those persons who may, on motion of Borough Council, be designated to enforce the terms and
conditions of this article and who shall have the authority to bring legal proceedings for the
violation of this article.
DYE TEST
Any commonly accepted plumbing test wherein dye is introduced into the storm or surface water
collection system of real property to determine if storm or surface water is entering the sanitary
sewer system.
EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE
An official statement from the Borough stating that it has on file a written statement from a
licensed plumber that there are no illegal storm- or surface water connections into the Borough
sanitary sewer system which would violate Borough or county ordinances, the state statutes or
Borough, county or state plumbing regulations.
ILLEGAL STORM- OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS
The discharge of basement seepage or ground water or the connection of downspouts, roof
drainage or surface or areaway drainage into the Borough sanitary sewer system.
PERSON
Any person, partnership, association, syndicate, firm, corporation, institution, agency, authority or
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 137/339
A.
B.
A.
(1)
B.
TEMPORARY EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE
A temporary statement from the Borough issued pursuant to the terms of § 298-14 of this article.
§ 298-12. Sale without evidence of compliance prohibited.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell real property within
the Borough on which a building or improvement exists without first delivering to the purchaser
evidence of compliance or temporary evidence of compliance from the Borough.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any purchaser of real property within
the Borough on which a building or improvement exists to occupy the building or improvement
without having evidence of compliance or temporary evidence of compliance.
§ 298-13. Application for evidence of compliance.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
Any person (hereinafter, "applicant") selling real property within the Borough shall make application for
evidence of compliance on a form furnished by the Borough at least 14 days before the date of sale.
The applicant shall then have a plumber who is registered and licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department perform a dye test on the real property to be sold. The plumber shall complete the
appropriate portions of the form confirming that the property has been dye tested and certifying the
results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal storm- or surface water connections, the
Compliance Officer, or his designate, shall issue evidence of compliance upon payment of a fee as set
forth in the current Fees Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary. If the dye test reveals the existence of an illegal storm- or surface water connection, no
evidence of compliance will be issued until the illegal connections are removed and certification of
such removal by a registered licensed plumber is received.
§ 298-14. Temporary evidence of compliance.
Temporary evidence of compliance may be issued at the Borough's sole discretion when, either:
The applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because of weather conditions. In this
case, the applicant shall provide the Borough with security in the amount of $200 to guarantee that
the dye test will be performed. The applicant will cause the dye test to be performed within 14
days of written notification from the Borough, which will be given at such time as weather
conditions make the dye test possible. In addition, the applicant shall provide the Borough with a
signed, written acknowledgment from the purchaser agreeing to correct, at the purchaser's sole
expense, any violations discovered as a result of subsequent dye tests. Nothing in this subsection
shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring the applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs
incurred; provided, however, that primary liability for correction of any illegal connection shall run
with the land and no agreement between the applicant and the purchaser shall affect the
Borough's enforcement powers or excuse the current owner from performance; or
When an illegal storm- or surface water connection is discovered and the necessary remedial
activities to correct such connection would require a length of time such as to create a practical
hardship for the applicant, applicant may apply to the Compliance Officer for temporary evidence
of compliance which may only be issued when the applicant provides the Borough with all of the
following:
A bona fide executed contract between the applicant and a registered licensed plumber
legally requiring the plumber to complete the necessary remedial work and granting the
Borough the legal power to enforce the contract;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 138/339
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
Cash security in the amount of said contract is posted with the Borough; and
An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost overruns related to the remedial
work together with a license to enter upon the property to complete the work in case of default
by the contractor. The Compliance Officer shall determine when such temporary evidence of
compliance shall expire, and the applicant and the purchaser shall be advised of the
expiration date. Upon expiration of the temporary evidence of compliance, without all work
having been completed, the security shall be forfeited and the Borough may use the security
to have the necessary remedial work completed.
§ 298-15. Borough lien letters.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
A request for a Borough lien letter or property tax certification letter must be accompanied by a
valid evidence of compliance certificate and a lien letter fee as set forth in the Borough's Fees
Resolution, all of which shall be delivered to the Borough at least seven days prior to the day said
letters are to be provided.
When requested by a property owner or his agent, and subject to time availability as determined
solely by the Borough Secretary, the Borough may issue an expedited Borough lien letter on two
days' notice upon the payment of an expedition fee as set forth in the Borough's Fees Resolution
in addition to the fee set forth above.
§ 298-16. Rules and regulations.
The Borough shall promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations as approved by Borough
Council for the operation and enforcement of this article which shall include, but not be limited to:
Establishing acceptable forms of security or guaranty;
Establishing the form of applications, purchaser acknowledgments, and plumber certifications;
Limiting the times of year in which temporary evidence of compliance is available for reasons
of weather.
Rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and distributed as
necessary to insure compliance with this article.
§ 298-17. Adjustment of fees.
The fees set forth in this article may be changed from time to time by resolution of Council.[1]
Editor's Note: The Borough's Fees Resolution, as amended, is on file and available for inspection
during regular office hours in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 298-18. No conflict with general police powers.
Nothing in this article shall limit in any fashion whatsoever the Borough's right to enforce its ordinances
or the laws of the commonwealth. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation issued by
any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any law or ordinance.
§ 298-19. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 139/339
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any person violating any provisions of this article or any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto
and authorized thereby shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty up to the maximum provided by
law. Each day that a violation of this article shall occur shall be deemed to be a separate offense
subject to all of the penalties provided.
Article III. Sewer and Solid Waste Rates and Charges
[Adopted 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 773; amended in its entirety 1-16-2006 by Ord. No. 858]
§ 298-20. Sewer rents.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 990;
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-
2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
For the use of the sanitary sewer system and treatment plant, as well as for the maintenance and
support of said system and its rentals, debt service and costs, there is hereby imposed and levied
upon owners, tenants and occupiers of such property served by the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, except for owners of such property as set forth in § 298-21 below, for
the calendar year of 2019, a sewer rental charge for calendar year of 2020, a sewer rental charge
for calendar year 2020, as follows:
$160 per year which will be billed at $13.34 per month; plus
A use charge of $0.70 per 100 gallons of actual use.
For the purpose of paying the sewer rental charges as hereby imposed, the charge shall be
calculated, in part, by the quantity of water flowing into each separate dwelling, apartment,
business, commercial or manufacturing use or occupancy on the premises of any property
abutting said sanitary sewer system. It is also recognized that certain business and/or dwelling
units (having five or less separate dwelling units) may be serviced by less than one water meter
per individual business and/or dwelling unit. If this situation shall occur, each individual business
and/or dwelling unit shall be assessed as set forth in Subsection A(1) plus its proportionate share
of Subsection A(2).
§ 298-21. Sewer rents for apartment buildings, hotels and motels
with six or more units.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965; 2-17-2014 by Ord. No. 967; 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018
by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
Owners of apartment buildings, hotels and/or motels, having at least six separate dwelling units, will be
assessed as follows:
Whenever an apartment building, hotel or motel, having at least six separate dwelling units, is
served by the sanitary sewer system, the owner of such apartment building, hotel and/or motel
shall be charged the rate of $80.16 per year billed at $6.67 per month for each individual dwelling
unit thereof.
In addition to the charge of $6.67 per month per individual dwelling unit, each owner of such
apartment building, hotel and/or motel, having at least six separate dwelling units and equipped
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 140/339
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
[1]
with separate water meters, will be charged $0.70 per 100 gallons actually used.
It is recognized that some buildings are serviced by less than one water meter per individual
apartment or dwelling unit. If this situation should occur, the owner of the building shall be
assessed as follows:
The owner shall be assessed $6.67 per month per individual apartment or dwelling unit; plus
In addition to the monthly assessment, the owner shall be assessed the charge of $0.70 per
100 gallons of actual use for the entire building.
Whenever any property owner both lives in a building and also conducts their own business from
the same building, such property shall only be charged one sewer rental charge. However, the
owner will be assessed $13.34 per month for each business unit.
An unoccupied dwelling will be assessed the charge of $13.34 per month, as well as the charge of
$0.70 per 100 gallons of actual use. Relief from this charge can only be obtained by the removal
of the water meter by the water company and the delivery to the Borough of a letter from the water
company stating the date the water meter was removed. Relief from assessments will commence
beginning the quarter subsequent to the removal of the water meter. The owner of the premises
shall be solely responsible for contacting the water company to remove the meter.
Where water is furnished to any user as herein provided by a utility company or Authority, the flow
of water measured by meter or flat rate of said utility company or Authority shall be considered
and deemed to be the basis of measuring the rate of actual use.
§ 298-22. Solid waste charges.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 990;
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-
2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
For the collection of garbage, rubbish, recycling materials and other waste materials, there is
hereby imposed and levied upon owners, tenants and occupiers of residential dwelling units, a
charge of $204.76 for the year. This charge will be billed at the rate of $51.19 per quarter.
In any area wherein there are apartment buildings or multiple dwelling units and/or business units,
each individual apartment, dwelling or business unit shall be considered to be a separate property
for purposes of the charge herein made.
Editor’s Note: For additional provisions, see also Ch. 308, Solid Waste.
§ 298-23. Manner of billing; delinquent billings; penalty.
[Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 862; 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-
15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 944; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018
by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
Borough Council shall determine who shall bill the sewer rental charges and the manner of such billing;
provided, however, that every property owner shall have a minimum of 30 days in which to pay such
bill before it incurs any late charges or penalties. In the event that the bills are not paid by the due date
set forth on the bill, the same shall become delinquent and subject to interest at the rate of 10% per
annum, and a penalty of 10%.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 141/339
A.
B.
§ 298-24. Liens.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 965; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No.
1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
All sewer and solid waste fees, charges and assessments shall be a lien upon the property charged
with the payment thereof until the same is paid. The Borough Solicitor is hereby empowered to lien and
to enforce collection of any delinquent charges or assessments in accordance with the law. Additional
charges shall be applied to the balance due as set forth in the Borough fee resolution as may be
amended from time to time and the contract the Borough has with Legal Tax Services for the collection
of delinquent accounts.
§ 298-25. Facilities and personnel.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
The Borough Council shall provide the facilities and personnel necessary for the administration and
application of this article, and for the collection of the rentals, charges and assessments hereunder.
§ 298-26. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 872; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 884; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 896; 12-
21-2009 by Ord. No. 911; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 930; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 944; 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 954; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 965; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the sewer rental charge or assessment as
herein provided shall, upon conviction before the District Justice for the Borough, be subject to a
fine of not more than $500 and costs. The failure to pay any quarterly rental charge or assessment
shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided in this section shall not relieve the owner, tenant or occupier from the
payment of the sewer rental, charge or assessment and any penalty or interest thereon.
§ 298-27. Irrigation systems.
[Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 902[1]]
Residents with irrigation systems may contact the water company to have a separate meter installed
for the limited purpose of measuring water use for the irrigation system. It shall be the resident's
responsibility to contact the water company to complete arrangements for the installation of a separate
meter and pay all fees/charges related to same. The water company shall establish the costs of the
separate meter and the Borough shall not incur any cost associated with the installation of a separate
meter. The cost of the separate meter shall be determined solely by the water company and may be
substantial. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to contact the water company and to
decide if the owner wishes to pursue the option of having a separate meter installed. This option is
provided to residents on the basis that the Borough recognizes that water from irrigation systems will
not enter the sanitary sewage system. Nothing contained in this provision shall relieve the owner from
incurring the charges for water use described above. The quantity of water so measured by the meter
installed for irrigation systems measured by the second meter shall thereafter be excluded in
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 142/339
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
computing the sewage services charges to be paid by the resident. The charge, if any, for reading both
meters shall be added to the quarterly sewer rate.
Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided as follows: "It shall be the responsibility of the person
wishing a separate meter for an irrigation system to contact the Pennsylvania American Water
Company prior to having a separate water line and meter installed. Such arrangements shall be at the
property owners' cost, and the owner shall be responsible to contact the water company for reading of
the meter and the billing procedures. A permit from the Borough of Pleasant Hills is not required for an
irrigation water line or meter nor is the Borough responsible for the installation or maintenance of such
meters."
§ 298-27.1. Owner responsibility for payment of bills.
[Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 977; amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No.
1007; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1018; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1026]
Any sewage bills shall be sent to and shall be payable by the party to whom the water bills are
addressed. Notification that sewage bills have become delinquent shall be sent to and shall be
payable by the record owner of the property. Regardless of the name on the bill, or if there is an
absence of the record owner's address on file, the sewage fees and charges are owed, jointly and
severally, by the occupant(s) of the premises and by the record owner(s) of the real property.
It shall be the duty of the record owner of all real property to make provisions to ensure that any
occupant of the real property pays the sewage fees, charges and/or assessments when due. All
unpaid sewage fees, charges and/or assessments, together with penalty and interest, and cost
shall become a lien on the real property.
As a condition precedent for the Pleasant Hills Authority to provide sewer usage services to a
residential dwelling or units, if either the water bills or the sanitary usage fee bills are addressed to
one who is not the owner of the real property, then the record owner of said real property must
notify the designated collector of sewage usage bills for the Authority of the following information:
Notice of addresses for real property where the occupants who are not the owner of the real
property are receiving water and/or sanitary sewage bills in their name;
The identity of the owner of the real property and the address where notice of delinquent bills
should be sent to the owner.
The record owner of residential real property shall provide updated information, as appropriate,
and keep the above information current. Thereafter, the collector of the sewage usage fees, by
first class mail, will notify the tenant and the owner within 30 days after the tenant's bill becomes
delinquent at the address provided by the owner to the collector for the sewage bills. The failure of
the owner of residential real property to register and provide the requisite information or to keep
the requisite information current will act as an absolute waiver of the defense that the owner did
not receive the notice that the tenant owed a bill within 30 days from the date the bill became
delinquent.
Article IV. Pretreatment Standards
[Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 298-28. Standards applied to industrial users.
[Amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 890; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 933; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 996; 12-16-
2019 by Ord. No. 1027]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 143/339
[1]
The Borough adopts the following local limits to be applicable to its existing and future industrial users
as follows:
Pollutant
Local Limit
(mg/l)
Mercury 0.0062
Cyanide 6.4
Cadmium 0.54
Article V. Tapping Fees
[Adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 835[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply only from the date of the ordinance
forward.
§ 298-29. Collection.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills shall collect tapping fees as defined herein on behalf of the Pleasant
Hills Authority at the same time that it issues a building permit on the subject property or at such time
as it collects its own tapping fee, whichever occurs first.
§ 298-30. Amount; applicability.
[Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 853]
The tapping fee authorized by Resolution No. 254 of the Pleasant Hills Authority establishes a general
tapping fee, and the fees referenced herein will be collected from applicants within the geographic
limits of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The amount of the tapping fee shall be established following a
resolution of the Pleasant Hills Authority, and the amount of this fee may be amended from time to
time.
§ 298-31. Remittance.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills shall remit the tapping fees, collected on property within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, on behalf of the Pleasant Hills Authority to the Pleasant Hills Authority, retaining 5% of
the total not to exceed $1,000 for those fees calculated on multiple equivalent dwelling units (EDU's).
Chapter 302. (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Former Ch. 302, Signs, adopted 1-12-1948 by Ord. No. 22, was repealed 5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 824. See now Ch. 374, Zoning.]
Chapter 308. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 174.
Dumping — See Ch. 189.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 225.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 144/339
Littering — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Solid waste and recycling collection charges — See Ch. 298, Sewers, § 298-21.
Article I. Recycling
[Adopted 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 681]
§ 308-1. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Borough of Pleasant Hills Recycling Ordinance," and the
same may be cited in that manner.
§ 308-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988.[1]
ALUMINUM
All empty aluminum beverage or food cans.
BI-METAL CONTAINERS
Empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel and aluminum, and cans commonly
referred to as "tin" cans.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Pleasant Hills.
COLLECTOR
The entity or entities authorized by the Borough of Pleasant Hills to collect recyclable materials
from residences, or authorized by commercial, municipal and institutional establishments that do
not receive collection services from the Borough to collect recyclable materials from those
properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Those properties used primarily for commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals that include but are not
limited to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER
Structural paper materials with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
COUNCIL
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
FERROUS CONTAINERS
Empty steel or tin coated food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 145/339
Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown/amber glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer
glass, plate glass, automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
All white paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Those facilities that house or serve groups of people including, but not limited to, hospitals,
nursing homes, orphanages, day care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES
Includes but not be limited to automotive, truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE
Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden residues, chipped shrubbery and tree
trimmings, but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS
Printed matter containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES
Any properties having four or more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT
Public facilities operated by the municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting the
definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS
Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals, having
printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, colored comics, glossy advertising
inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other than black and white often included with
newspapers.
PERSON(S)
Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences and commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments, whether individuals, corporations and any other legal entities.
PLASTIC BAGS
Any container used for carrying, storing or disposing of groceries, wearing apparel, other
retail/wholesale purchased items and yard waste.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS (HDPE)
Containers used for milk, clothes and dish washing soaps and other cleaning products.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS (PET)
Containers used for soft drinks.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 146/339
[1]
A.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Materials generated by residences and commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
which are specified by the Borough and can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products. Recyclable materials
may include, but are not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics, and any
other items selected by the Borough or specified in future revisions to Act 101. The recyclable
materials selected by the Borough may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the
Borough.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale of use of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics
and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and
creation and recover of reusable materials.
REFUSE MATERIALS
All materials discarded as useless by any resident of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and placed at
the curb for collection by the collector authorized by and contracted to the Borough of Pleasant
Hills.
RESIDENCES
Any occupied single- or multi-family dwellings for which the Borough provides municipal waste
collection service.
SCAVENGING
The unauthorized and uncontrolled sorting, removal, reclamation or disturbance of refuse
materials placed at the curb for collection.
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
SUPER MIX PAPER
An unseparated mix of all recyclable grades and types of paper items used in offices for which one
unit price is offered by a recycling broker or market.
WASTE
A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or
processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The term does not include source separated
recyclable materials or material approved by the PA Department of Environmental Protection for
beneficial use.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 308-3. Establishment of program; statutory authority.
The Borough hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory separation and collection
of recyclable materials and the separation, collection and composting of leaf waste from all
residences and all commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located in the Borough
for which waste collection is provided by the Borough or any other collector. Collection of the
recyclable materials shall be made at least once per month by the Borough, its designated agent,
or any other solid waste collectors operating in the Borough and authorized to collect recyclable
materials from residences or from commercial, municipal and institutional establishment. The
recycling program shall also contain a sustained public information and education program.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 147/339
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(2)
A.
Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this article. The Borough Council is
empowered to make changes to program regulations as necessary, as described in § 308-10.
Subsequent changes in the program regulations may be made through approval of Borough
Council and public notice and notification of all affected parties.
This article is ordained pursuant to the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 308-4. Lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is prohibited and shall be a
violation of this article.
§ 308-5. Separation and collection.
All persons who are residents of the Borough shall separate all of those recyclable materials
designated by the Borough from all other municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments
and other residential establishments, store such materials for collection, and shall place same for
collection in accordance with the guidelines established hereunder.
Residents must separate recyclable materials from other refuse. Recyclable materials shall
be placed at the curbside in containers provided by the Borough for collection. Recycled
materials shall not be placed at the curb any earlier than the time permitted for trash to be
placed. Any containers provided to residents for collection of recyclable materials shall be the
property of the Borough and shall be used only for the collection of recyclable materials.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792; 3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 935]
Whenever any property is sold in the Borough, the seller and buyer must both sign the
"Recycling Container Affirmation" form, as may be amended from time to time, and return
the form to the Borough with the application for the lien letter. A lien letter shall not be
issued until the signed form is submitted to the Borough. The containers must be left at
the dwelling for the buyer's use. If the containers are lost, damaged, stolen or not
available to the buyer for any reason, the seller is responsible to contact the Borough to
obtain a replacement at the time the form is signed. The owner of the property (seller) is
responsible for the cost of the replacement up until the time of the closing on the property
and the delivery of the deed to the buyer. Once the property is sold, the buyer (new
owner) is responsible for the bin and any replacement cost. Use of recycling containers
for any purpose other than the designated recycling program or use of the recycling
containers by any person other than the person allocated such container(s) shall be a
violation of this article.
Missing or damaged containers must be replaced at the resident's cost, and the fee for
such cost shall be defined by the Fee Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, which
may be amended from time to time.
An owner, landlord, manager or agent of any owner, landlord or manager of a multifamily
housing property with more than four units, not serviced by the Borough program, may
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each property.
The collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the
recyclable materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and written instructions to
the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords,
managers and agents of owners, landlords or managers who comply with this article shall not
be liable for noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the Borough or its
authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords shall submit an
annual report to the Borough reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 148/339
B.
(a)
[a]
[b]
[c]
[1]
[2]
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
previous year. This requirement may be fulfilled by submission of a letter or form from the
collector which certifies that recyclable materials are being collected from the multifamily
housing property.
All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their houses,
apartments and other residential establishments for collection unless those persons have
otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste.
Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and community activities.
Persons must separate aluminum, leaf waste, clear green and brown/amber glass, bi-metal
containers, PET plastic containers, HDPE plastic containers, and such other materials as may
be designated by the Borough generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable materials until
collection. A person may be exempted from this subsection by:
Providing for the recycling of high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf
waste, clear, green and brown/amber glass and other materials deemed appropriate by
the Borough.
Submitting, at a minimum, an annual recycling report to the Secretary of the Borough.
The report shall document the amount of municipal waste generated per year as well as
the type and weight of materials that were recycled in the previous calendar year. Valid
documentation shall include information from an end-use, recycler, or waste hauler which
describes the type and weight of each recyclable material that was collected and
marketed.
Documentation may be in the form of one of the following:
Copies of weight receipts or statements which consolidate such information;
A report from the provider of recycling collection services which identifies the
amount of each material collected and marketed. The type and weight of
recyclables generated by an individual establishment may be approximated
based on a representative sample of its source-separated materials; or
A report from the provider of waste collection services that identifies the type
and weight of each recyclable material collected and marketed in cases where
recyclables are commingled with the establishment's waste.
The type and weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment may be
approximated based on a representative sample of its waste. For Subsections C(1)
(b)[1][b] and [c] where recyclables from several establishments are collected in the
same vehicle, any individual establishment's contribution to the load may be
apportioned. Only the weight of materials marketed for recycling purposes can be
credited to an establishment.
If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the Borough or its authorized
agent, occupants of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the Borough
reporting the type and weight of materials recycled during the previous calendar year. This
requirement may be fulfilled by submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies
that recyclable materials are being collected from the establishment.
All employees, users (patrons), and residents of commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments must be informed of the recycling program. The education program should
describe the program's features and requirements, and should include at a minimum an
annual program meeting and an orientation to the program upon the arrival of a new
employee or resident. Receptacles should be clearly marked with the recycling symbol and
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 149/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
D.
the type of recyclable material that is to be placed in the receptacle, and signs should be
prominently displayed stating the requirements of the program.
Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which generate more than 2,200
pounds of municipal waste per month should also implement a waste minimization
opportunity assessment which includes:
Waste characterization, including source, generation rate, management techniques, and
management costs. The assessment should expressly consider high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper, black and white newsprint, leaf waste, clear, green and
brown/amber glass and other materials generated in significant quantities.
A description of all possible waste minimization options, including use and waste
reclamation.
An evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility of each option and a ranking of
each option.
An estimate of the pay back period for each feasible option.
A statement of which options will be implemented, including an explanation and a
timetable.
Identification of the individual(s) who will be responsible for implementing the plan.
The waste minimization plan should be periodically updated. Implementation of the plan
should include:
Recycling or composting of materials, to the greatest extent feasible, either privately or
through a municipal recycling program.
Use, to the greatest extent feasible, of products and materials which are recyclable or
made of postconsumer materials.
Substitution, to the greatest extent feasible, of durable and reusable products and
materials for products that are not durable or reusable.
Appropriate education materials and signs should be made available to employees or the
public to encourage the use of products that are durable or reusable.
All recycling collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through Friday between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or on Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless
prior approval of any exception has been granted by the Borough. No collection, hauling or
transporting of recyclables shall be permitted on Sunday.
§ 308-6. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Borough or authorized collector
pursuant to this article shall from time of placement at the curb, become the property of the Borough or
the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by § 308-8 of this article. Nothing in this article
shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by the generator unless
and until such materials are placed at the curbside for collection.
§ 308-7. Collection by unauthorized persons and scavenging.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 150/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation, other than the Borough or
one authorized by the Borough or other entity responsible for providing for collection of recyclable
materials, to collect or scavenge recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments for collection by the Borough or an authorized collector,
unless such person, firm or corporation has prior written permission from the generator to make
such collection. In violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences or
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments on one calendar day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
The unauthorized sorting and removal, commonly referred to as "scavenging," of refuse material is
prohibited. Scavenging is defined in § 308-2 of this article.
§ 308-8. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may donate or sell recyclable
materials to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit or not, provided that the
receiving person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the
collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment without prior
written permission from the Borough or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable
materials to make such a collection.
§ 308-9. Disposal of recyclables as waste prohibited.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and shall be a violation of this
article. The collected recyclable materials shall be taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or
operators of recycling facilities of source-separated recyclable materials in landfills or to be burned in
incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have notified the
Secretary in writing.
§ 308-10. Enforcement and administration; violations and
penalties.
The Borough Council or Council's designee is hereby authorized and directed to make reasonable
rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this article as deemed necessary,
including, but not limited to:
Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and recycling by residences,
and additional recyclable materials to be separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
Establishing reporting procedures for amount of materials recycled.
Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and collection of recyclable
containers.
Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this article shall receive an
official written warning of noncompliance for the first and second offense. Thereafter all such
violations shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 151/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than as
specified in C(1), (2) and (3) and costs of prosecution for each and every offense.
Summary offense. Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his official duties,
who violates any provision of this article, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any order
issued hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal waste management
plan shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000.
Misdemeanor offense. Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his official duties,
who violates any provision of this article, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any order
issued hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal waste management
plan commits a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $1,000 but not more than $10,000 per day for each violation.
Second or subsequent offense. Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his
official duties, who, within two years after a conviction of a misdemeanor for any violation of
this article, violates any provision of this article, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any
order issued hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal waste
management plan commits a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $25,000 for each violation.
Violations to be separate offense. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of
any provision of this article, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any order issued
hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal waste management plan
shall constitute a separate offense under Subsections C(1), (2) and (3).
The Borough reserves the right not to collect municipal waste containing recyclable materials in
combination with nonrecyclable materials or not to collect municipal waste from any residence not
being registered as having obtained a Borough recycling container.
§ 308-11. Franchise or license.
The Borough may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private agencies or firms to authorize
them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from curbside.
§ 308-12. Modifications.
The Borough may, from time to time, modify, add to or delete from the standards and regulations
herein and as authorized in § 308-10.
Article II. Disposal and Collection
[Adopted 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 686]
§ 308-13. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 308-14. Definitions; word usage.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 152/339
(1)
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed herein,
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97
The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).[1]
AGRICULTURAL WASTE
Poultry and livestock manure, or residual materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the
production and marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the residual materials
generated in producing, harvesting and marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural
and agricultural crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and excepted as
farms, forests or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE
Large items of solid waste, including but not limited to appliances, furniture, large auto parts,
trees, branches or stumps which may require special handling due their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but
not limited to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE
All municipal and residual waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings
and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DISPOSAL
The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid waste into
or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste
enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE
Solid waste, comprised of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE
Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable matter that is capable of being
decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as odors,
gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR
Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation who has been licensed by the
Municipality or its designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse for a
fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, as defined in the Act, which because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in
either an individual or the total population; or
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 153/339
(2) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment engaged in service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities; and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air
pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, state
institution and agency or any other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty,
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING
Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal or residual
waste or any technology used to convert part of all such waste materials for off-site reuse.
Processing facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities and
resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE
All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
The term "residual waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.[2]Residual waste shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a
valid permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams Law.[3]
RUBBISH
All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other decomposable matter. This
category includes but is not limited to ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass,
paper, wood and yard cleanings.
SCAVENGING
The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of material placed for collection or from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 154/339
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES
Any course screenings, grit and dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants
and pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are municipal solid waste and require
proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE
Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE
The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute
disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of
one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing
evidence to the contrary.
TRANSFER STATION
Any supplemental transportation facility used as an adjunct to solid waste route collection
vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION
The off-site removal of any solid waste any time after generation.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 308-15. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to accumulate upon any public or
private property within the Municipality, any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other municipal
or residual solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this article, and Department
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and
Regulations, Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the Municipality except in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the Municipality except in
accordance with the provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove any solid waste from public
or private property within the municipality without first securing a license to do so in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any solid waste that is stored or
deposited for collection with the municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid wastes within the municipality
except at any approved and permitted resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 155/339
G.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown,
placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or
private property within the municipality except as provided in this article.
§ 308-16. Standards for storage of solid waste.
The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create
safety hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient number of approved containers to
store all waste materials generated during periods between regularly scheduled collections, and
shall place and store all waste materials therein.
Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the following preparation
standards:
All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being placed in storage containers.
All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in paper, plastic or similar
material or placed in properly tied plastic bags.
All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of food particles and drained
before being placed in storage containers.
Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved containers or shall be cut
and tied securely into bundles. Bundles shall be not more than three feet in length, not more
than six inches in diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers or shall be tied securely
into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in weight.
When specified by the municipality or its designated representative, special preparation and
storage procedures may be required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the municipality or its designated
representative. Individual containers and bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste
shall comply with the following standards:
Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight, rust- and corrosion-resistant
material, such as plastic, metal or fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof,
weatherproof, insect-proof and rodent-proof.
Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tight-fitting cover and suitable
lifting handles to facilitate collection.
Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity of not less than 10
gallons nor more than 30 gallons, and a loaded weight of not more than 40 pounds.
Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers provided the bags are designated
for waste disposal. Plastic bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for collection and shall have a
capacity of not more than 30 gallons and a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with the minimum standards
established by the National Sanitation Foundation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 156/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the following storage
standards:
Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid waste shall not protrude
or extend above the top of the container.
Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. The interior of the
containers shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as
necessary, to prevent the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides of
the containers.
Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public nuisances.
Containers that do not conform to the standards of this article or which have sharp edges,
ragged edges or any other defect that may hamper or injure collection personnel shall be
promptly replaced by the owner upon notice from the municipality or its designated
representative.
Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection point specified by the
municipality or its designated representative.
With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed out for collection, the
containers shall be properly stored on the owner or customer premises at all times. Visual
front yard storage of recycling containers is prohibited.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 922]
Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery, appliances and tires shall be
stored in a manner that will prevent the accumulation of collection of water, the harborage of
rodents, safety hazards and fire hazards.
The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units, commercial establishments,
institutions and industrial lunchroom or office waste sources is subject to the regulations and
standards set forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk containers
shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste hauler and are subject to approval by
the municipality.
Bulk containers or dumpsters for the storage of all types of waste and mechanical equipment in
Districts R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, O-1 and M-1 shall be screened from public view by an opaque
fence; wall or similar enclosure not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. The
service end of the enclosure must conform to Borough Standard No. PH-18 or equal. All such
containers must be airtight and verminproof. Any such container located in the rear of a building
and totally out of public view need not be enclosed.
[Added 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 873]
§ 308-17. Standards and regulations for collection.
The municipality shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish and bulky wastes from
individual residences and multifamily residential sources with less than four units, or it may
contract with a private collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection service.
All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection service provided by the
municipality unless they can demonstrate that they have made alternate arrangements that are
consistent with this article and approved by the municipality.
All multifamily residential sources (with more than four units), commercial, institutional and
industrial establishments shall negotiate and individually contract collection service with the
municipality's collector or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 157/339
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
H.
A.
B.
C.
All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a week. Certain bulky wastes
shall be collected following prior arrangement with the municipality's collector and payment of any
required special fees as current contract agreement specifies.
All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office waste containing garbage
shall be collected at least once a week. Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as
often as necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly conditions. The
municipality reserves the right to require more frequent collection when deemed necessary.
Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the municipality or its contracted
hauler.
All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through Friday between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. or on Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
unless prior approval or an exception has been granted by the municipality. No collection, hauling
or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday.
All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the municipality shall comply with the
following standards and regulations:
All municipal waste collected with the municipality shall ultimately be disposed only at a
landfill cited in the Allegheny County Solid Waste Plan - 1990 or in subsequent revisions
thereto.
Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and transportation of municipal waste
must comply with the requirements of Act 97, and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department.
All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall be watertight and suitably
enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and
other nuisances.
Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid waste shall be capable of being
enclosed or covered to prevent roadside litter and other nuisances.
All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent public health hazards,
safety hazards and nuisances.
All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
§ 308-18. Collection and disposal charges.
The governing body of the municipality shall be authorized to make funds available, in accordance
with the laws and procedures of the municipality, for the establishment, maintenance, and
operation of a municipal solid waste collection and disposal system; or for the contracting of such
service to a private collector.
Annual fee schedules shall be published by the municipality or any competitively bid residential
collection service contract that may be awarded by the municipality.
The municipality shall be responsible for the collection of any fees for solid waste collection and
disposal from residential customers. Licensed haulers shall be responsible for the collection of any
collection and disposal fees from commercial, institutional and industrial customers.
§ 308-19. Administrative appeals.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 158/339
A.
B.
(1)
C.
D.
All appeals shall be made in writing to the governing body of the municipality.
Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the municipality shall remain effective and
enforceable.
Appeals may be made by the following persons:
Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation issued by the municipality may
appeal within 10 days after the municipality gives notice of its intention to issue the new
standard or regulation.
The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail and return receipt
requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, the municipality shall hold a public
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare for the
hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with return receipt requested at the last
known address in addition to publication in the local newspaper.
§ 308-20. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this article.
§ 308-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
which is punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, or in default of payment of
such fine, then by imprisonment for a period of not more than 10 days or both. Each day of violation
shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
Article III. Placement for Pickup
[Adopted 11-9-1970 by Ord. No. 448]
§ 308-22. Hours.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 922; 6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 923]
No garbage, rubbish or trash of any kind or nature may be placed in the front yard or at the curb line of
any property, except on the day designated for the pick-up of garbage, rubbish and trash for such
property, or for the period commencing at 12:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day designated for the
pick-up of garbage, rubbish and trash for such property. All reusable garbage, rubbish and trash
containers must be removed from the curb, after collection, to a storage area that is not a visual front
yard area, no later than 7:00 p.m. on the day following the day of collection.
§ 308-23. Definitions; applicability.
As set forth in this article, the terms "garbage," "rubbish" and "trash" shall be deemed to include the
container or containers in which such garbage, rubbish and trash may be placed, and this article shall
apply to such containers, whether they may be filled or empty.
§ 308-24. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 159/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $100.
Chapter 312. Storm Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 216.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 225.
Sewers — See Ch. 298.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 323.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
Article I. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 980]
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Appendix A, Operation and Maintenance (O and M) Agreement
§ 312-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Pleasant Hills MS4 Prohibited
Discharge Ordinance."
§ 312-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities
to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases pollution of water resources.
Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides groundwater recharge for water
supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a permit for stormwater
discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated small municipal separate
storm sewer systems (MS4s).
§ 312-3. Purpose.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 160/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
The purpose of this article is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the municipality and its
watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 312-2 of this article,
through provisions designed to:
Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the
waters of this commonwealth.
Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Provide proper operation and maintenance of all facilities and all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the municipality.
§ 312-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of
the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 312-5. Applicability.
All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved stormwater management BMPs
and all activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to
regulation by this article.
§ 312-6. Compatibility with other requirements.
Actions taken under this article do not affect any responsibility, permit or approval for any activity
regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 312-7. Word usage; definitions.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 161/339
[1]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater
recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this article. Stormwater BMPs are commonly
grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this
article, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural
BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide
variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested
buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater
BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S.
§ 851(c)] that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but
not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials. Earth disturbance activity is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.[1]
MUNICIPALITY
Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any activities that may affect stormwater runoff and any activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 162/339
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
§ 312-8. Stormwater management requirements.
For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this article and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs
and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. [NOTE:
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.]
Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, decreased, relocated, or
otherwise altered without written notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer.
Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this article.
For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented, operated, and maintained to meet
the purposes and requirements of this article and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,[1] and the Storm Water Management Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual. [NOTE: Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and
updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.]
§ 312-9. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation
easements that run with the land.
O&M plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 after the
date of this article shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the
provisions of this article.
§ 312-10. Operation and maintenance agreements.
Prior to completing construction of a SWM site plan, the property owner shall sign and record an
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see Appendix A)[1] covering all stormwater control
facilities which are to be privately owned.
The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain all facilities in accordance with
the approved schedule(s) in the O&M Plan.
The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements to assure access for
periodic inspections by the municipality and maintenance, as necessary.
The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name, address, and telephone number
of the person or company responsible for operation and maintenance activities. In the event
of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Municipality within 10
working days of the change.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 163/339
[1]
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
C.
D.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 312-11. Prohibited discharges and connections.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4
or to enter the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into
waters of this commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided
in Subsection C below and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors
to pollution a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth:
Discharges from firefighting activities.
Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
Irrigation drainage.
Air conditioning condensate.
Springs.
Water from crawl space pumps.
Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used.
Diverted stream flows.
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
Lawn watering.
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
Uncontaminated groundwater.
Water from individual residential car washing.
Routine external building wash down (which does not use detergents or other compounds).
In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this
commonwealth, the municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 312-12. Roof drains and sump pumps.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 164/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs.
§ 312-13. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in
regard to any aspect regulated by this article.
§ 312-14. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee (including the
municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of minimum
frequencies:
Annually for the first five years following construction.
Once every three years thereafter.
During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater storm.
§ 312-15. Enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any approved SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of DEP or a delegated County Conservation
District, and the municipality.
§ 312-16. Suspension and revocation.
Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or revoked for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of an approved SWM site plan or
O&M agreement.
A violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or
regulation relating to a regulated activity.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act which constitutes or creates a
hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the
suspension.
The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The applicant may
apply for a new approval under the provisions of this article.
If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion,
the municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these
cases, the municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 165/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend any, or
all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this article.
§ 312-17. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 312-18. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee, relevant to the provisions
of this article, may appeal to the municipality within 30 days of that action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to the provisions of this article,
may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken
place within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
Chapter 316. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 170.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 234.
Obstructions as nuisance — See Ch. 248, Art. I.
Excavation nuisances — See Ch. 248, Art. II.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 262.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Utility poles and wires — See Ch. 350.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 356.
Article I. Obstructions and Damage
[Adopted 9-3-1947 by Ord. No. 9]
§ 316-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either directly or indirectly, or by its agents to do,
aid or abet any of the following described regulations or restrictions intended to promote the general
safety, comfort and convenience of the Borough of Pleasant Hills:
To injure, remove, or destroy any property owned by the Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 166/339
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
To injure, remove, or destroy any public street, road, highway, lane or alley in the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
To damage, remove, molest, upset, change position of, mar or destroy any notices, barriers, red
lanterns or other warning devices placed along, or upon, any public road, highway, street, lane or
alley, whether the said highway or roadway be improved, or is being repaired, or is under
construction.
To damage, remove, molest, upset or destroy any sign or notice, whether temporary or
permanent, to the public which sign or notice hung, placed, fixed, painted, or otherwise is secured
at any place within the Borough for the purpose of safeguarding the public in matters of traffic,
health, hazard, or other danger.
To walk upon, or to drive upon with any wagon, automobile, truck, motorcycle, or any vehicle
whatsoever on any public highway, road, street, lane or alley in the Borough of Pleasant Hills
which is in the process of being repaired, improved, or being constructed, whereby the roadway or
roadbed or surface to said road may be damaged, marred or destroyed.
To place or store any building materials, landscaping materials, rubbish, lawn or garden waste,
barricades, dirt, earth, stone, construction material or other obstruction on any public highway,
road, street or sidewalk within the Borough. Exception: public utility companies performing
scheduled or emergency repairs or replacements or any construction performed under contract
with the Borough are exempt from this article, provided that all stored material, excavations and
equipment must be protected by barricades and flashing amber lights.
[Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 851]
Tree branches and other objects which hang over the roadway must be trimmed or removed to
provide clear passage of not less than 12 feet above the roadway. The express purpose of this
subsection is to allow clear passage for Borough vehicles and other types of trucks such as
delivery vehicles. This restriction also applies to basketball hoops or other structures which
prevent clear passage. Said structures must be moved back so that the entire roadway is free of
obstruction. Portable devices, such as basketball hoops or any other obstruction which block the
path of vehicles, including tree branches which block the roadway, must be relocated or trimmed
far enough from the street or edge of curb to provide a clear path of travel for all types or vehicles.
The Borough shall provide notice to the property owner of the need to remove the obstruction. In
the case of tree branches, the Borough shall provide a period of five days to remove the branches
unless the Borough determines the branches pose an imminent danger to people or property. If
the branches are not removed within the time established by the Borough, the Borough shall have
the right to trim the branches away from the roadway. The cost of this work shall be billed back to
the homeowner and due within 30 days. The failure to satisfy these charges within 30 days shall
result in the charges being a lien on the property.
[Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 851; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 890]
§ 316-2. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 851]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
before any District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine in the amount of $300
for each occurrence. Upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to serve jail time for a period not exceeding that permitted
by state law or 30 days.
Article II. Drainage Ditches; Driveways
[Adopted 10-13-1947 by Ord. No. 17]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 167/339
§ 316-3. Duty of owner or tenant to keep ditches clear.
On and after the passage of this article every owner, tenant or occupier of property abutting along any
road, street, lane, alley, highway, right-of-way dedicated to the use of the public or other public or
semipublic property where gutters have been constructed or where a system of drainage along roads,
streets, lanes, alleys, highways, rights-of-way dedicated to the use of the public, or other public or
semipublic property have been constructed or exist by reason of their establishment or because of
natural levels and slopes, shall keep said gutters or natural drainage ditches open and unobstructed.
§ 316-4. Driveway construction permit required.
All owners, tenants and occupiers of property abutting along any road, street, lane, alley, highway,
right-of-way dedicated to the use of the public or other public or semipublic property, where gutters or
other drainage ditches now exist, or shall hereafter be established, and where such person desires to
use any sidewalk or right-of-way dedicated for the use of the public or portions of either for the purpose
of ingress and egress to and from his property, or for the purpose of using any such sidewalk or rightof-
way dedicated for the use of the public or parts thereof as driveways or approaches to any road,
street, lane, alley, highway or to any other property, shall make application to the Borough Secretary or
a duly authorized Clerk for permission for the use of such sidewalk, right-of-way dedicated for the use
of the public or parts thereof, as he may designate in said application, whereupon a permit shall be
granted to said applicant to construct proper driveways or approaches in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 316-5. Driveway construction to provide for proper drainage.
No driveway or approach shall be constructed over any sidewalk, whether improved or unimproved, or
right of way dedicated for the use of the public, unless proper provision shall be made for drainage by
the underlaying of said driveway or approach with either terra cotta pipe, concrete pipe, steel or cast
iron pipe where needed, and at a depth and in the manner as will conform to the drainage ditches
already established or to be established along said roads, streets, lanes, alleys, highways or rights of
way dedicated for the use of the public, and as shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 316-6. Safety requirements for driveways.
All driveways and approaches shall be so laid and so constructed as to not interfere with the safe
passage over and use by the public generally of streets, roads, lanes, alleys, highways or rights-ofway.
§ 316-7. Costs of driveway construction; maintenance.
The construction of every driveway or approach and the gutters as provided for herein shall be done at
the expense of the property owner and maintained by him thereafter in a safe and reasonable
condition, so as not to render the Borough liable for any damages therefor.
§ 316-8. Inspection.
All driveways and approaches as herein provided for shall be subject to inspection by the Borough
Engineer or Road Commissioner, and where the same does not comply with the provisions of this
article, the owner or user thereof shall be given written notice, duly mailed, that unless the driveway
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 168/339
and approaches are made to conform with the provisions hereof within a period of 30 days from the
date of the notice, the owner or user thereof shall be deemed to have violated this article.
§ 316-9. Work done by Borough.
Upon the neglect of any owner to comply with the provisions of this article, the proper officers of the
Borough may, after notice as required by law, cause the guttering to be done or corrected at the cost of
such owner and shall collect the costs thereof and 10% additional together with all charges and
expenses from such owner in accordance with the provision of law.
§ 316-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 851]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine in the amount of $300 for each
occurrence. Upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may
be sentenced and committed to serve jail time for a period not exceeding that permitted by state law or
30 days. Each and every day in which the violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense and liable to penalties as a separate offense.
Article III. Curbing Specifications
[Adopted 6-9-1958 by Ord. No. 183]
§ 316-11. Compliance required.
[Amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 890]
No curbing shall be erected or completed in the Borough of Pleasant Hills unless the same is in
compliance with the specifications and dimensions as prepared by the Borough Engineer, set forth in
the Code requirements of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The proposed work shall be reviewed and
approved by the Borough Engineer. The documents referenced herein, including the official plans in
the Code section may be modified or amended from time to time.
§ 316-12. Modifications.
The Council shall have the right to approve, especially at any time within its discretion, a modification
or change of this provision under circumstances which it feels is incumbent, necessary or feasible, but
no person shall proceed in any manner unless such action is procured through proper action of the
Borough Council.
§ 316-13. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 851]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any District
Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine in the amount of $300 for each
occurrence. Upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may
be sentenced and committed to serve jail time for a period not exceeding that permitted by state law or
30 days.
Article IV. (Reserved)
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 169/339
[1]
A.
Editor’s Note: Former Art. IV, Curb Cut Permits, adopted 6-13-1966 by Ord. No. 373, as amended, was
repealed 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 949.
§ 316-14. through § 316-18. (Reserved)
Article V. Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 12-20-1978 by Ord. No. 553]
§ 316-19. Duty of owner or occupant to abate hazardous
conditions.
The owner or occupant of property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall have the duty to remove,
abate, counteract, or otherwise make safe, any accumulation of snow, sleet, ice, water likely to freeze,
or similar conditions likely to create a hazard or serious risk of harm to pedestrians or others, within a
period of 24 hours from the commencement of any such condition of accumulation upon any sidewalk
or other paved areas construed to be sidewalks by virtue of their construction or their use by
pedestrians or others; such sidewalks or other paved areas being within the right-of-way of any street
or within any other right-of-way of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. For the purposes of this article an
accumulation shall be defined as any amount of snow, sleet, ice, water likely to freeze, or similar
conditions likely to create a hazard or serious risk of harm to pedestrians or others which is collected or
gathered upon sidewalks or other paved areas as defined hereinabove. The duty of such owner or
occupant of property containing sidewalks or other paved areas shall not be breached if any
accumulation as defined hereinabove is removed, abated, counteracted, or otherwise rendered safe
within 24 hours of the commencement of such accumulation. Failure to remove, abate counteract, or
otherwise make safe such accumulation within 24 hours shall constitute a breach of duty by the owner
or occupant and shall constitute a violation of the terms and provisions of this article. The duty
described hereinabove is a continuing duty and each breach of duty shall constitute a separate offense
and a separate violation of this article; however, there can be but one violation during any twenty-fourhour
period per individual property or business premises.
§ 316-20. Use of sand or abrasives.
In the event snow, sleet, ice or similar hazardous condition has become frozen so that it cannot be
removed without the likelihood of damage to a sidewalk or other paved area as defined hereinabove,
the person or entity charged with the duty to remove such, shall, within the time set in § 316-19, abate,
counteract, or otherwise make safe such condition by causing enough sand or other abrasive material
to be put on the sidewalk or other paved area to make travel thereon reasonably safe, and shall then,
as soon as weather permits, remove such accumulation as per the provisions of § 316-19 above.
§ 316-21. Remedies; violations and penalties.
In the event of a violation of the terms and provisions of this article as defined hereinabove, the
Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be, and hereby is, authorized to pursue an election of remedies in the
alternative or cumulatively as follows:
To perform the work of removal, abatement, counteraction, or otherwise rendering safe any
accumulation and to charge back the cost thereof to the owner or occupant of such property; and
in the event that such owner or occupant shall fail to pay the charges within a period of 10 days
after receipt thereof or after the mailing date if the charge was mailed by registered mail the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 170/339
B.
A.
B.
C.
Borough Solicitor is authorized to file a lien against such property, together with interest at the rate
of 6% per annum and a penalty of 5%; and/or
To levy a fine in the amount of $300 per violation upon any person or entity who shall have
violated the terms and provisions of this article, such violation to be prosecuted before any District
Justice of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Upon default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to serve jail time for a period
not exceeding that permitted by state law or 30 days.
§ 316-22. Throwing snow into street prohibited; violations and
penalties.
[Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 719]
From and after the date of this section, no person may shovel, throw, toss, blow or otherwise
deposit snow or ice from their lawn, driveway or sidewalk onto any public road in the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
The prohibitions in Subsection A of this section shall apply whether the same are done by means
of manual labor or by mechanical labor.
Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction before the District Justice
before the Borough of Pleasant Hills be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $300. Each day
that a violation of this article occurs shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Article VI. Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 693]
§ 316-23. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT
Any person who makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY
Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes a clear and
immediate danger to persons or properties.
MANAGER
The Borough Engineer for all matters related to the administration of this article.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Pleasant Hills.
NEWLY IMPROVED STREET
Newly constructed cartways including base and surfacing of either concrete or asphalt and
reconstructed cartways surfaced with at least 1 1/4 inch top of asphalt. It shall be the prerogative
of the Director of Public Works to define the category of "newly improved street" and advise the
proper utility companies of this designation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 171/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
PERMITTEE
Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (ALCOSAN), any cable television company, or any company
subject to the jurisdiction of and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
STREET
A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway, public alley, public sidewalk, public
way or public road accepted or maintained by the Municipality, or open for travel and use by the
public, whether or not so accepted or maintained, including the entire area within the right-of-way
thereof.
§ 316-24. Street openings and pavement cuts.
Permit required.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening, or excavation of any kind in
or under the surface of any street without first securing a permit from the Borough Engineer
for each separate undertaking; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines or
other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately,
provided the permit could not reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand. In
such cases where emergency openings are necessary, however, the municipality shall be
notified prior to such openings in one of the following manners:
FAX notification.
Telephone notification.
PA. One Call.
The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the Borough Engineer is open for business and said permit shall be retroactive to the
date when the work was begun.
Street openings limited. No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that specified in the permit, except that
where the permittee desires to perform additional work not in excess of an amount greater than
10% of the amount specified in the original permit, an application for a new permit shall be made.
Any deposit or bond posted in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any
such additional work as may be added pursuant to the issuance of an amended permit within the
limit specified herein.
Commencement of work. Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30
days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall be terminated
automatically unless the permittee applies for an extension of time within which to commence
work. If such an extension is granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate by reason of failure to commence work within
30 days after issuance or within any extension of time granted hereunder may be renewed only
upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
Permits nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work
shall not be performed in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 172/339
E.
F.
G.
H.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
Expiration of permits. Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be set
out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the specified time, he
shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present in writing to the Borough Engineer a request for an
extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If the Borough
Engineer finds that the failure to complete the work under the permit within the time specified
therein was due to circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the permittee and that an
extension of time to complete the work under the permit is necessary and not contrary to the
public interest, the permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the work.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Municipal utility cuts. All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
municipality shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of the Borough
Engineer. The permit, fee, deposit, insurance, and bond requirements of this article shall not be
applicable to any openings made by municipally owned and/or operated utilities.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
State and county highways. The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the street or highway is maintained by the commonwealth or by the County of Allegheny;
provided, however, that any person applying for a permit to do work within the right-of-way of a
street or highway maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the County of
Allegheny which would otherwise require a permit under the terms of this article, shall notify the
Borough Engineer at the time that said application is made and at the time that the work under any
permit issued pursuant to said application is begun, so that proper safety precautions may be
taken by the municipality during the continuation of said work.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Rights of municipality. Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the municipality or of
any other person entitled thereto to use the street for any purpose for which such street may
lawfully be used not inconsistent with the permit.
Revocation of permits.
Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Engineer, after notice to the permittee, for:
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this article;
Violation of any other applicable provision of the Municipal Code, or any law relating to
the work;
Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or
endangering the life or property of others.
A permittee shall be granted a period three days from the date of the notice to correct the
violation and to proceed with the diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit
before said permit is revoked.
Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon the permittee or his
agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to be
notified.
When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been
completed, the Borough Engineer shall do or cause to be done such work as may be
necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening
was made. All expenses thereby incurred by the municipality shall be recovered from the
deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the municipality.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 173/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
§ 316-25. Applications and permits.
Duties and responsibilities of applicants. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
Make written application for such permit with the Borough Engineer on such form as he shall
prescribe. No work shall commence until the Borough Engineer has approved the application
and plan and issued a permit and until the permittee has paid and provided all required fees,
deposits, certificates and bonds.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Furnish in triplicate a plan showing the work to be performed under said permit. Two copies of
such plan shall be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted.
Agree to save the municipality, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all
costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any
work performed under said permit. The acceptance of a permit shall constitute such an
agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
Duties and responsibilities of permittees. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person
receiving a permit to:
Pay a minimum permit fee as set forth in the current Fees Resolution of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough Secretary; provided, however, that public
utility companies may elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they accrue, upon written
notice to the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792; 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Make a deposit to cover any additional costs borne by the municipality specifically related to
the work authorized by the permit and, unless the permittee is granted permission to restore
the street surface as provided in § 316-26B(4) of this article; and the cost of restoring the
street surface removed or damaged by the work done under such permit. The amount of such
deposit shall be computed by the Borough Engineer as provided in § 316-27 of this article. In
the case of public utility companies, the municipality may waive this requirement of a deposit
if said utility companies file with the municipality their corporate bond in a form satisfactory to
the Municipal Solicitor, conditioned upon the payment to the municipality of all costs which
would otherwise be covered by and paid out of such a deposit. In the event such utility
companies elect to file such a bond, the municipality shall bill such utility companies monthly
for such costs as they accrue.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Furnish a maintenance bond as required in § 316-28 of this article, and, when the permittee is
granted permission to restore the street surface as provided in § 316-26B(4) of this article, a
performance bond as required in § 316-28 of this article.
Furnish a certificate of insurance as required in § 316-29 of this article unless excepted from
such requirement by the provisions of § 316-29.
Submit, when required by the Borough Engineer, a list of owners and/or tenants and/or
addresses of all properties abutting the area where the work authorized by the permit is to be
performed.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Present evidence, when required, that all materials, labor and equipment which are needed to
complete such work as authorized by the permit are available.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 174/339
(7)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan [see § 316-25A(2)] at
all times while such work is in progress at the location for which such permit was granted and
show such permit and/or plan upon demand by a municipal official.
Provide advance notification to operators of underground facilities about excavation,
augering, blasting or other activities which may endanger underground facilities, using a one
call system if one is in operation.
§ 316-26. Street opening regulations.
Opening and excavation restrictions.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center line of the street before
being backfilled and the surface of the street temporarily restored.
No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time,
except by special permission of the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently or definite location be determined ahead of
trench excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if
necessary.
Pipe drains, pipe culverts, or other facilities encountered shall be protected by the permittee.
Any person whose facilities are damaged, or caused to be relocated by the permittee shall
notify the permittee and the municipality of such damage and thereafter may make the
necessary repairs or relocation and (in conjunction with notifying the municipality of such)
may file a claim against the permittee for the cost of such repairs or relocation. Public utility
companies concerned shall be notified by the municipality in sufficient time to determine the
validity of the damage or relocation claims. The cost of such repair work or relocation work
may be withheld by the Borough Engineer from the deposit pending determination of liability
for the damage.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Monuments of concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or
preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point
or a permanent survey bench mark within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained in writing
from the Borough Engineer. Permission shall be granted only upon condition that the
permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established drainage system of any
street, provision shall be made by the permittee to provide proper drainage.
When any earth, gravel, or other excavated material is caused to flow, roll or wash upon any
street, the permittee shall cause removal of same from the street within eight hours after
deposit to permit safe flow of traffic. In the event the earth, gravel, or other excavated material
so deposited is not removed as specified, the Borough Engineer shall cause such removal
and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags
and danger signs as shall be determined by the Borough Engineer to be necessary for the
protection of the public. Additional safety requirements may be prescribed by the Borough
Engineer, and where applicable, shall be in conformance with the requirements set forth in 67
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 175/339
(a)
(b)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(13)
(14)
Pa. Code 203.1 et seq. dealing with work zone traffic control. Copies of the publication shall
be made available in the office of the Borough Engineer for inspection by the public.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the required safety devices, such
devices shall be required safety devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained
by the municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his deposit.
No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or extinguish any barrier, warning
light, sign or notice erected, placed or posted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working hours when construction
operations prohibit provision of such access. Free access must be provided at all times to fire
hydrants.
Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up
so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. In order to expedite the flow
of traffic or to abate dirt or dust nuisance, the Borough Engineer may require the permittee to
provide toe boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to
pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee as directed by
the Borough Engineer. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without
using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least 1/2 the
sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the permittee obtains written consent from the
Borough Engineer to do the work at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted
only in the case of an emergency or in the event the work authorized by the permit is to be
performed in traffic-congested areas.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
In granting any permit, the Borough Engineer may attach such other conditions thereto as
may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent
the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner
likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
The limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be performed;
Restrictions as to the size, weight and type of equipment;
Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the prevention of noise,
and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public, or any
portion thereof; and
Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
Hydra-hammer, headache ball. The use of a mechanical device for the braking of pavement,
such as a hydra-hammer, headache ball, etc., will be permitted only under special written
permission of the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 176/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B. Backfilling and restoring opening.
All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be made properly and backfilled properly
by the permittee according to municipal specifications. Unless permittee has been granted
permission to restore the street surface as provided in Subsection B(4), permittee also shall
place a temporary surface on the pavement cut, opening or excavation in accordance with
municipal specification. If the permittee has been granted permission to restore the street
surface but weather conditions are such as to prevent the completion of permanent
restoration of the street surface at the time backfilling is completed, permittee shall install a
temporary surface in accordance with municipal specifications until such time as weather
conditions will permit permanent restoration of the street surface.
The Borough Engineer shall be notified by the permittee during the forty-eight-hour periods
preceding the beginnings of backfilling and restoration and the approximate time each will be
begun.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
No backfilling or restoration shall be accomplished unless or until the Borough Engineer is
present or permission has been granted for backfilling or restoration after inspection by the
Borough Engineer.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and paving base, shall be
performed by the permittee according to Borough specifications and shall be subject to
Borough approval and the inspection of the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
If the Borough Engineer finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street openings may be
damaged where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where a number of cross
trenches are laid in proximity to one another, or where the equipment used may cause such
damage, he may require negotiated contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in
place of patching of such street if the total area of the proposed patch or probably damaged
area exceeds 25% of the total pavement surfacing between curb faces or between concrete
gutter edges. Such negotiations shall be carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to
issuance of a permit.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the same shall be
prosecuted with due diligence. Unless the provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section apply,
the permittee is required to complete permanent restoration of the street surface in
accordance with municipal specifications within seven days after repairs and/or installation
are completed. Furthermore, the permittee shall be required to install and maintain a
temporary surface in accordance with municipal specifications during:
The period between the completion of repairs and/or installation and the commencement
of final restoration; and
The periods during the actual work when workers do not require access to the
excavation.
Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the Borough Engineer at such
times and in such manner as required to assure compliance with provisions of this article. If
the nature of the work to be performed under any permit is such as to require the services of
a full-time inspector, the Borough Engineer shall provide for services of such an inspector.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be based upon a
schedule of charges on file in the office of the Borough Engineer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 177/339
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of a permit, the permittee
shall notify the Borough Engineer in writing. A certificate of final inspection shall be issued by
the Borough Engineer to each permittee no sooner than one year and not later than 18
months after the permanent restoration of the excavation has been made, providing the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to municipal specifications. Prior to
the issuance of a certificate, the Borough Engineer shall make a final inspection of the
restoration to determine whether municipal specification have been adhered to.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years from date of
completion of the permanent restoration, and permittee fails to make such correction after
notification, any expense incurred by the municipality in correcting such settlement shall be
paid by the permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the permittee submits proof
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer that the settlement was not due to defective backfilling.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the charge or care of the
municipality, or any of its officers or employees, and no officer or employee of the municipality
is authorized in any way to take or assume any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in
the exercise of the police power, when it is necessary to protect life and property; provided,
however, that the municipality assumes charge when making final surface restoration, unless
permittee has been granted permission to perform the work of restoration of the street surface
as provided in Subsection B(4).
§ 316-27. Deposits.
Computation of deposit. The Borough Engineer, upon receipt of a properly completed application,
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee in accordance with the
schedule of charges established pursuant to Subsection E of this section; provided, however, that
the minimum deposit required shall not be less than $50. The deposit shall be used to reimburse
the municipality for the cost of any work and/or materials furnished by it in connection with work
authorized by the permit, to cover the cost of all necessary inspections of said work or any other
expenses incurred by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of this article. In the case of a
public utility company, the requirement of such deposit may be waived if such public utility
company files with the municipality its corporate bond as provided in § 316-25B(2) of this article.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified, treasurer's or cashier's check
or in lawful money of the United States.
Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs, the permittee shall, upon
demand, pay to the municipality an amount equal to the deficient. If the permittee fails or refuses
to pay such deficiency, the municipality may institute an action to recover the same in any court or
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits shall be issued to
such permittee.
Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility company shall anticipate applying for permits for more
than one street opening or excavation per calendar year and does not elect to file a corporate
bond as hereinbefore provided, such public utility company may post one deposit in an amount
and form as hereinbefore provided for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of
deposits which would otherwise be required for the anticipated permits.
Deposit and cost schedules. The Borough Engineer shall establish a schedule of charges for
inspections, labor, materials, and other such expenses as may be incurred by the municipality in
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 178/339
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
carrying out the provisions of this article. This schedule shall be established by the Borough
Engineer in accordance with the reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred by the municipality in
making such inspections, including reasonable administrative and overhead expenses, and in
accordance with the currently prevailing costs in the area for any labor and materials which may
be provided by the municipality. The Borough Engineer shall revise said schedule from time to
time to reflect any increase or decrease in the costs used to establish said charges. The schedule
shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Borough Engineer upon request.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Decision on costs. The decision of the Borough Engineer as to the cost of any work done or
repairs made by him or under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be final
and conclusive as to such cost.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit has
been completed and after restoration of the opening, the Borough Engineer shall refund to the
permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the municipality in connection with said permit. In
no event shall the permit fee be refunded.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
§ 316-28. Bond requirements.
Performance bond where municipality does not restore opening. In those instances where the
applicant has received or intends to apply for permission to perform the work of restoration of the
street surface, each such applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a permit shall provide the
municipality with an acceptable corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful performance of the
work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be
100% of the estimated cost of restoring the street pending. The term of the bond shall begin upon
the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of
final inspection from the Borough Engineer. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than one
permit per year as required by this article, he may furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to
guarantee faithful performance in such amount as the Borough Engineer deems necessary. The
amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the
permittee throughout the year. In the case of a public utility company, its corporate bond in a form
satisfactory to the solicitor may be accepted in lieu of the corporate surety bond required by this
section.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Maintenance bond. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Municipality with
an acceptable corporate surety bond conditioned for compliance with the street opening
specifications of the municipality and the provisions of this article. The Borough Engineer shall
determine the amount of the bond, and it shall be in relation to the cost of restoring the pavement
cut to be made by the permittee; provided, however, the minimum amount of the bond shall not be
less than $2,000. The term of each such bond shall begin from the completion date of the
permanent restoration of the opening by the municipality and shall terminate upon the receipt by
the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Borough Engineer. If the permittee
anticipates requesting more than one permit a year, he may file a continuing corporate surety
bond conditioned for compliance with the specifications of the municipality and the provisions of
this article in such amount as the Borough Engineer deems necessary. The amount of such bond
shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee through the
year. In the case of a public utility company, its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the
Solicitor may be accepted in lieu of the corporate surety bond required by this section.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Default in performance. Whenever the Borough Engineer shall find that a default has occurred in
the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 179/339
D.
A.
B.
C.
principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Borough Engineer to be reasonably necessary
for the completion of such work.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Completion of work. After receipt of such notice the surety must, within the time therein specified,
either cause the required work to be performed, or, failing therein, indemnify the municipality for
the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
§ 316-29. Liability insurance requirements.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality with an acceptable
certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as
well as against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the
work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly
employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by
equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the Borough Engineer in accordance
with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, it shall provide for a minimum of comprehensive
bodily injury liability insurance including coverage on a personal injury basis and comprehensive
property damage liability insurance not less than $2,000,000 combined single limit. Public utility
companies and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such a certificate if they
submit satisfactory evidence that they are insured in accordance with the requirements of this article or
have adequate provision for self-insurance. Public utility companies may file an annual certificate of
insurance in lieu of individual certificates for each permit.
§ 316-30. Openings in newly improved streets.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
Notice of proposed improvement. When the municipality shall improve or pave any street, the
Borough Engineer first shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about
to be paved or improved, and to all public utility companies and authorities operating in the
municipality and all such persons, public utility companies and authorities shall make all
connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street, within
30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be extended if permission is requested in
writing and approved by the Borough Engineer after consultation with the Municipal Engineer.
Restrictions upon opening newly improved street. No permit shall be issued by the Borough
Engineer which would allow an excavation or opening in a paved and improved street surface less
than five years old unless the applicant can demonstrate clearly that public health or safety require
that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
Penalty for opening newly improved street. If, by special action of the Borough Engineer, a permit
is issued to open any paved and improved street surface less five years old, a penalty charge
shall be made for the opening, except that the penalty shall be waived in the event the work is of
an emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale and shall be equal to 2% of
the cost of restoring the opening for each unrelapsed month or fraction thereof of the five year
restricted period. Said penalty may be waived by action of the municipal governing body.
§ 316-31. General provisions.
[Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 901]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 180/339
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
[1]
D.
E.
Street list of underground utility installations.
Every person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest in pips, conduits, ducts, or other
structures under the surface of any street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas,
electricity, communication impulses, water or steam to or from the municipality or to or from
premises of its inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the Borough Engineer,
within 120 days after the adoption of this article, a written statement containing the names of
the municipality's streets wherein the aforementioned facilities owned by such person are
located.
Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year, such person shall notify
in writing the Borough Engineer of the changes necessary to maintain the street list required
under Subsection A above.
Abandoned facilities.
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure located under the surface of any
street is abandoned, or the use thereof abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling, or
having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Borough
Engineer a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so abandoned.
Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with any abandoned underground
facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at the time of abandonment and the
Borough Engineer notified thereof in writing.
When the municipality plans to pave or improve streets in which there are abandoned
facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to remove them if, in the opinion of the
Commission, their removal is in the best interest of the municipality. If the owner shall refuse
to remove such abandoned facilities and the owner shall reimburse the municipality for such
removal.
Notice to property owners and tenants abutting project.
If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties
abutting or adjoining the project, the Borough Engineer may require the permittee to submit a
list of owners and/or tenants and/or addresses of all properties abutting the area where the
work authorized by the permit is to be performed. Upon receipt of such list, the Borough
Engineer shall notify the affected property owners and/or tenants of the proposed work to be
done.
If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface installation(s) in the
vicinity of the proposed opening, the Borough Engineer shall notify the owner(s) of such
facilities of the proposed work.
Notice to police and fire authorities. The Borough Engineer shall notify in writing municipal police
and fire authorities of all street opening permits he grants of a nature that would require a street
being closed. Such notification shall state the nature of the work to be done, proposed beginning
and completion dates, and the location of such project.[1]
Editor's Note: The following appendix material, which was included at the end of Ord. No. 693, is
on file in the Borough offices: Diagram with text re: disturbed surfaces; Concrete Surface Reconst.;
Brick Surface Reconst. & Concrete Base Detail; Application for Street Opening Permit; Street
Opening Procedure; and Emergency Street Opening Procedure.
Obstruction/alteration of manholes. It shall be prohibited in the Borough of Pleasant Hills to cover,
alter, adjust or bury manholes. Violations of this subsection shall be subject to a penalty and fine
of $300, plus court costs for each offense upon an adjudication of the District Judge.
[Added 2-17-2014 by Ord. No. 968]
Article VII. Maintenance of Sidewalks and Curbs
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 181/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
[Adopted 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 982]
§ 316-32. Maintenance responsibilities for sidewalks and curbs.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1011]
The owners of real property in the Borough of Pleasant Hills are subject to the maintenance
responsibilities for sidewalks, walkways and driveways set forth in the International Property
Maintenance Code and as described herein. The owners of land within the Borough on which
sidewalks and/or curbs are constructed, and persons in possession of any such premises, shall
properly maintain, in accordance with criteria developed by the Borough Zoning Officer and/or Borough
Engineer, such curbs and sidewalks, and shall be responsible for the repair thereof in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough. All sidewalks and curbs or sections thereof hereafter constructed,
reconstructed or repaired, shall conform to the requirements of this article and the International
Property Maintenance Code. Pursuant to Section 302.3 of the 2018 Edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, all sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. The
owners of the real property where these areas are located shall be responsible to maintain these areas
and to repair defects and hazards located thereon.
§ 316-33. Permit required.
No person or group of persons, partnership or corporation shall commence the construction or
reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or curb in the Borough without first making application for and
securing a permit from the Borough Zoning Officer. Applications for a sidewalk and/or curb construction
or reconstruction permit shall contain the requisite information on a form issued by the Borough and
the permit fee must be satisfied. The fee for this permit may be amended from time to time by the
Borough Fee Resolution. In the case of new construction, a plot plan showing the location of the
proposed work in relation to existing buildings, curbs and sidewalks is required. Permits shall be issued
by the Borough Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions and standards set forth herein and
satisfaction of any engineering concerns of the Borough Engineer. The following requirements exist for
the permits:
A permit shall be required for patching or repair of existing sidewalks and/or curbs.
As used in this chapter, "reconstruction" shall mean the complete replacement of a sidewalk
and/or curb to either existing or new line and grade.
Permit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of Council.
Any permit issued under this article shall be null and void unless work is commenced within six
months of its issuance. If work is commenced within said six-month period and abandoned within
one year of the date of issuance of the permit, said permit shall be null and void. One or more
ninety-day extensions of time may be granted by the Borough Zoning Officer for cause shown
after written application therefore.
§ 316-34. Work to be done in accordance with specifications
contained in Subdivision Ordinance.
Curbs and/or sidewalks shall be constructed, repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the
specifications and requirements of the ordinances of the Borough entitled Subdivision and Land
Development.[1] The Borough Engineer shall determine if these standards have been satisfied and
what additional steps are necessary for satisfaction thereof.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Subdivision and Land Development
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 182/339
§ 316-35. Notice given by Borough.
Notice to reconstruct, repair, and or replace existing sidewalks and/or curbs, due to unsafe conditions,
shall be provided in writing by the Zoning Officer to the owners of property containing said sidewalks
and/or curbs. Such owners shall have six months in which to reconstruct, repair or replace said unsafe
conditions, except where repairs are required, which in the opinion of the Borough Zoning Officer, are
of an emergency nature, in which event 48 hours' written notice shall be given.
§ 316-36. Remedies.
Upon the neglect of any owner or owners of property to reconstruct, repair or replace existing
sidewalks and/or curbs, in a safe and useable condition, the Borough shall, after notice as herein
provided, cause the reconstruction. repair or replacement of said sidewalk and/or curb to be done at
the cost of such property owner or owners and shall collect the cost thereof, together with all charges
and expenses, along with a penalty of 10% of the cost of repair/reconstruction, from such owner and or
owners, and may file a municipal lien therefore in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County or
collect the same by filing a civil action according to the Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania pertaining thereto.
§ 316-37. Faulty construction.
If any sidewalk and/or curb shall be reconstructed, repaired or replaced without conforming to the
requirements of this article, or of any other ordinance or law, the Borough Zoning Officer may require
the owner of the premises and other persons responsible for such construction to remove the faulty
curb or paving as a nuisance, and replace it with conforming construction, and on failure of such
person to do so within such time as the Borough shall fix, the Borough may proceed to do so and
collect the cost thereof by entry of a lien with the Department of Court Records of Allegheny County or
by proceeding with a civil action as set forth above.
§ 316-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, shall upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 per occurrence.
Chapter 322. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 9-15-1986 by Ord. No.
636. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 75.
South Hills Regional Planning Commission — See Ch. 105.
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 170.
Fees — See Ch. 206.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 216.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Realty transfer warranty — See Ch. 278.
Sewer systems and certificates of compliance — See Ch. 298.
Trees — See Ch. 344.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
ATTACHMENTS
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 183/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
322a Table 1 street design standards
Article I. General Provisions
§ 322-1. Title.
These subdivision regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Pleasant Hills
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance" or just the "Subdivision Regulations."
§ 322-2. Purposes.
The purposes of these subdivision regulations are to regulate certain land subdivision, consolidation
and development activities in the Borough by providing for a uniform method for the submission of
preliminary and final plats to ensure the proper layout or arrangement of land; the proper design of
streets to accommodate projected traffic and facilitate fire protection; and the provision of adequate
easements or rights-of-way, storm and sanitary drainage facilities, walkways, stormwater management
and other required public facilities.
§ 322-3. General intent; community development objectives.
These subdivision regulations are made in accordance with the community development objectives set
forth in Chapter 374, Zoning, and are intended to achieve the following goals:
To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare; coordinated and practical community development; proper density of
population; civil defense; disaster evacuation; the provision of adequate light and air; police
protection; vehicle parking and loading space; transportation; water; sewerage; schools; public
grounds; and other public requirements; and
To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land; blight; danger and congestion in
travel and transportation; and loss of health, life or property from fire, panic or other dangers.
§ 322-4. Subdivision and consolidation plats; development plans.
A subdivision plat, consolidation plat or site development plan approved in accordance with these
subdivision regulations shall be required for:
Any development consisting of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouse units or
other multifamily dwellings. The subdivision plat for such a development shall show each lot
occupied or intended to be occupied by a one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling and the lot
area to be occupied by townhouse units or multifamily dwellings;
Any development in which the developer proposes or intends to construct streets to be dedicated
to the Borough for public use;
Any development consisting of townhouse units or multifamily dwellings or commercial, business
or industrial structures and/or buildings in which one or more units or areas will be under separate
and independent ownership or lease, including, but not limited to, condominiums and the like.
Plats and plans, including declaration plans, required by any statute of the commonwealth for
condominium developments may qualify as a plat or plan pursuant to these subdivision
regulations;
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 184/339
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Any development consisting of the construction or reconstruction on a site for a business,
commercial or industrial use in which one or more structures will be constructed for separate
ownership or for leasehold;
The consolidation of two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of one
development; and
A subdivision that is proposed for any parcel, lot or tract of land in the Borough.
§ 322-5. Most restrictive provisions to prevail.
Whenever any provision of these subdivision regulations is at variance with another lawfully
adopted rule, regulation, ordinance, restriction or covenant, that which imposes the most
restrictive requirement shall govern.
Whenever there is a difference between a minimum standard or dimension specified in these
subdivision regulations and those contained in another official regulation, resolution or ordinance
of the Borough, the highest standard shall apply. If a question of conflict arises between various
portions of these subdivision regulations, the most restrictive term shall apply.
§ 322-6. Definitions.
As used in these subdivision regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless
otherwise specifically stated:
APPLICANT
A landowner or developer who has filed an application for a subdivision or development, including
his or her heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
An application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start of
construction or development, including, but not limited to, an application for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BOROUGH ENGINEER
The Borough Engineer or an engineering consultant appointed by Council.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections, defined by lines of sight between points at a
given distance from the intersection of street lines.
CONSOLIDATION
The combination of two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease of a
building or lot.
CUL-DE-SAC, COURT AND DEAD-END STREET
A short street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle
turnaround.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who
proposes, makes or causes to be made or proposed a subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 185/339
A.
The provisions for development of a planned residential development, including a plat of
subdivision, all covenants relating to the use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
the intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities.
PROVISIONS OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The written and graphic materials referred to in this chapter.
ENGINEER
A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth. The use of the word "engineer"
shall not restrict the practice of surveying as provided for in state law.
INSPECTOR
An authorized representative of Council or an engineer assigned by Council to make any or all
necessary inspections of the work performed and materials furnished by the subdivider or
developer.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving a group of two or more buildings, or the division or allocation of land or space
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features, or a
subdivision of land.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he or she
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY
A right-of-way, municipally owned, which cuts across a block to furnish access for pedestrians to
adjacent streets or properties.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Borough Planning Commission.
PLAT
A map or plan indicating the subdivision, consolidation or redivision of land and land development,
whether preliminary or final.
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes parks, playgrounds and other public areas, as well as sites for schools, sewage
treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities.
SERVICE STREET
A short street or roadway designed to serve a group of structures and not intended as a public
street. Such street shall be designed to discourage through traffic and may include cul-de-sac
streets.
SIGHT TRIANGLE of M/N
That one can see M feet down a side street when N feet from the intersection.
STREET
A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other
way used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STRUCTURE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 186/339
[1]
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER
Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land. The subdivider may be the landowner or the
authorized agent of the landowner or the land developer. A subdivider shall be considered as the
developer.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
SUBDIVISION, PLAT ADJUSTMENT
The adjustment of lot lines in townhouse and garden apartment lots where a master plan has been
submitted and approved by Borough Council and subsequently recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County and buildings have been subsequently erected thereon
and the plat adjustment reflects the final lot line for the townhouse or garden apartment.
[Added 5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 765]
WATERCOURSE
A ditch, channel, creek, drain, river or stream.
ZONING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 391, passed June 12, 1967, as amended; Chapter 374, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 322-7. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of these subdivision regulations shall be
fined not more than $1,000 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or parcel. All fines collected
for such violation shall be paid to the Borough and deposited in the general fund. The description of
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalty or from the remedies provided in
these subdivision regulations.
Article II. General Requirements
§ 322-8. Final plats required.
No person who is the owner or the agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out,
construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvement,
for public use, travel or other purpose, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, or sell, transfer or agree or enter into an agreement to sell or transfer any land in a subdivision
or land development, whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such subdivision or land
development, or erect any building thereon, unless and until a final plat has been prepared in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended)[1] and these
subdivision regulations and with the regulations adopted pursuant to these subdivision regulations, and
has been recorded as provided in these subdivision regulations. This section shall apply to all
subdivisions and/or land developments and to all zoning classifications in the Borough.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 322-9. Streets.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 187/339
[1]
A.
B.
A.
Council shall not approve any plat unless all streets shown thereon are of a width and grade as set
forth in Table I, following these subdivision regulations,[1] and are so located as to accommodate the
projected volume of traffic thereon, afford adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection and provide
access of firefighting equipment to buildings, adequate community safety and a coordinated system of
streets conforming to the Borough's plan of streets. A subdivision abutting and having its access upon
a public street which does not meet the width requirements of Table I shall not be approved by Council.
In the case of a subdivision for commercial, industrial and public purposes, no street giving access
upon an arterial street shall be located closer than 200 feet, along the same side of such arterial street,
to any driveway, public or private street in the same or another subdivision.
Editor's Note: A copy of Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-10. Site planning.
Council shall encourage and promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in the layout and design of
subdivisions and land developments, as well as provide authorization for the Planning Commission to
alter site requirements and to encourage other practices which are in accordance with modern and
evolving principles of site planning and development. Under these subdivision regulations, and when
recommended by the Commission, Council shall have the authority to approve applicable changes
within its jurisdiction that are otherwise restricted by these subdivision regulations.
§ 322-11. Special exceptions.
Where Council finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with these
subdivision regulations, it may grant a special exception to vary the regulations so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such special exception will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent, interest and purpose of these subdivision regulations or of
the community development objectives set forth in Chapter 374, Zoning.
In granting special exceptions, Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. The reasons
for granting the special exception shall be recorded in the official record of Council.
Article III. Preapplication
§ 322-12. Approval of plats prior to grading and recording of
deeds.
No developer proposing to make or having made a subdivision or land development within the area of
jurisdiction of these subdivision regulations shall proceed with any grading without first obtaining from
Council the approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. No developer shall have a
deed recorded for lots in any subdivision without first obtaining from Council the approval of the final
plat of the proposed subdivision or land development.
§ 322-13. Access required; subdivision of flood-prone or
geologically unsafe lands.
No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or public use,
unless adequate access to the land over adequate streets or thoroughfares exists or will be
provided by the developer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 188/339
[1]
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
If land is considered by Council to be unsuitable for use by reason of flooding or improper
drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography, geology or any other feature
harmful to the health and safety of possible residents and the community as a whole, the
subdivision and use of such questionable land shall be limited to its safe capabilities. Compliance
with National Flood Insurance Regulations shall be considered at all times.[1]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 216, Floodplain Management.
§ 322-14. Advisory meetings.
Prior to filing an application for approval of a preliminary plat, a developer may appear before the
Planning Commission to discuss his or her proposal. This step does not require any fee or formal
application. The purpose of such meeting is to afford the developer advice and assistance in order
to save time and money and suggest professional assistance if needed.
The developer shall be prepared to discuss with the Commission details of the proposed
subdivision and use and existing features of the area. Such discussion shall cover such items as
existing covenants, land characteristics, availability of community facilities, utilities, size of
development, play areas or public areas, proposed utilities, sewage, water and street
improvements and the type of subdivision, consolidation or development.
Article IV. Preliminary Plats
§ 322-15. Applications for approval; contents.
A developer desiring approval of a land development plat of any land lying in the Borough shall first
submit a written application therefor to the office of the Borough Secretary. A suitable form supplied by
the Borough shall be accompanied by the following information and plans:
Location plan. A location plan showing:
The subdivision or development name and its site and location;
The names of major existing thoroughfares related to the development, including the
distances therefrom;
Any adjacent property;
The title, graphic scale, North point and date of the plan. The location map need not be a new
drawing made for this special purpose;
The zoning use classification of the area to be subdivided or developed; and
Site plan. A site plan showing:
The contours of property and 100 feet beyond, at vertical intervals of two feet if the general
slope of the site is less than 10%, and at vertical intervals of five feet if the general slope is
greater than 10%. The Planning Commission may relieve the subdivider of this requirement if,
on application by the subdivider, setting forth his or her reasons, the Commission is of the
opinion that contours are not necessary in order to administer these subdivision regulations
properly in connection with the subdivision. In making such application, the subdivider shall
withhold submission of his or her preliminary plat until the Commission has taken action on
the application;
Terrain features, wooded areas, buildings and other natural or artificial features which would
affect the plan of the subdivision, as well as residential buildings planned and a statement
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 189/339
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
[1]
D.
E.
concerning nonresidential uses or buildings deemed to be appropriate;
Tract boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings and corners. The block and lot number of
the parcels shall be indicated;
Streets and rights-of-way on or adjoining the site, including dedicated widths, roadway widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of pavements, curbs and sidewalks and other
pertinent data;
The locations, widths and purposes of easements;
All utilities, including sanitary sewers, water lines, fire hydrants, gas mains, street lighting,
electric utilities and other facilities. The size or capacity of each should be shown and the
locations of, or distances to, such existing utilities indicated. All utilities, including all types of
transmission lines, shall be underground, except outdoor meters or other necessary
equipment. This includes, but is not limited to, all electric power feeders and telephone lines.
Cross-sections of street rights-of-way shall show utilities, including all types of transmission
line locations;
The existing plotting of adjacent land within 50 feet of the proposed subdivision and other
conditions on the adjacent land, including the approximate direction and gradient of ground
slope, including embankments or retaining walls; the character and location of buildings,
railroads, power lines, gas lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse
influences; the names of the owners of adjacent land uses or adverse influences; the names
of the owners of adjacent land; and the zoning use classification of adjacent land;
All existing storm sewer lines, culverts or other underground structures, with pipe sizes,
together with a preliminary layout of the necessary extensions thereof or additional sewer
lines or other proposed underground utilities, and indicating easements of drainage;
Other features of conditions which would affect the development or subdivision favorably or
adversely, including previous or new cut and/or fill areas;
The title, graphic scale, North point and date of the plan;
A geologic report by a registered engineer on soil and subsurface conditions, giving
preliminary opinions on probable measures needed to be considered in the design of the
development;
An impact statement, discussing the effect of the development on existing off-site streets,
highways and other public facilities and utilities and the need for additional off-site public
facilities and utilities, including, but not limited to, storm sewers and sanitary sewers; and
U.S.S.C.S. report. A copy of a report from the United States Soil Conservation Service concerning
soil conditions and water resources;
Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared by a person trained and experienced in control methods and techniques. The plan shall
conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law[1] and of the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The plan shall be
approved by the Allegheny County Conservation District and their technical review agent, the
United States Soil Conservation Service;
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat which shall be drawn to scale of 50 feet to one inch or 100 feet
to one inch, or as part of the site map detailing all of the lands under the control of the applicant,
including the following information:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 190/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
The proposed name of the subdivision;
The names and addresses of the landowner, developer, land planning consultant, engineer,
surveyor and/or other persons who are associated with the general development of the
subdivision;
Street and pedestrian patterns, showing the names and widths of right-of-way streets, the
widths of easements for utilities and the approximate grades of streets;
The layout of lots, showing dimensions, lot numbers and building lines;
The location of all off-street parking and a computation of the required parking spaces;
The parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or
other public, semipublic or community purposes;
The locations and types of all landscaping;
The key plan, legend and notes;
The location, use, height and bulk of each structure. In residential developments, the number
of families shall be noted for each structure;
The graphic scale, North point and date of the plat; and
Engineering plans. Preliminary plans showing profiles, typical cross-sections and specifications for
proposed street improvements and profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation
of utilities distribution systems and sanitary and storm sewerage systems. The sewerage systems
data shall include the following information:
A report on the feasibility of connection to any existing or proposed public sewerage system.
This report shall include the distance from the nearest existing or proposed public sewer and
the capacity of the existing or proposed system intended to handle the additional sewage
load;
A planning module in the form prescribed by the County Department of Health and/or the
State Department of Environmental Protection.
Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan prepared by a registered
professional engineer with training and expertise in hydrology and hydraulics. The report shall be
prepared in accordance with Chapter 323 of this Code.
[Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 843]
§ 322-16. Fees.
The application shall be accompanied by a check payable to the Borough in the amount set forth
in Subsection C hereof to cover the costs of review, inspection and verification of the proposed
plat.
Should a developer submit a revised application after the preliminary approval is given, the
revised application shall be accompanied by a check in an amount equal to the cost of the
Borough in processing the revised application, as estimated by the Borough Engineer.
The filing fees provided for in Subsection A hereof are as set forth in the current Fees Resolution
of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 191/339
D.
A.
B.
[1]
A.
The procedures and requirements defined by Act 206 of 2004 are incorporated hereby in
reference. The Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby adopts the amendments set forth in Act 206 of
2004 as if set forth in their entirety and specifically adopts the billing procedure and arbitration
procedure described in Section 503 and Section 510(g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended by Act 206 of 2004.
[Added 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 842]
§ 322-17. Special procedures for small subdivisions.
Full compliance with the preliminary procedures set forth in this chapter is not required in the case
of a division of land involving not more than two lots and where no new streets or other
improvements are required, provided that the subdivision is in strict compliance with Chapter 374,
Zoning.
Waivers from full compliance with these subdivision regulations shall be given by Borough
Council.
§ 322-18. Review of applications by other agencies.
The Borough may submit all or portions of the application to other governmental agencies or private
consultants for review and comment. The developer is advised to begin processing the project through
other jurisdictions at this point in the review process.
§ 322-19. Recommendation of Planning Commission.
Recommendation for approval or denial of the plat by the Planning Commission shall be submitted to
Council, with a copy of the recommendation to the subdivider.
§ 322-20. Decision of Council.
An application for preliminary approval of a plat, other than a plat governed by Article VII of Act 247, as
amended,[1] shall be acted upon by Council, and its decision shall be communicated to the applicant,
not later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of Council next following the date the
application is filed, provided that if the next regular meeting occurs more than 30 days following the
filing of the application, such ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application has been filed. The decision of Council (unless applicant is present at the meeting
when the decision is made) shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally,
or mailed to him or her at his or her last known address, not later than 15 days following the decision.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq., Planned Residential Development.
Article V. Final Plats
§ 322-21. Final plat specifications.
The final plat shall be submitted to the office of the Borough Secretary within 60 days of the approval of
the preliminary plat and shall meet the following specifications:
The plat may include all or only a part of the plat as proposed in the application. Additions to or
deletions from the approved preliminary plat shall be clearly noted as such.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 192/339
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
The original linen tracing of the plat of the subdivision and 20 prints shall be included in the
submission. The plan shall be in full conformity with the format and forms for certificates and
approvals as adopted by the County Planning Commission.
The developer shall cause to be prepared an application and plans and specifications for sanitary
sewers for submission to the commonwealth. The application to the commonwealth, along with the
fee prescribed from time to time by the commonwealth, and the plans and specifications, shall be
submitted to the Borough Secretary for transmission to the commonwealth. If approval is required
by the commonwealth, no work shall be done in connection with the construction of sanitary
sewers until a permit is granted by the commonwealth.
The developer shall also present certificates from all utility companies whose service it is
contemplated will be employed in the subdivision, stating that the final plan meets their
requirements and specifications insofar as the utility service which they provide is concerned.
The developer shall present detailed construction plans for all on-site and off-site public
improvements.
§ 322-22. Plat drawing specifications.
All of the following basic information shall be shown on the drawings of the final plat:
Titles to the land of the total plat previously submitted for preliminary approval and of adjacent
land, all as shown on the deed registry sheets of the county;
Accurate boundary lines, with metes and bounds, which provide a survey of the tract;
Accurate distances between items shown thereon, as well as accurate distances and directions to
the nearest established street corners or official monuments. Reference corners shall be
accurately described on the plan;
Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract;
Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet with angles to street, alley and
lot lines;
Street names;
Complete curve data for all curves included in the plan;
Lot numbers and dimensions;
Easements for utilities and limitations on such easements;
Accurate dimensions of any property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semipublic or
community use;
The locations of all monuments and lot markers;
The name of the subdivision;
The names and addresses of the owner and the developer;
The North point, graphic scale and date of the plat;
Certification by a professional land surveyor; and
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 193/339
P.
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
A.
Building setback lines, the minimum as fixed in Chapter 374, Zoning.
§ 322-23. Improvement inspection fees.
[Amended 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 842]
The developer, at the time of filing the original tracing of the final plan of the development, is required
to submit a fee payable to the “Borough of Pleasant Hills" to defray the costs incurred by the Borough
for inspecting the installation of the improvements required by this chapter and to insure compliance
with this chapter. The amount of this fee shall be determined by the Borough Engineer and shall be
based upon the estimated actual cost to inspect the subject improvements to be approved by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 322-24. Procedure for plat approval.
Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that the final plat submitted is in accordance with these
subdivision regulations, the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission shall endorse such approval
on the plat and shall submit the recommendation of the Commission to Council. When approved by
Council and when all other conditions required by any ordinance have been met, the President and
Secretary shall endorse such approval and return the plat to the developer for recording purposes.
Abbreviated procedure for plat approval for subdivisions which are classified as plat adjustments
in article. One may be transmitted as transparencies prepared for recording, with all required
signatures, to the office of the Borough Manager in accordance with the following procedures:
[Added 5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 765]
Certifications required on all plat adjustment plans are the owner's adoption, acknowledgment
of notary public, certification of title, surveyor's certification, Borough Engineer's certification,
certification of compliance with the approved Master Plan by the Borough, certification of
review by the County Department of Economic Development and proof of recording.
The certification of compliance with the approved Master Plan by the Borough shall be as
follows:
"In accordance with § 5.04(A) of Ordinance 636 [§ 322-24A], I certify that this plan is in
conformance with approved master plan for the [name of record of approved
development], which was approved by the Borough Council on [give date of final
approval], and as recorded in PBV______, pg._____.
(date) (municipal officer)
The owner's adoption, acknowledgment of notary public, certification of title and surveyor's
certification clauses must be signed and sealed prior to submittal for review by the Borough.
If the transparency is correctly prepared, and the amended plan conforms with the approved
Master Plan, the Borough Manager and the Borough Engineer will sign the plan.
All required certifications shall be as required by the County of Allegheny.
§ 322-25. Communication of decisions to applicants; recording of
plats.
An application for approval of a final plat, other than a plat governed by Article VII of Act 247, as
amended,[1] shall be acted upon by Council, and its decision shall be communicated to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of Council next following
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 194/339
[1]
B.
[1]
A.
B.
the date the application is filed, provided that if the next regular meeting occurs more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, such ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the application has been filed. The decision of Council (unless the applicant is
present at the meeting when the decision is made) shall be in writing and shall be communicated
to the applicant personally, or mailed to him or her at his or her last known address, not later than
15 days following the decision.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq., Planned Residential Development.
Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of such final approval, record
such plat in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 322-26. Approval by other agencies.
Approval of final plats by Council shall not be binding if county, state or federal agencies find just cause
to disapprove the development.
§ 322-27. Completion of improvements or guarantee required.
No plat shall be finally approved unless all of the streets shown on such plat have been improved, as
may be required by these subdivision regulations, and until all walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights,
fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements required by these
subdivision regulations have been installed in accordance with the same. In lieu of the completion of
any improvements required as a condition for final approval of the plat, final approval may be granted if
the developer has complied with § 322-54.
§ 322-28. Copies of plat.
Upon recording the plat in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, the developer shall deliver to
the Borough Secretary one reproducible Mylar copy and four paper prints of the plat as recorded.
Article VI. Standards of Construction
§ 322-29. Compliance required; conflicts of law.
The plats of a subdivision shall substantially conform to the principles and standards enumerated in
this chapter. If there is a discrepancy between any of the minimum standards or dimensions noted in
these subdivision regulations and a standard or dimension contained in Chapter 374, Zoning, or the
BOCA Building Code,[1] or any other official regulation, the highest standard shall apply. All
construction shall comply with all applicable codes.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Building Construction.
§ 322-30. Streets and alleys.
All street and alley layouts shall take into consideration prospective plans made by the Borough,
the county and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Also, the subdivider shall comply
with any plan officially adopted by the Borough.
Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley along a boundary of the
tract being subdivided, the remainder of such street or alley, to the prescribed width, shall be
platted within the proposed development.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 195/339
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
[1]
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Service streets may be considered only in planned developments, shopping centers, office
complexes, etc.
Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet, which shall include a turnaround at the closed end.
The turnaround shall have a maximum grade of 5%.
Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts, but may be included in commercial, industrial or
institutional areas where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes.
The minimum distance between center lines of parallel or approximately parallel streets
intersecting across street from opposite directions shall be 125 feet.
Intersections of more than two streets at one point are prohibited. Street intersections shall be
spaced not less than 300 feet apart.
Sight triangles for intersections shall be free of all obstruction, including embankments and
shrubbery which obstruct vision between any point on the streets and any other point on the
streets within the triangle. The clear vertical area shall permit unobstructed visual access to the
area between 1 1/2 feet and eight feet above the opposing street, but shall not be interpreted to
prohibit street signs, utility poles, tree trunks, etc.
Council may, when it deems it advisable, require a right-of-way in excess of the width of that
required in these subdivision regulations. Such increased width shall be under the advisement of
the Planning Commission and the Borough Engineer.
Minimum right-of-way widths, paving widths, angles of intersection, distances along sides of sight
triangles, required sidewalks, horizontal alignments, vertical alignments and maximum and
minimum grades, shall be in accordance with Table I, following these subdivision regulations.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
Design standards of streets are as shown in such Table I.
§ 322-31. Blocks.
Blocks shall ordinarily not exceed 1,000 feet in length. Where it is necessary for blocks to exceed such
length, pedestrian ways and/or easements may be required near the center of the block.
§ 322-32. Lots.
Every lot shall be accessible for the use of public safety vehicles and other public and private
purposes and shall be served by a public or private street system improved in accordance with
these subdivision regulations and connected to the general street system.
Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight streets and be radial lines on
curved streets. Some variation from this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots shall
be avoided, unless It is clearly evident that such variation will improve the overall neighborhood
design.
Double-frontage lots shall be discouraged; however, where double-frontage lots are the only
practical alternative, vehicular access to the lot shall be limited to only one street, and that street
shall be the street with the lower volume of traffic, if physically feasible.
Lot width, building setback and lot area shall be as specified in Chapter 374, Zoning.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 196/339
E.
[1]
[1]
[1]
When a tract is subdivided into larger than required building lots, such lots or parcels shall be so
arranged as to permit a logical location and opening of future streets and resubdividing with
provision for adequate utility connections for each subdivision.
§ 322-33. Location of structures.
The placement of structures on a lot shall be as specified or permitted in Chapter 374, Zoning.
§ 322-34. Easements.
Sewer and utility easements shall be required at a minimum width of 15 feet. Where a subdivision is, or
will be, traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage rightof-
way of a width sufficient for the purpose, but no less than 20 feet.
§ 322-35. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 322-35, Stormwater drainage, was repealed 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 843. For
current provisions, see Ch. 323, Stormwater Management.
§ 322-36. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 322-36, Erosion control facilities, was repealed 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 843. For
current provisions, see Ch. 323, Stormwater Management.
§ 322-37. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 322-37, Stormwater management, was repealed 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 843.
For current provisions, see Ch. 323, Stormwater Management.
Article VII. Improvements
§ 322-38. Notice of intent to construct or install streets.
If plans of roads, streets or alleys located in the Borough have been approved and recorded as
provided in these subdivision regulations, a developer shall first notify the Borough Secretary of his or
her intention to proceed with the construction or installation of such roads, streets or alleys. Such
notification shall be made at least two business days before any such construction or installation
commences so as to give the Borough officials an opportunity to inspect the site prior to the
commencement of work and to inspect the installation or construction of such roads, streets or alleys
during the course of work being performed.
§ 322-39. Compliance required.
All improvements to a subdivision must be completed in accordance with this chapter and shall also
conform to the requirements of all other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the Borough.
§ 322-40. Monuments.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 197/339
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
Permanent monuments shall mark all streets, at the beginning points of curvatures thereof, set five feet
within the right-of-way lines. The final location and the number of monuments shall be determined by
the Borough Engineer. The installation and certification shall be made by a registered engineer or a
registered surveyor prior to the approval of the final subdivision plat. In lieu of such prior installation,
the subdivider shall furnish a cash guarantee in the form of a certified check for monuments required in
the subdivision or development. The refundable deposit shall be as set forth in the current Fees
Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 322-41. Streets.
The design and method of construction of all road and street work shall be as follows:
Excavation and embankment. The slope of excavations and embankments for streets and
roadways shall be trimmed neatly to the width and rate of slope by the contractor, and the work
shall be completed in a neat and acceptable condition. The slope of cuts may be reduced during
construction as required by the Borough Engineer or in order to obtain satisfactory stability. In no
case shall the slope of cuts exceed two horizontal to one vertical. A grading permit shall be
obtained as required by Chapter 222, Grading and Excavations.
Grading.
All streets shall be graded to stakes set by the developer. Where fill material is necessary to
establish uniform grades, compaction shall be in accordance with the recommendations of a
soils engineer, or not less than the latest Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications and standards for highways.
The subgrade for streets shall be free or made free of sod, vegetation or other similar
material. Where poor subgrade drainage conditions are found during construction, additional
necessary drainage shall be installed as directed by the Borough Engineer.
Curbs. Curbs are required in accordance with Borough standards.
Grade limits. Roads and streets shall be put to the grade limits. Specifications and the method of
using concrete or bituminous materials shall comply with the latest Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation specifications. All grades shall conform to Borough standards.
Subgrade. The subgrade shall be formed by shaping the graded roadway surface correctly with
approved material and shall be brought to a firm, thoroughly compacted surface for the width of
the improvements.
Base. The base shall be in accordance with Borough standards.
Surface. The surface of streets shall be in accordance with Borough standards.
Shoulders. Street shoulders shall be constructed and maintained with suitable material from the
roadway or structure excavation supplemented by additional suitable material. The entire shoulder
area shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by rolling and must be level with the tops of
curbs as directed by the Borough Engineer. The maximum slope on fills and cuts beyond
shoulders is two horizontal to one vertical.
§ 322-42. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 322-42, Storm drainage systems, was repealed 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 843. For
current provisions, see Ch. 323, Stormwater Management.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 198/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 322-43. Water supply.
The subdivider shall construct or cause to be constructed a system of water mains on and/or off the
development site, with required fire hydrants connected to the public water supply at two points to
provide loop service to the development.
§ 322-44. Sanitary sewers.
Requirement. The developer shall provide the development with a complete sanitary sewerage
system to be connected to the municipal sanitary sewerage system.
Design criteria. Sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Sewage Manual, as amended.
Construction. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough standards and
with the specifications attached to the application for a water quality management permit.
§ 322-45. Utilities.
Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by utilities. Easements acceptable to
the utility companies shall be granted as required. All utilities and all other piping and distribution
lines shall be installed underground within public rights-of-way or within properly designated
easements.
To the fullest extent possible, underground utility lines located in street rights-of-way shall not be
installed beneath existing or proposed paved areas and, in any case, shall be installed prior to the
placement of any pavement.
§ 322-46. Street signs and names.
The cost of street name signs and posts shall be assumed by the developer. The signs shall be in
accordance with Borough standards and shall be installed and maintained by the Borough. All street
names are subject to Borough approval.
§ 322-47. Streetlights.
For the safety, convenience and attractiveness of the subdivision, streetlights of a type approved by
Council must be installed on the streets on poles as prescribed by the Borough. The cost thereof shall
be borne by the developer.
§ 322-48. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks are required to be installed along the frontage of all lots in the development and elsewhere
where it is deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents, pedestrians
and others.
§ 322-49. Driveways.
[Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 860]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 199/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Driveway connections to streets and highways shall comply with the Borough standards and the
standards published in the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Chapter 441.
Driveways within the Borough of Pleasant Hills may consist of porous pavement, as described in
§ 374-91A(2)(c), as amended, so long as all other Borough standards and the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual have been satisfied. Driveways shall
not consist of gravel grass as described in § 374-91A(2)(c) as gravel grass surfaces are only
permitted on parking pads but not driveways.
[Added 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 906]
§ 322-50. Testing.
All construction materials used in sewers and appurtenances, streets and sidewalks shall be tested by
a qualified testing laboratory as may be directed by the Borough Engineer. The cost for such tests shall
be borne by the developer.
§ 322-51. Development agreement required.
Where on-site and off-site public improvements are involved and/or approved, the developer, before
approval of the final plat, shall execute a development agreement containing provisions that are
reasonably required, in the opinion of the Solicitor, to guarantee the construction and installation of the
required improvements in accordance with these subdivision regulations, and/or any other ordinance,
standard, rule or regulation of the Borough, which development agreement shall contain appropriate
provisions providing for the indemnification of the Borough in connection therewith.
§ 322-52. Completion of improvements required prior to final
approval.
Subject to the provisions of § 322-53, no plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on
such plat have been improved as may be required by these subdivision regulations, and unless all
walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
drains and other improvements, as may be required by these subdivision regulations, have been
installed in accordance with the same.
§ 322-53. Performance bond or financial security required.
In lieu of the completion of any improvement required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
the applicant shall deposit with the Borough a corporate bond or other financial security,
acceptable to Council, in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any improvement which may
be required, which financial security may include, inter alia, a lending institution letter of credit or a
restrictive or escrow account in a lending institution.
Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the Borough, the completion of any
improvement which may be required within one year of the date fixed in the development
agreement for the completion of such improvement.
Where development is projected over a period of years, Council may authorize the submission of
final plats by sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees, as to
improvements in future sections or stages of development, as Council finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section of the development.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 200/339
D.
E.
[1]
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
[1]
B.
All such bonds or other security shall be in favor of the Borough, and all sureties in connection
with any guarantee or bond shall be on the approved list of the Pennsylvania Insurance
Commission.
The amount of the bond or other security shall be based on estimates by a registered engineer or
a reputable contractor, but only after approval by the Borough Engineer, and shall be in an amount
equal to 110% of such estimated cost.
Such bond or other security shall remain in force and terminate in accordance with Section 510 of
Act 247, as amended,[1] but in all cases the bond shall be forfeited if the work is not completed
within one year after the date for completion as set forth in the development agreement.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 322-54. Protection of existing facilities; special maintenance
bond required.
If the Borough Engineer deems that the construction of the development could cause damage to or
failure of existing Borough streets, sewers or other facilities and/or utilities, the applicant shall furnish a
special maintenance bond in an amount fixed by the Borough Engineer to guarantee repairs or
replacements. However, the terms of the special maintenance bond shall be in full conformity with
§ 322-53.
§ 322-55. Extended maintenance bond required.
Upon completion of the required improvements and installations, the applicant shall provide an
eighteen-month maintenance bond which shall:
Be in favor of the Borough and provide a surety which is on the approved list of the
Pennsylvania Insurance Commission;
Be in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of the improvements; and
Provide that for 18 months after the completion of such improvements and installations, the
subdivider, developer or his or her surety will, at his or her own expense, make all repairs of
such improvements and installations which may become necessary by reason of improper
workmanship, faulty materials or damage occurring during construction. Prior to, and as a
condition of, the final plat approval, a written commitment by the subdivider shall be submitted
to the office of the Borough Secretary stating the willingness on the part of the subdivider or
developer to comply with this subsection at the time of completion of the construction.
Roadway maintenance bonds are also for 18 months.
The requirements contained in this section shall automatically be amended so as to conform with
the provisions of Act 247, as amended from time to time.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 322-56. Cash deposits in lieu of bonds; use of funds; return of
deposits.
As an alternative to the posting of the required bonds or other security, the developer may deposit a
cash guarantee in the form of a certified or cashier's check or an escrow account with terms
satisfactory to Council. All funds deposited for guaranteeing construction shall be used only for the
purpose of making improvements, installations or repairs for which the bond or cash was provided.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 201/339
Based on the progress of the work, percentages of the deposit shall be returned to the developer on a
monthly basis. Such progress and returned deposits shall be certified by the Borough Engineer.
§ 322-57. Notification of completion of improvements; submission
of plans.
After the required roads, streets, sewers and other improvements have been installed and constructed
pursuant to this chapter, and if a developer then wishes to have the Borough accept such roads,
streets, sewers and other improvements as a part of the Borough system, then the developer shall
notify the Borough Engineer that the construction or installation has been completed and shall supply
the Borough with a tracing of the plan of lots or development in question as built in accordance with the
final approval thereof. Such tracing shall be certified by a registered engineer. The developer shall also
supply the Borough with a minimum of four copies of the as-built plan on the basis of which the roads,
streets, sewers and other improvements in question have been constructed or installed. Such tracing
and four copies of the plan shall be confirmed copies in every respect and contain a notice thereon as
to where and when the plan was recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 322-58. Designation of improvements to be dedicated.
With respect to the portions of roads, streets, sewers or other improvements which the developer
wishes to have the Borough accept, the developer shall shade or color such portions in yellow crayon
on each of the copies required by § 322-57 and shall also clearly designate the number of linear feet of
such roads, streets, sewers or other improvements which he or she wishes to be accepted by the
Borough. The maintenance bond required by § 322-55 shall be furnished to the Borough
contemporaneously with such plan. The maintenance bond shall contain an accurate, well-defined
description of the portions of such roads, streets, sewers or other improvements which the developer
wishes the Borough to accept.
§ 322-59. Petitions for acceptance.
The developer shall submit a formal petition for the acceptance of improvements. In addition, a legal
description of the center line (or perimeter) of each street or road and each storm or sanitary sewer
easement shall be furnished for inclusion in the ordinance of acceptance. Such petition shall contain
appropriate provisions which, in the opinion of the solicitor, are sufficient to release the Borough from
any and all liability, damages, claims and expenses for damages, direct or consequential, sustained or
allegedly sustained by the applicant or his or her heirs, successors or assigns in connection with or as
a result of the acceptance of any public improvement or the establishment or change in any grade of
any street or road in connection with the repair, replacement, maintenance or removal of any public
improvement, facility or utility, including, but not limited to, any storm or sanitary sewer.
Article VIII. Payment of Professional Fees and Expenses
[Added 3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 755]
§ 322-60. Payment of engineering, administrative and legal fees.
The applicant for any subdivision or development plan shall be required to pay all reasonable
engineering and legal fees incurred in the processing, review, approval, or denial of said plans and for
any subsequent inspections of any subdivision or development plan which is submitted under the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 202/339
[1]
§ 322-61. Initial deposit.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills may, at the time a subdivision or development plan is submitted, require
the deposit of a reasonable sum of money to defray the engineering, administrative and legal
expenses which the Borough may incur in processing such application.
§ 322-62. Additional deposits.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills is further authorized to require additional deposits by the applicant
during the processing of any subdivision or development application and any subsequent inspections if
it appears that the previous deposit was not sufficient to cover the reasonable engineering,
administrative and legal expenses to be incurred.
§ 322-63. Approval to be withheld pending payment.
Final approval of any application for subdivision or development shall be withheld until all fees and
expenses for engineering, administrative and legal services have been paid in full.
§ 322-64. Appeals.
Any applicant who contests the amount of deposit or the amount of engineering, administrative or legal
fees assessed by any Borough official shall have the right to appeal directly to Borough Council who
shall review the assessed fees and expenses and shall issue a final determination as to the amount of
fees and expenses due.
Chapter 323. Stormwater Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 11-19-2018 by Ord. No.
1014.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 216.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 225.
Sewers — See Ch. 298.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 312.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Appendix A, Operation and Maintenance (O and M) Agreement
Attachment 2 - Appendix B, Low-Impact Development Practices
Attachment 3 - Appendix C, Pollutant Loads From Specific Land Use
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 323, Stormwater Management, adopted 12-
15-2014 by Ord. No. 981.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 323-1. Short title.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 203/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Pleasant Hills Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 323-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public
health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater recharge for water supplies
and supports the base flow of streams.
The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low-impact development (LID) are intended to address
the root cause of water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic
natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and recharge; 2) evapotranspire; and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater
controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) program.
§ 323-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the municipality and its
watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 323-2 of this chapter,
through provisions designed to:
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the
waters of this commonwealth.
Preserve natural drainage systems.
Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and mimic predevelopment
hydrology.
Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.
Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 204/339
G.
H.
[1]
A.
Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the municipality.
Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
§ 323-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as amended,
and/or the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended, the
Stormwater Management Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 323-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development
and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
§ 323-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 323-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or provision of this chapter
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 323-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance.
§ 323-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information
provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action
may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality purporting to validate such a
violation.
§ 323-10. Waivers.
If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter cannot be achieved for a
particular regulated activity, the municipality may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve
measures other than those in this chapter, subject to § 323-10B. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification or waiver shall originate
with the landowner, shall be in writing, and shall accompany the stormwater management site plan
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 205/339
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
submitted to the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the request is based,
the provisions of the chapter involved, and the proposed modification. The designated plan
reviewer shall review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of the chapter,
including Subsection B below. If acceptable to the municipality, the municipality may grant the
waiver or modification.
Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be approved by the municipality
if enforcement will exact undue hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or detrimental
to the public interest and will achieve the intended outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is
preserved. Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and not to
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. A
request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater management site plan
submission, as directed in § 323-10A above.
No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater
than or equal to one acre may be granted by the municipality.
§ 323-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to refer to the latest or most
current version of that document.
Article II. Definitions
§ 323-12. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or
statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
§ 323-13. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT 167
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff and surface and
groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management Act.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 206/339
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and
animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT
A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the municipality for
approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge,
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into
one of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter,
nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and
treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention,
wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention
basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to
the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)]
that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion or the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER
A qualified professional as defined herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County
Conservation District, that has been designated by the municipality to be the reviewer of SWM site
plans for the municipality, and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the
municipality within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely in a
designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME
The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the commonwealth at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE)
See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 207/339
An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not
limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION
The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or chemical
action.
EXISTING CONDITION
The dominant land cover during the five-year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated
activity.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN
Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by
applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area
where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet
from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting a
timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets,
logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
Systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse
stormwater on the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER
Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells and springs and is within the saturated zone
of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
The replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies from precipitation or overland
flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification.
The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as
the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS[1]).
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 208/339
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA)
A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and
driveway areas are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION
Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the
atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES
DCNR defines invasive plants as those species that are not native to the state, grow aggressively,
and spread and displace native vegetation. (See
http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/public/documents/document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list of
invasive species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT)
Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.[2]
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID)
Site design approaches and small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to
new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that
infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly largescale
conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of small,
cost-effective landscape features located on site.
MUNICIPALITY
Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION
Plant species that have historically grown in Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined
herein.
NRCS
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA
Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 209/339
The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the municipality are planned,
conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL
Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land
in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,[3] 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.[4]
RELEASE RATE
The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the
proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT
A watershed or portion of a watershed for which a release rate has been established by an
adopted Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF
The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected
to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to
occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a twenty-fiveyear
storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER
A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and
wetlands.
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT
Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25
of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.[5]
STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include,
but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 210/339
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
The plan prepared by the developer or the developer's representative indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter. "Stormwater
management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this chapter.
STREAM
A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION
As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247.[6]
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE
See "stream."
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED
Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this commonwealth
to a downstream point.
WETLAND
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39A and B.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010, effective 10-9-
2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article III. Stormwater Management Standards
§ 323-14. General requirements.
For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is specifically exempted in
§ 323-15:
Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is required.
No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues written approval of an
SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with § 323-24, shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 211/339
C.
[1]
[2]
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
[3]
(3)
G.
These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in regulated activities.
For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.[1] Various
BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual[2]), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39D.
Impervious areas.
The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this chapter.
For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is
subject to the requirements of this chapter; except that the volume controls in § 323-16 and
the peak rate controls of § 323-17 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas
that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity.
Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be created, increased,
decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered without written notification of the affected
property owner(s). Notification shall include a description of the proposed development and the
stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered. Adjacent property shall at a minimum include any property having a shared boundary with
the subject property of the SWM site plan, however, if in the judgment of the designated plan
reviewer additional properties are being affected, additional notifications may be required. Proof of
notification (signed postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
Protect health, safety, and property.
Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing measures to:
Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.
Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.
Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual (BMP Manual[3]). If methods other than green infrastructure and LID methods are
proposed to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter, the SWM site
plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not practicable.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 212/339
H.
I.
[4]
J.
[5]
[6]
K.
[7]
L.
[8]
M.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at strategic locations, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still
meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate
control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from
the end of the design storm.
The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall
be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual, Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from
the latest version of the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14[4] can be accessed at:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39E.
For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained
to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25
of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,[5] and the Storm Water Management Act.[6]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.[7]
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state water
quality requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams
Law.[8]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 323-15. Exemptions.
Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than one acre are exempt
from the requirements in § 323-19 of this chapter except as provided in Subsection B below.
Earth disturbances between 0.25 acre (10,890 square feet) and one acre of earth disturbance
must submit a SWM site plan to the municipality which shall consist of the following items and
related supportive material needed to determine compliance with §§ 323-16 through 323-18. The
applicant can use the protocols in the Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan if
municipality has adopted Appendix C.[1]
General description of proposed stormwater management techniques, including construction
specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and letters of adequacy from the
Conservation District where appropriate.
Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area that is
proposed; proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed
by the applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved drainage plan must be
approved by the municipality, and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan must be
submitted to the municipality or Conservation District for approval.
All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail; and
all calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 213/339
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
A.
facilities must be shown.
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase impervious area, and
underground infrastructure projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided the
activities meet the requirements of all other municipal, state and federal requirements.
Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from the
requirements in § 323-14D through J.
The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this section at any time for any
project that the municipality believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the
environment.
Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that are solely intended to better
manage runoff from existing development and are not part of new development or redevelopment
are exempt from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does not exempt
such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal regulation.
§ 323-16. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual[1] shall be
utilized for all regulated activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented
using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below.
Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the
Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or alternative design criteria as allowed by Pa. Code Title 25,
Chapter 102.
The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual[2]) is applicable as a method to any size of
regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions. The following
shall be incorporated into the CG-1 Method:
Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible, and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility
designed for a twenty-four-to-seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated
stormwater system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a
facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined
sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
For modeling purposes:
Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be considered meadow in
good condition.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 214/339
(b)
[2]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[3]
B.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow in good
condition in the model for existing conditions.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual[3]) provided below is independent of site
conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not
applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of runoff from the net increase
in impervious surfaces.
At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible, and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility
designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater
system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility
designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined sewer
system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the
entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
This method is exempt from the requirements of § 323-17, Rate controls.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
§ 323-17. Rate controls.
For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 stormwater management
plan: Postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for
the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. This is
the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those rates shown in the maps
contained in Appendix A (New and Existing Release Rate Management Districts).[1] This
predevelopment-to-postdevelopment control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the
"Conditional Direct Discharge" areas on the release rate maps. If it is shown that the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-,
and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of
discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the methods included in the chapter
titled "Stormwater Calculations and Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP
Manual.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 stormwater management
plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm
events, the postdevelopment peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (New and Existing Release Rate Management
Districts)[2] of this model ordinance. For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 215/339
[2]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
[1]
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the
specified design events. Peak flows should be computed using the methods included in Chapter 8
of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 323-18. Riparian buffers.
In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer easement shall be created and
recorded as part of any subdivision or land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The
intent of this chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve stream water quality.
The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland flow to the stream through the presence of native
grasses, trees and shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition of
sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer rather than in the stream; and
reducing erosion by providing stream bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams;
keeping waters cooler and reducing evaporation.
Except as required by Pa. Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer easement shall be
required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with a contributing watershed area of greater than
10 acres. The riparian buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the top
of the stream bank (on each side).
Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the
intent of the riparian buffer as described in § 323-18A.
Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within the riparian buffer
easement.
Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively removed and the riparian buffer
easement shall be planted with native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse
native plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.
The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality and shall be recorded in the
appropriate County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the
use of the property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership
and shall count toward the minimum lot area required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in the
municipal Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 374, Zoning.
Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be conducted in a manner that will
maintain the extent of the existing 100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability,
and preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer easement, but they shall
cross the easement in the shortest practical distance. Other structural stormwater management
facilities are not permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private recreation trails are permitted by
the municipality within riparian buffers:
It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for nonmotorized use only;
however, impermeable trails are permitted provided they have adequate drainage.
Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant species and other sensitive
environmental features.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 216/339
H.
I.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
[2]
(b)
(c)
(3)
C.
Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement and shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer easement; however, work shall
be performed to minimize disturbance area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian
buffer easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other plantings. One tree shall
be planted for each tree removed and the restoration shall be designed by a registered
professional with the requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to cross
the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest practical distance. Existing utilities
may remain and be maintained as required.
Article IV. Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan
Requirements
§ 323-19. Plan requirements.
Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,[1] and
other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances
where the municipality lacks subdivision and land development regulations, the content of SWM
site plans shall follow the Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Subdivision and Land Development.
The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements
of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is
found to be deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and require a
resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the municipality may accept submission of
modifications.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs,
such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the operation and
maintenance (O&M) plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(i) below.
The following signature block for the municipality:
"(Municipal official or designated plan reviewer § 323-21A), on this date (Signature date),
has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. 1014, except where waivers have been granted as
noted on the Plan. The review is based on a survey and plan prepared by others and
assumes that all information is correct and valid as submitted."
The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual.[2] A detailed site
evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas,
such as brownfields.
Editor's Note: See § 323-39C.
Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this chapter,
or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations and
general requirements in § 323-14.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 217/339
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
Expected project time schedule.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and
submitted to the approval authority.
The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows) on
surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance
system that may be affected by the project.
Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open
channels, and swales.
SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater
facilities and water supply wells, property boundaries, existing and proposed topography,
point(s) of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and proposed physical
stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and
responsibilities for O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance activities,
personnel and equipment requirements, estimated annual maintenance costs, and
method of financing continuing O&M.
A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer, must be included in the SWM
site plan if BMPs other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this chapter.
§ 323-20. Plan submission.
Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
Two copies to the municipality.
One copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when requested by the District).
One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with combined sewer systems).
§ 323-21. Plan review.
The municipality has designated __________ as the designated plan reviewer of SWM site plans
for the municipality, and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the municipality
within this chapter.
SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency with the provisions of this
chapter.
The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the SWM site plan is
approved or disapproved or requires additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a
subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed
by the Municipalities Planning Code[1] (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green infrastructure and LID
practices to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter, the municipality will
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 218/339
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
not approve the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are
not practicable.
If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will state the reasons for the
disapproval in writing. The municipality also may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if
so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 323-22. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or
that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other
conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated plan reviewer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 323-23. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the municipality's
concerns, to the municipality in accordance with this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with
Article VI, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 323-24. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the
SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval. The
municipality may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM
site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is not completed according to § 323-25 within the term of
validity, then the municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 323-23 of this chapter.
§ 323-25. Record drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all SWM BMPs included in the
approved SWM site plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
construction plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
The record drawing submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a qualified
professional verifing that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM
BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified
professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must
sign the completion certificate.
The municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it deems appropriate. If
inspections performed by the municipality reveal deficiencies from the submitted and approved
SWM site plan, the municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall be at
the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 219/339
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
A.
B.
After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the municipality may conduct a final
inspection.
Article V. Operation and Maintenance
§ 323-26. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities
prior to final approval of the SWM site plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such
facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not
an indication that the municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to
reject or accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater
management controls.
Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate
appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the
land.
The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the
provisions of this article.
§ 323-27. Operation and maintenance agreements.
Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall sign and record an operation
and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see Appendix B)[1] covering all stormwater control facilities
which are to be privately owned.
The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the approved
maintenance schedule in the O&M agreement.
The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements to assure access for
periodic inspections by the municipality and maintenance, as necessary.
The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name, address, and telephone number
of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the municipality within 10 working days of
the change.
Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 323-28. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of all
stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.[1]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 220/339
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511.
Article VI. Fees and Expenses
§ 323-29. General.
The municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged to an applicant.
The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
Administrative/clerical processing.
Review of the SWM site plan.
Review of a SWM site plan resubmission.
Attendance at meetings.
Inspections.
Article VII. Prohibitions
§ 323-30. Prohibited discharges and connections.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4
or to enter the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into
waters of this commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided
in Subsection C below, and discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors
to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth:
Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
Discharges from potable water sources including waterline flushing and fire hydrant flushing,
if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance, landscape drainage and
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Diverted stream flows and springs.
Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation and footing drains and
crawl space pumps.
Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.
Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where cleaning agents are not utilized.
Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of TRC.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 221/339
(9)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as the PADEP guidelines for
swimming pool water discharge are followed.
In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this
commonwealth, the municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 323-31. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 323-32. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, drainage
easements, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this chapter without the written
approval of the municipality.
Article VIII. Enforcement and Penalties
§ 323-33. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated agent may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 323-34. Inspection.
The landowner or the owner's designee (including the municipality for dedicated and owned
facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/or structures installed under this chapter
according to the following frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
Annually for the first five years.
Once every three years thereafter.
During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater storm.
Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following precipitation events. A written
inspection report shall be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain
the date and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the inspection, the location of
the BMP, facility or structure inspected, observations on performance, and recommendations for
improving performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the municipality
within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
§ 323-35. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an
approved SWM site plan, unless specifically exempted in § 323-15.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 222/339
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful to violate § 323-32 of this chapter.
Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a responsibility of the municipality.
§ 323-36. Suspension and revocation.
Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or
revoked for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM site plan or
O&M agreement.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or
regulation relating to the regulated activity.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of
others.
A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the
suspension.
The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The applicant may
apply for a new approval under the provisions of this chapter.
If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion,
the municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these
cases, the municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend any, or
all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this chapter.
§ 323-37. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense, and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $_____ for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 323-38. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee, relevant to the provisions
of this chapter, may appeal to the municipality within 30 days of that action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 223/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
taken place within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
Article IX. References
§ 323-39. References enumerated.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). National
Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical
Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006), as
amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as
amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National
Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
Chapter 326. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
908.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 374.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 326, Swimming Pools, adopted 6-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 830.
§ 326-1. Title; purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Swimming Pool, Spas and Hot Tubs Ordinance" and shall be
deemed presumptively to provide for all matters affecting or relating to the location, design,
construction, installation, equipment, maintenance, repair and operation of all swimming pools, spas
and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling constructed within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills, it being necessary and desirable for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of
persons and property within the Borough.
§ 326-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABOVEGROUND/ON-GROUND POOL
See "swimming pool."
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 224/339
[1]
A.
B.
C.
BARRIER
A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool
and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
HOT TUB
See "swimming pool."
IN-GROUND POOL
See "swimming pool."
RESIDENTIAL
That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling or a one-family
townhouse not more than three stories in height.
SPA, NONPORTABLE
See "swimming pool."
SPA, PORTABLE
A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating
and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.
SWIMMING POOL
Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches
(610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs
and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR
A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by
the walls of the enclosing structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR
Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
§ 326-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all swimming pools, spas and hot tubs intended for
one- or two-family dwelling use. All other swimming pools must be authorized by the Borough Council
of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and other authority having jurisdiction of other types of pools.
§ 326-4. Permits; insurance coverage.
Installation or construction permits. No swimming pool, spa or hot tub either permanent or portable
shall be installed, enlarged or altered unless a permit shall first have been issued therefor by the
Building Code Official of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and said permit shall be issued only if the
requirements of the Department of Health of the County of Allegheny and the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code are met.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.
All applications for in-ground or indoor swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be accompanied
by a plot plan and complete construction drawings prepared by and bearing the seal and signature
of the architect or engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
No swimming pool, spa or hot tub permit shall be issued until a certificate of insurance evidencing
coverage for possible liability to third persons for bodily injury or property damage in the minimum
amount of $100,000 shall be filed with the Borough Building Code Official.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 225/339
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
§ 326-5. Plot plan; location.
A survey or plot plan to scale shall be furnished showing all property, main and accessory
buildings, driveways, fences, walks, filters and other related equipment thereon. The proposed
location of the swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be clearly shown on this drawing.
Private swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, except indoor installations, shall be located entirely
within the rear yard area and no less than 10 feet from any property line and no closer than eight
feet from any building. Pools located on corner lots shall be completely screened by evergreen
plantings when viewed from the side street, or a fence as permitted by the fence regulations of the
Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 326-6. Barrier (enclosure) requirements.
All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, current edition,[1] as such code relates to barrier requirements.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 326-7. Design requirements.
All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall conform to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
current edition, for all matters relating to design, construction, entrapment protection, suction outlets,
suction fittings, vacuum relief systems, drains, cleaner fittings and electrical requirements.
§ 326-8. Recirculation of water; abatement of hazards.
[Amended 8-15-2011 by Ord. No. 940]
To prevent stagnant water, every permanent or portable swimming pool shall be of the
recirculation type in which circulation of water is maintained through the pool by one or more
pumps, the water drawn from the pool or at the place of return by the use of recognized and
approved chemicals. In addition, each property owner is responsible to abate hazardous
conditions which require remediation. The Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall notify
the property owner of such conditions. These conditions may include bowed or weakened walls
which appear to be in a state of disrepair and in danger of collapsing or stagnant water which has
been allowed to accumulate in the swimming pool or on top of the pool cover and result in a
nuisance by attracting flying insects or mosquitoes, etc. In the case of such situations, the property
owner shall receive notification of the hazard and a reasonable time period to abate the hazard.
Notice of the hazard shall be served by hand delivery, certified mail, facsimile or telephone call to
the owner.
In the event that the owner does not abate the hazard within the time established by the notice,
the Borough shall have the right to arrange for necessary repairs and/or corrective action. This
may include drainage the water from the pool to abate the hazard of collapse or to remove
stagnant water. Upon notice of the violation and the failure to abate the violation, the property
owner may be subject to a fine of $300 as described in § 326-13 below. In the event the Borough
is required to abate the hazard as a result of the failure of the property owner to respond to the
notice and correct the hazard, the Borough may charge the property owner the actual cost of labor
and/or any materials required to correct the hazard, in addition to the fine.
§ 326-9. Water supply.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 226/339
A.
B.
No water other than that secured from the public waterworks distribution system or private water
approved by the Health Department shall be used in any swimming pool, spa or hot tub.
§ 326-10. Inlets.
Supply inlets for any swimming pool, spa or hot tub recirculatory system shall be located, to the extent
possible, so as to produce a uniform circulation of water throughout the pool and to carry pool bottom
deposits toward the outlet or outlets.
§ 326-11. Drainage.
Every permanent swimming pool, spa or hot tub of concrete construction must be equipped with
adequate floor drains and valves to regulate flow of wastewater or pool drainage and must be
piped into the sanitary sewer system.
Every vinyl or membrane-lined swimming pool, spa or hot tub must be equipped with sufficient
hose or flexible piping to permit drainage by pumping through the sanitary sewer system of the
dwelling.
§ 326-12. Sanitation.
Any means of germicidal or bacterial protection within the pool, spa or hot tub equal or superior to a
standard of 0.5 parts per million chlorine residual may be used in permanent or portable swimming
pools. Every pool, spa or hot tub shall be equipped with a testing kit adequate to determine such
residual.
§ 326-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, group or association violating any provisions or regulation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding $300, and upon
any default in payment of said fine, may be committed to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist by such person after
notice in writing shall constitute an additional, separate offense, punishable by like fine or penalty.
§ 326-14. Commercial public and health/member club swimming
pools.
All commercial public or health/member club swimming pools must comply with all state, county and
Borough regulations concerning zoning, construction, health and safety matters including Borough
Council approval.
Chapter 336. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 336, Trailers, Cabins and House-Cars, adopted 2-9-1948 by Ord. No. 23, as amended,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919.]
Chapter 340. Trapping
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 227/339
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 3-9-1964 by Ord. No.
321. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 150.
Trapping in parks — See Ch. 254, Art. II.
§ 340-1. Trapping prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be illegal for any person to set or fix a metal
trap or snare within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 340-2. Permitting trapping prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be illegal for any person or persons to
knowingly permit or allow any other person to set or fix any metal trap or snare within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
§ 340-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
METAL TRAP or SNARE
Any metallic device or appliance whose purpose is the entrapment or ensnarement of any wild or
domestic animal.
§ 340-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before any of the District
Justices of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 and, in default
thereof be imprisoned in the Allegheny County Jail or Allegheny County Workhouse for a period of not
more than 10 days.
Chapter 344. Trees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 5-8-1961 by Ord. No.
251. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 162.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
§ 344-1. Restriction on planting poplar and willow trees.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to plant any poplar or willow trees at
or near any place where the same may send its roots into, or clog any part of the sanitary sewer
system of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, or in any way interfere, obstruct, harm or destroy the same, or
any part thereof.
§ 344-2. Notice to remove.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 228/339
A.
B.
Any person who has planted or maintains a tree such as a poplar or willow as is prohibited in § 344-1
hereof shall be given written notice to have the same removed and destroyed, so as to prevent any
obstruction, interference or harm to the said sanitary sewer system or any part thereof.
§ 344-3. Failure to respond to notice.
Upon failure or refusal on the part of any person or persons planting or maintaining same, said person
or persons shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions hereof.
§ 344-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons planting or maintaining any poplar or willow trees, who fails to abate, remove or
destroy same after 72 hours' notice thereof by the Borough of Pleasant Hills, or any of its agents, shall,
upon conviction before the District Justice, be subject to a fine of not more than $100, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each day in which said person or persons fail to remove and destroy said trees,
after notice thereof in accordance with the provisions hereof, shall be deemed to be a separate
offense.
Chapter 350. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 350, Utility Poles and Wires, which was comprised of Art. I, License Fee, adopted 9-8-
1947 by Ord. No. 10, as amended, and Art. II, Location and Placement, adopted 8-8-1966 by Ord. No.
375, as amended, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919.]
Chapter 356. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 254, Art. II.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 360.
ATTACHMENTS
356a Woodland Drive
Article I. Speed Limits
[Adopted 8-9-1948 by Ord. No. 31]
§ 356-1. Maximum speeds established.
There is hereby established traffic speed limit zones within the Borough of Pleasant Hills, limiting the
speed of vehicles to a maximum of 25 miles per hour as follows:
Zone 1: Old Clairton Road from State Highway Route 51 (now known as Clairton Boulevard) to the
Borough Line; and
Zone 2: Old Lebanon Church Road from State Highway Route 51 (now known as Clairton
Boulevard) to the Borough Line.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 229/339
A.
B.
§ 356-2. When effective.
Upon the erection of the official speed limit signs, the speed on said Old Clairton Road and Old
Lebanon Church Road as fixed in § 356-1 shall be and is hereby limited to 25 miles per hour, and any
speed in excess of 25 miles per hour within said zones shall be unlawful.
§ 356-3. Signs.
Properly approved signs shall be erected and placed in accordance with the provisions of law and the
regulations of the Secretary of Highways.
§ 356-4. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article are not intended to apply where the provisions of law specifically provide
exceptions hereto; and the provisions hereof are further not intended to increase the rate of speed in
any case in which provisions of law make it unlawful to operate a vehicle at a lesser rate of speed than
25 miles per hour.
§ 356-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon summary conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of the
payment thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
Article II. One-Way Traffic
[Adopted 2-13-1950 by Ord. No. 45]
§ 356-6. Designation of one-way streets.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919]
One-way traffic is hereby established on McClellan Drive from house no. 365, southerly to house no.
456.
§ 356-7. Prohibited acts.
Other than such one-way traffic is hereby prohibited on:
Audrey Drive from Old Clairton Road to and towards Caryl Drive; and
Caryl Drive from Audrey Drive to and towards Constitution Drive.
§ 356-8. Signs.
The proper Borough authorities shall post the required signs to effectuate the provisions of this article.
§ 356-9. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 230/339
[1]
A.
B.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon summary conviction before a District
Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than an amount as permitted by current
law and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not
more than five days in the Borough lockup, or not more than 30 days in the Allegheny County Jail.
Article III. Weight Limits and Trucks
[Adopted 10-15-1956 by Ord. No. 155]
§ 356-10. Maximum weight of 16,000 pounds.
On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle, truck, trailer or semitrailer, whenever the weight and load thereon exceeds 16,000 pounds,
except as hereinafter provided on, over or along the following streets:
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding West Bruceton Road, was superseded 5-20-2013
by Ord. No. 958. See now § 356-18.1.
Glenburn Drive from Old Clairton Road to Lebanon Church Road.
§ 356-11. Application for greater limit.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792]
Whenever any person desires to move a vehicle exceeding the weight and load specification in § 356-
10 hereof, he shall make application in writing to the Mayor of the Borough and accompany the same
by a fee as set forth in the current Fees Resolution of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary. Said application shall set forth the cause which, in the proper discretion of
the Mayor, may authorize the applicant to operate or move either a vehicle or combination of vehicles
or a vehicle and load, or a combination of vehicles or a combination of vehicles and their loads, of a
size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in § 356-10 hereof, upon any of the streets mentioned
in § 356-10 hereof.
§ 356-12. Issuance of permit.
Upon good cause being shown, the Mayor may issue a permit authorizing the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the application or in accordance with the application as modified within the discretion
of the Mayor. Such permit may be issued for a single trip and shall designate the route to be traversed,
subject to any rules, regulations, restrictions or conditions as may be deemed necessary by the Mayor;
provided, however, that a combination permit may be issued for a single continuous round trip wherein
any specified load or loads may be transported for the entire trip, but no substantial increase in the size
or the weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles or of load shall be made between intermediate
points without supplemental permit. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers
and shall be subject to inspection by any peace officer or highway employee of the Borough properly
authorized thereto, or to any person who may have collided with such vehicle or vehicles or who
suffered injury therefrom.
§ 356-13. Signs.
Proper signs indicating the limitations of this article shall be placed on said streets and their respective
intersections as provided by law for the character and size of traffic signs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 231/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 356-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the District Justice of the
Borough, pay a fine of $50 and the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, undergo
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail or Allegheny County Workhouse for a period of not more
than five days.
§ 356-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with this article, and especially the provisions of
Ordinance No. 81, approved the 10th day of March 1952, are hereby repealed insofar as the same
conflicts with the provisions hereof.
§ 356-16. Truck travel prohibited on certain roads.
[Added 10-14-1963 by Ord. No. 314; amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 498; 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 512]
From and after the effective date of this section no trucks shall be permitted to travel on or through
Pleasant Hills Boulevard, National Drive or Constitution Drive, unless said truck is making pickups
or deliveries to or from houses situate on any of these streets.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 958]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction before
the District Justice for the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not in excess of
$300, plus costs of prosecution.
§ 356-17. Maximum weight of five tons.
[Added 12-19-1979 by Ord. No. 562]
From and after the date of the enactment of this article, a maximum five-ton weight limit restriction
is hereby placed on Old Lebanon Church Road between Route 51 and the boundary line between
the Borough of Pleasant Hills and the Borough of West Mifflin.
From and after the date of the enactment of this article, a maximum five-ton weight limit restriction
is hereby placed on Glenburn Drive from its intersection at State Route 51 to its intersection with
Old Lebanon Church Road.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills shall erect and maintain signs designating the restrictions contained
in this article along with and at each end of that portion of Old Lebanon Church Road and
Glenburn Drive which are affected by the terms and provisions of this section.
The weight limit restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to any vehicle which is
engaged in making local deliveries to a home situate on either Old Lebanon Church Road or
Glenburn Drive.
Any person violating the terms and provisions of this section shall be subject to the payment of a
fine as prescribed under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 356-18. Trucks prohibited on Green Drive.
[Added 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 625]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 232/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
Commencing November 1, 1985, all trucks are prohibited from using Green Drive from its
intersection at Curry Hollow Road to its intersection at Broadway Drive.
Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in Subsection A of this section, truck traffic shall be
permissible on Green Drive for local delivery only.
Signs stating "All Trucks Local Delivery Only" shall be posted at the intersection of Green Drive
and Curry Hollow Road and at the intersection of Green Drive and Broadway Drive and at such
other places as the Chief of Police of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall direct.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 per
offense.
§ 356-18.1. Establishment of weight limits on certain Borough
roads.
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 958]
Weight limits.
The existing Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, at Chapter 356, Article III, shall be
amended, in limited part, to recognize the following weight limits:
Road
Area of Vehicle Weight
Restriction Maximum Vehicle Weight
Arbor Lane Entire length of roadway 5 tons (10,000 pounds)
East Bruceton Road Entire length of roadway 5 tons (10,000 pounds)
Dutch Lane Entire length of roadway 5 tons (10,000 pounds)
Mowry Drive Entire length of roadway 5 tons (10,000 pounds)
West Bruceton Road Entire length of roadway 10 tons (20,000 pounds)
The weight limit study completed by the Borough Engineer referred to a single-axle weight
limit. For purposes of this section, the term "single axle" is used as that term is defined in the
Pennsylvania Code as may be amended. The Pennsylvania Code currently defines the term
"single axle" as an axle located over eight feet from another axle. The weight limits described
herein shall apply to all vehicles regardless of the number of axles.
Violations of section. A violation of this section may be established by either the gross vehicle
weight as defined by the registration of the vehicle or the actual vehicle weight. The actual vehicle
weight may be determined by weighing the vehicle at an established weigh station or certified
scale, and the vehicle weight shall include the amount of any load carried by said vehicle.
However, it shall not be necessary to establish a violation of this section by actually weighing the
vehicle if the vehicle registration establishes a gross vehicle weight in excess of the weight limits
described herein. Violations may also be established subject to the provisions of 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4902(a) and (b) as may be amended.
Enforcement of section. The Borough of Pleasant Hills, by and through the Police Department, an
agent or authorized contractor is hereby authorized to use all weight measurement devices
approved by any agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine the weight of the
vehicles and/or to rely upon the weight of the vehicle as established by the vehicle registration.
For purposes of weighing vehicles, the Borough may utilize any of the methods and procedures
recognized in the Pennsylvania Code and/or the Motor Vehicle Code. Such authority shall be
consistent with the procedures described in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4979.3 as may be amended, and the
actual weighing of the vehicles may be performed by a person authorized to weigh such vehicles
and not necessarily a Borough Police Officer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 233/339
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
F.
Notice of weight limits by appropriate sign. Signs publishing the vehicle weight limitations
described herein shall be erected and maintained within 25 feet of each end of the portion of the
roadway so restricted contingent upon sufficient space being available for the placement of the
sign. If circumstances prohibit the sign from being placed within 25 feet of the restricted area, the
sign shall be placed as near as possible to this location. In the case of any restriction which does
not begin or end at an intersection with an unrestricted road, an advance informational sign shall
be placed at the intersection nearest each end of the restricted portion of said road.
Exemptions.
School buses, emergency vehicles and vehicles making local pickups and deliveries shall be
exempt from the maximum weight limits imposed herein; provided, however, that in the case
of overweight vehicles making local pickups and deliveries, such vehicles shall be exempt
only when utilizing a course of travel which results in the shortest available route upon roads
restricted by the maximum weight limit imposed herein. Those vehicles making local pickups
and deliveries shall only be exempt if the property they are traveling to or from is within the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Permits for overweight vehicles for construction projects within the Borough of Pleasant Hills
may be obtained subject to the procedure administered by the Zoning Officer. These permits
shall be available for a construction project as described in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4978 as may be
amended. Permits may also be issued pursuant to the provisions of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(c)
as may be amended and subject to the posting of security as described therein. The owners
of vehicles which travel the roads which are the subject of the weight limits described herein
who do not have a valid permit are in violation of this section and subject to the penalties
described herein.
Permits for nonexempt vehicles shall be issued by the Zoning Officer following the completion
of an approved permit application and the payment of a permit fee of $250. The amount of
this fee shall be set and/or amended by the Fee Resolution of the Borough as may be
amended. The application shall be completed by the owner or authorized agent of the vehicle
which will be the subject of the permit. The permit application shall be accompanied by a
bond issued pursuant to PennDOT regulations to recover the cost of damage to the roadway.
In the event the actual damage caused by an overweight vehicle exceeds the amount of the
bond, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the actual damages to the road which
exceeds the amount of the bond.
Penalty for exceeding maximum weight. Any person or entity found in violation of this section shall
be subject to the provisions of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4945 as may be amended. As of the date of the
enactment of this section, these provisions include the following:
Gross weight violations.
Any person driving a vehicle or combination upon a highway exceeding the maximum
gross weight allowed by § 4941 (relating to maximum gross weight of vehicles) or the
registered gross weight allowed by § 4942 (relating to registered gross weight),
whichever is less, is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $75 plus $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of
3,000 pounds over the maximum gross weight or the registered gross weight.
If the gross weight of any vehicle or combination exceeds the applicable gross weight
allowed under § 4941(a), the fine imposed under this subsection shall be doubled.
Axle weight violation. Subject to the provisions of § 4982(c) (relating to reducing or
readjusting loads of vehicles), any person operating a vehicle or combination with a weight on
an axle or group of consecutive axles exceeding the maximum axle weights allowed by
§ 4943 (relating to maximum axle weight of vehicles) is guilty of a summary offense and shall,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 234/339
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 plus $100 for each 500 pounds, or part
thereof, in excess of 2,000 pounds over the maximum axle weight allowed.
Wheel weight violation. Any person operating a vehicle or combination upon a highway
exceeding the maximum wheel weight allowed by § 4944 (relating to maximum wheel load) is
guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100
plus $100 for each 200 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 200 pounds over the maximum
wheel weight allowed.
Concurrent violations. In any case in which there are concurrent violations of more than one
of the sections or subsections of this article prescribing maximum weights, the only penalty
imposed shall be for violation of that section or subsection which produces the greatest fine.
Article IV. No-Passing Zones
[Adopted 11-14-1955 by Ord. No. 143]
§ 356-19. Designation of no-passing zones.
Millers Grove and Clairton Road from the intersection thereof with Constitution Drive to the intersection
thereof with the Mowry, Gill Hall and Cochran's Mill Road is hereby fixed as a no passing zone in either
direction, in accordance with the provisions made therefor by pertinent Acts of Assembly.
§ 356-20. Signs.
The proper officers are hereby directed to fix signs indicating the no passing regulation, as provided for
by law.
§ 356-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon summary conviction before any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution, or upon default of
payment thereof, undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days in Allegheny County Jail.
Article V. Parking Restrictions
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 356-22. Authority to prohibit and restrict parking.
[Adopted 6-10-1968 by Ord. No. 408]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby authorized to prohibit or restrict
the parking of vehicles on any of the streets or highways located within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills. Any such parking regulation shall be adopted by the Borough Council by ordinance or
resolution enacted at any duly convened meeting of the Borough Council.
Any part of any street or highway located within the Borough of Pleasant Hills may be designated
by the Borough Council as prohibiting or restricting the parking of vehicles thereon shall be posted
with signs indicating the prohibition or restriction for said street or highway in the manner provided
by the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 235/339
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any person found guilty of parking on any street or highway within the Borough of Pleasant Hills
which has been designated as a "No Parking" area shall, upon conviction before any of the District
Justices of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $2 nor more
than $10 and costs of prosecution.
Any person found guilty of violating the parking restrictions on any street or highway within the
Borough of Pleasant Hills which has been designated as a "Limited Time Parking" area shall, upon
conviction before the District Justice for the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $2, and not more than $10, and costs of prosecution. Any person who may
receive a traffic summons for violating the parking restrictions contained in any "Limited Time
Parking" area may, within 48 hours of the time of such violation, as may be set forth in the traffic
summons, appear at the office of the District Justice for the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and there
pay the sum of $2 and costs of prosecution, which payment shall be in full satisfaction of any fine
imposed under this section.
[Amended 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 493]
Any part of any street or highway located within the Borough of Pleasant Hills which has
heretofore been designated as a "No Parking" area or a "Limited Time Parking" area, shall
continue as heretofore and no part of this section shall be deemed to have repealed or altered any
ordinance or resolution restricting or prohibiting the parking on any of the streets or highways in
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
The provisions of this section relating to fines for violation of parking restrictions shall apply to all
existing ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills which regulate parking in any part of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
This article repeals Ordinance No. 154 and Ordinance No. 202 in their entirety.
§ 356-23. Overnight parking.
[Adopted 3-10-1958 by Ord. No. 181]
No vehicle shall be parked upon any public street within the limits of the Borough for a period
longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Any person violating the provision of this section shall, upon conviction before a District Justice of
the Borough, be sentenced to a fine of not more than $300 for each offense, or in lieu thereof,
shall be confined in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
[Amended 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 447]
§ 356-24. Fire lanes.
[Adopted 7-13-1964 by Ord. No. 329]
From and after the effective date of this section it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle on any fire lane within the Borough of Pleasant Hills. This prohibition shall apply whether
the property be privately owned or under public control.
The Fire Inspector of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, or in the absence of the Fire Inspector, the
Borough Council, by majority vote at a duly advertised public meeting, shall determine and
designate the areas to be used as fire lanes within the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Thereafter, once
such area has been designated as a fire lane, a description of such area shall be submitted to the
Borough Manager of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, who shall maintain a record of all areas
designated as fire lanes within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
[Amended 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 956]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 236/339
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any areas designated as fire lanes by the Fire Inspector shall be so marked with appropriate signs
indicating that the area is a fire lane and that the parking of vehicles thereon is prohibited. If such
areas are not identified by such signs, the penalty provisions of this section shall not be
applicable.
[Amended 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 956]
The Fire Inspector is hereby given the authority to enter upon private property, at reasonable
times, in order to install fire lane signs on any area which he may designate as a fire lane.
[Amended 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 956]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction before the District Justice
of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $50. Any person who
may receive a summons for violating the provisions of this section may, within 48 hours of the time
of such violation, appear in the office of the District Justice for the Borough of Pleasant Hills, and
there pay the sum of $2 and costs of prosecution, which payment shall be in full satisfaction of any
fine imposed under this section.
[Amended 10-19-1964 by Ord. No. 333; 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 493]
This article shall be effective 30 days after passage.
§ 356-25. Enforcement of no parking in fire lanes and fire zones.
[Adopted 11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 781]
The purpose and scope of this section is to define enforcement and penalty provisions wherever it
appears that parking or vehicle traffic congestion may create a hazard by impeding the free
movement of fire-fighting equipment, ambulances or public emergency response vehicles within
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
The Fire Marshal shall prescribe and the Police Department shall issue all forms necessary for the
administration of this section and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration of this section, including but not limited to the inspection and
collection of fines for violations of this section. The Fire Marshal and the Police Department of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills are hereby designated to enforce this section, either singly or in
conjunction with each other. The approval of the Fire Marshal to enforce this section is recognized
by both the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills. At all times relevant hereto, the Fire Marshal shall wear his Fire
Marshal uniform in carrying out the duties related to this section.
Any vehicle owner who parks or permits a vehicle to be parked within a designated fire lane/fire
zone shall be subject to a fine and penalty/prosecution as the law allows. A fine of $10 shall be
imposed for each violation and shall be collected by a ticketing procedure whereby the fine must
be paid as the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Said fines are to be made
payable to the Borough of Pleasant Hills. A $10 fine will also be imposed for overnight parking,
illegal parking in spaces designated for the handicapped, limited time parking violations and other
parking violations as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and/or
the ordinances of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Such fines/tickets are issued by the Police
Department. If said fines are not paid within 10 days of the date of issuance of the ticket, the
vehicle owner may be subject to prosecution before the District Justice as the law allows.
Thereafter, if default of payment occurs, the violator may be sentenced as the law allows. As set
forth in Subsection B of this section, the Fire Marshal's ability to issue tickets is expressly limited
to violations of parking in fire lanes. All other tickets for parking violations shall only be issued by
members of the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
[Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 783]
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this section shall be and the
same are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. This section is to be read in conjunction
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 237/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
with § 356-24 of this chapter, and does not repeal the provisions of that section which are not in
conflict with this section.
§ 356-26. Parking after snow or ice accumulation.
[Adopted 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 718]
From and after the date of this section, the parking of any motor vehicle on any public road in the
Borough of Pleasant Hills after there has been an accumulation of at least six inches of snow or
ice on said public road is hereby prohibited.
The term "accumulation of snow and ice" is hereby defined as the average depth of snow and ice
on the paved cartway of said public road.
Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction before the District Justice
serving the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $500. Each and
every day that a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense under the terms of this
section.
§ 356-27. McClellan Drive.
[Adopted 12-12-1960 by Ord. No. 239]
No parking shall be permitted on the left side off the roadway in the area known as McClellan
Drive Circle between 365 McClellan Drive and 439 McClellan Drive, between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. except on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Signs designated this
restriction shall be posted in this area. As McClellan Drive is a one-way road, this restriction shall
apply to the area between 365 McClellan Drive and 439 McClellan Drive on the left side of the
road in the direction that traffic flows.
[Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 941]
The proper officers shall post the necessary signs, as required by law, for effectuating the
provisions hereof.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon summary conviction before the
District Judge of the Borough, be subject to pay a fine of no more than $50 per violation, plus court
costs. The failure to pay the fine upon conviction shall result in further penalty as permitted by law.
[Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 941]
§ 356-28. Old Clairton Road.
[Adopted 4-8-1968 by Ord. No. 406]
A No Parking Zone is hereby established on the easterly side of Old Clairton Road from its
intersection at Glenburn Drive to its intersection at State Route 51.
The Mayor of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is authorized to post such signs as may be necessary
to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 356-29. Betty Rae Drive.
[Adopted 5-18-1987 by Ord. No. 644]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 238/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
From and after the date of this section, the parking of motor vehicles on the westerly side of Betty
Rae Drive from the southerly boundary line of Lot No. 151 to the northerly boundary line of Lot No.
151, also known as 109 Betty Rae Drive, is hereby prohibited.
The Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall erect "No Parking At Any Time"
signs at appropriate locations on Betty Rae Drive.
§ 356-30. East Bruceton Road.
[Adopted 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 673]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, pursuant to the authority granted by the
Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, 77 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109 does hereby establish a "No Parking"
Zone on the north side and on the south side of East Bruceton Road commencing at its
intersection with State Route 51 and continuing in a westerly direction along East Bruceton Road
to its intersection with Traverse Drive.
This section has been enacted after completing an engineering and traffic investigation study, a
copy of said study being found in the permanent records of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 356-31. Arbor Lane.
[Adopted 9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 810]
Parking on the sidewalk and street is hereby prohibited from the property line separating 429 and
423 Arbor Lane to the property line separating 413 and 404 Arbor Lane in the interest of public
safety.
The within restrictions shall not apply to authorized personnel and emergency vehicles that are
transporting disabled individuals and/or those with a need for accommodation.
The effective date of this section shall be 30 days from the date of enactment and after
appropriate signs have been installed notifying the public of the restrictions created by this section.
Any owner/operator of a motor vehicle who violates this section shall be subject to a fine and
penalty as the law allows. Said prosecution shall be carried out by the issuance of a state citation
with the appropriate fine and costs. Thereafter, if default of payment occurs, then the violator may
be punished pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 356-31.1. Woodland Drive.
[Added 2-17-2014 by Ord. No. 968]
On and after the effective date of this section, parking on Woodland Drive shall be restricted
within the recorded right-of-way at the terminus of Woodland Drive for the period October 15th
through April l 5th. This restriction shall apply during these months so as to allow the Borough
vehicles to turn around in this area. Attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by
reference is a drawing completed by the Borough Engineer which delineates the area of the
restricted parking and confirms that such a restriction is necessary to allow the Borough trucks to
turn.[1]
Editor's Note: Said drawing is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Violations and penalties. Any violation of this section restricting parking in this area of Woodland
Drive shall be subject to a fine of up to $300 for each offense, plus court costs, with each separate
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 239/339
day of this offense being a separate violation.
Article VI. Studded and Metallic Wheels
[Adopted 7-12-1965 by Ord. No. 355]
§ 356-32. Operation on Borough streets prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be illegal for any person, firm or corporation to
operate any vehicle, machinery or equipment containing metallic or cleated wheels or tracks on any of
the streets or highways in the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 356-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any of the District
Justices of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not in excess of the sum of $100
and in default thereof to suffer imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 10
days.
Article VII. Stop Intersections
[Adopted 2-13-1967 by Ord. No. 385]
§ 356-34. Ratification of existing signs.
From and after the date of this article, the location and erection of all stop signs located within the
corporate limits of the Borough of Pleasant Hills are hereby adopted and ratified. A complete list of the
locations of all stop signs heretofore erected is on file in the office of the Mayor of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills and is available for inspection during normal business hours.
§ 356-35. New stop intersections.
From and after the date of this article, the Mayor of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall have full
authority to locate, erect and/or eliminate all stop signs in the Borough of Pleasant Hills; provided,
however, that consent thereto has been given by motion of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
§ 356-36. Record of stop signs to be maintained.
A permanent record of all stop signs in the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be maintained in the office
of the Mayor of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
Article VIII. Removal and Impoundment
[Adopted 8-12-1968 by Ord. No. 410]
§ 356-37. Authority.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 240/339
A.
Any vehicle parked upon the streets, highways or public property of the Borough of Pleasant Hills in
violation of any law of Pennsylvania or any ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills may be removed
therefrom, impounded and stored as hereinafter provided.
§ 356-38. Designation of poundkeeper and towing service.
[Amended 10-13-1975 by Ord. No. 514; 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 826]
The Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall, from time to time, designate the official
poundkeeper, as provided herein, for the purpose of impoundment and storage. The Borough Council
shall, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with the poundkeeper setting forth the terms of the
poundkeeper’s services and may, from time to tine, designate an official towing service or services for
the removal of vehicles, as provided herein, and delivery to the official poundkeeper.
§ 356-39. Fees and charges.
[Amended 10-13-1975 by Ord. No. 514; 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 792; 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 826]
The fees set forth in this article shall be set forth in the current Fee Resolution of the Borough as may
be amended from time to time and subject to change in the future.
§ 356-40. Notification of vehicle owner.
[Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 826]
Within a reasonable period of time of removal of such vehicle, the Police Department shall, by
registered mail, notify the owner or person responsible for said vehicle of the place from which the
vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and the location of the pound in
which it has been impounded.
§ 356-41. Payment of charges constitutes waiver.
Payment of the charges set forth in § 356-37 hereof shall be final and conclusive and unless made
under protest shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
§ 356-42. Payment under protest.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation making payment of the charges and fees under protest as
provided in § 356-43 hereof shall be entitled to a hearing before any District Justice in which case the
defendant shall be proceeded against and receive such notice as is provided by the Motor Vehicle
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in other cases of summary offenses and shall have the
same rights of appeal and waiver of hearing as provided therein.
§ 356-43. Poundkeeper's bond; towing service insurance.
[Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 826]
The poundkeeper hereof shall furnish to the Borough of Pleasant Hills a bond with good and
sufficient surety in the amount of $50,000 to the use of the owners of vehicles removed and
impounded hereunder, indemnifying said owners against the loss of any vehicle or damage
thereto while in the custody of the poundkeeper.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 241/339
B.
[1]
The towing service or services designated shall furnish the Borough of Pleasant Hills with a public
liability and property damage insurance policy providing complete and third-party coverage for the
Borough of Pleasant Hills from a company approved by the Pennsylvania Insurance Commission.
The policy shall provide coverage in an amount not less than $100,000 for public liability and not
less than $50,000 for property damage per occurrence.
§ 356-44. Indemnification of Borough.
[Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 826]
The poundkeeper and towing service or services shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Pleasant Hills against all civil liability arising from the removal, impounding and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
Article IX. Parking, Stopping and Standing
[Adopted 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 500]
§ 356-45. Obstructing traffic prohibited.
No person shall park, stop, leave standing, load or unload any vehicle on any street or highway within
the Borough of Pleasant Hills if such parking, stopping, standing, loading or unloading shall interfere
with or inhibit the free flow of traffic on the streets and highways within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 356-46. Signs.
The Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, on directions from the Mayor of the Borough
of Pleasant Hills or the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, shall cause to be erected
signs indicating the areas where parking, stopping, standing, loading or unloading is prohibited.
§ 356-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the District Justice of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, be sentenced to pay a fine not in excess of $10, plus costs of prosecution.
Article X. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Pedestrian Bridge, adopted 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 511, was repealed 3-
15-2010 by Ord. No. 919.
§ 356-48. through § 356-50. (Reserved)
Article XI. Speed-Timing Devices
[Adopted 2-17-1982 by Ord. No. 584]
§ 356-51. Use of devices authorized.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 242/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
The rate of speed of any vehicle may be timed on any street or road within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, by authorized officers of the Borough of Pleasant Hills through
the use of excessive speed preventor (ESP) equipment or other similar devices.
§ 356-52. Criteria for conviction of speed limit violations.
No conviction shall be had upon evidence obtained through the use of excessive speed preventor
(ESP) equipment or other similar devices unless:
The apparatus is of a type approved by the Secretary of Transportation;
The apparatus has been calibrated and tested for accuracy and found accurate or adjusted for
accuracy within a period of 60 days prior to the alleged violation; and
The speed recorded is six or more miles per hour in excess of the legal speed limit.
§ 356-53. Calibration.
An official certificate from an inspection station approved by the Secretary of Transportation for use by
the Pennsylvania State Police, showing that the calibration and tests required were made within the
required period and that the excessive speed preventor (ESP) equipment was accurate or was
adjusted for accuracy, shall be competent and prima facie evidence of the fact that such certificate was
issued by an official inspection station appointed by the Secretary of Transportation and of the
accuracy of the excessive speed preventor (ESP) equipment in every proceeding where any
information is brought charging a violation of the speed regulations applicable within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
§ 356-54. Training of operators.
The operators of such equipment shall be properly instructed and certified in the use of such
equipment by the manufacturer of such equipment or by any other appropriate entity.
§ 356-55. Administration.
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, together with the Chief of Police, be and they
are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to take any steps necessary to implement the
provisions of this article regarding excessive speed preventor (ESP) equipment or other similar devices
in the Borough of Pleasant Hills, consistent with the applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code.
Article XII. Prohibited Turns
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 356-56. Left-hand turn onto East Bruceton Road at plaza.
[Adopted 9-19-1994 by Ord. No. 716]
Designation of prohibited turn. Effective 30 days after the date of the passage of this article, no
vehicle exiting onto East Bruceton Road from the easterly driveway of K-mart Plaza nearest State
Route 51 shall make a left turn onto East Bruceton Road.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 243/339
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
Signs; grace period. The Pleasant Hills Police Department is directed to erect signs on the rightof-
way of East Bruceton Road indicating the prohibition of making a left turn onto East Bruceton
Road. No traffic citation shall be issued for violation of these signs for a period of 30 days after
their erection.
Filing of traffic study. The traffic study which forms the basis for the enactment of this article shall
be filed in the office of the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall be retained
there so long as this article is in effect.
Violations and penalties. The violation of this article shall be punishable as provided under the
provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 356-57. Turning and parking on McClellan Drive at elementary
school.
[Adopted 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 802]
From and after the enactment of this section, vehicle traffic wishing to access McClellan
Elementary School, other than school busses, school personnel and/or emergency vehicles, are
hereby restricted from turning onto School Lane between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and
between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., on days when school is in session.
[Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 951; 2-15-2016 by Ord. No. 993; 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1015]
Signs will be posted informing residents and drivers of these restrictions, and said restrictions shall
thereafter be enforced following the enactment of this section and the posting of the signs with the
modified hours when the restrictions apply.
[Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 951; 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1015]
These restrictions shall remain in place until amended by future ordinance of Borough Council of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
[Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 951]
No vehicle shall be permitted to park or stand on the west side of McClellan Drive from the area in
front of 394 McClellan Drive through the area in front of 400 McClellan Drive.
For purposes of this section, "standing" shall refer to the process of stopping a vehicle and waiting
in the no-parking zone.
Any vehicle owner who parks and/or stands or permits a vehicle to be parked in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine and penalty/prosecution as the law allows. A
fine of $10 shall be imposed for each violation and shall be collected by a ticketing procedure
whereby the fine must be paid at the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Said
fines are to be made payable to the Borough of Pleasant Hills. Such fines/tickets are issued by the
Police Department. If said fines are not paid within 48 hours of the date of issuance of the ticket,
the vehicle owner may be subject to prosecution before the District Justice as the law allows. Such
prosecution shall be carried out by the issuance of a state citation with the appropriate fine and
costs. Thereafter, if default of payment occurs, the violators may be punished pursuant to the
terms of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
This section is intended to modify Ordinance No. 239 in limited part.[1] All other provisions of
Ordinance No. 239 not in conflict with this section are unaffected by the terms and provisions set
forth herein.
Editor's Note: See § 356-27 of this chapter.
§ 356-58. Old Clairton Road and National Drive at middle school.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 244/339
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Adopted 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 809]
Left-hand turns for vehicles traveling north and right-hand turns for vehicles traveling south on Old
Clairton Road are hereby prohibited from turning into the Middle School at the intersection with
National Drive from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. until 3:00 p.m. on the days when
Pleasant Hills Middle School is in session.
[Amended 2-15-2016 by Ord. No. 993]
On the days when the Pleasant Hills Middle School is in session, parking shall be restricted in
certain areas on Dutch Lane. The purpose of this restriction shall be to provide a staging area
for school buses before they turn into the access road from Dutch Lane. Parking shall be
prohibited in these areas between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. when
school is in session. Signs shall be posted in the area of the restriction and parking shall be
restricted during these times in the area between house numbers 67 and 101 on the eastern
side of Dutch Lane and in the area between house numbers 80 and 110 on the western side
of Dutch Lane
The access road from Dutch Lane is not to be used for vehicle traffic. Any and all turns into
the Pleasant Hills Middle School from Dutch Lane are restricted to emergency vehicles,
school personnel and school bus use only.
The within restrictions shall not apply to authorized personnel and, therefore, would not apply to
teachers, staff, administration and emergency vehicles. The restrictions would apply to parents
and/or visitors to the school during the hours set forth herein with the exception of vehicles that
are transporting disabled individuals and/or those with a need for accommodation.
The effective date of this section shall be 30 days from the date of enactment and after
appropriate signs have been installed notifying the public of the restrictions created by this section.
Any operator of a motor vehicle who violates this section shall be subject to a fine and penalty as
the law allows. Said prosecution shall be carried out by the issuance of a state citation with the
appropriate fine and costs. Thereafter, if default of payment occurs, then the violator may be
punished pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Article XIII. Restricted Parking in Mowry Park
[Adopted 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 356-59. Hours prohibited.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, pursuant to the authority granted to it under the
Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, does hereby prohibit the parking of
motorized vehicles in Mowry Park during the hours commencing midnight each evening and continuing
until 6:00 a.m. the following morning.
§ 356-60. Violations and penalties.
Any motorized vehicle found in violation of the terms in this article shall be subject to such penalties as
are provided in the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania relating to the unauthorized parking of motor
vehicles in designated areas.
Article XIV. Restricted Parking in Boulevard Park
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 245/339
[Adopted 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 1021]
§ 356-61. Parking restrictions within area of Boulevard Park.
From and after the date of this article, parking shall be restricted as set forth herein within the area of
Boulevard Park to only those vehicles that are present in the park to access the roller hockey rink,
basketball court or playground, or any of the park amenities. From and after the date of this article, it
shall be illegal for an individual to park their vehicle within the area of Boulevard Park and then leave
without actually visiting the park for recreation purposes. Restricting parking to those individuals who
are using the park will be beneficial for two purposes. First, such restriction will increase parking that is
available for those individuals who are actually using the park. Second, the public works employees
will be able to contact individuals who are actually present in the park to request they move their
vehicle when necessary.
§ 356-62. Time period and area of limitation.
The limitations set forth herein shall be effective Monday through Friday with the exception of days
recognized as federal holidays. The time period on the days when the restrictions are in place shall be
between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. During these time periods, vehicles shall not park on the right side of
the road, i.e., on the same side of Pleasant Hills Boulevard as vehicles approach from SR 51. These
restrictions shall apply as vehicles approach from SR 51 up to the end of the property line of Boulevard
Park. The restrictions shall apply for the entire distance of Parcels 388-J-274 and 388-J-276.
§ 356-63. Violations and penalties.
Any vehicle found in violation of the terms of this article shall be subject to such penalties as are
provided in the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania relating to the unauthorized parking of motor
vehicles in designated areas.
§ 356-64. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon the placement of signage in these areas of
Boulevard Park that parking is restricted.
§ 356-65. Limited amendment.
The express purpose of this article is to enact limited restrictions that apply only to the parking of
vehicles in the area of Boulevard Park. As such, this article is not intended to modify the terms of any
other ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Chapter 360. Vehicles, Junked and Abandoned
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 248.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Removal and impoundment of vehicles — See Ch. 356, VIII.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 246/339
[1]
Article I. Removal by Police
[Adopted 5-10-1965 by Ord. No. 351]
§ 360-1. Authorization.
The Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby authorized and empowered to
remove any abandoned or wrecked automobile from any of the streets in the Borough of Pleasant
Hills.
§ 360-2. Criteria.
An automobile shall be considered as abandoned or wrecked if it has been parked and unattended for
a period of 72 hours. This provision shall not apply to a vehicle parked in front of its owner's residence.
§ 360-3. Notification of owner prior to removal.
In the event that the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall determine that an
automobile is abandoned or wrecked on one of its streets in the Borough of Pleasant Hills, it shall
make a diligent effort to ascertain the owner of said automobile. If said owner is located, the Police
Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall give said owner a period of 24 hours in which to
remove said abandoned or wrecked automobile.
§ 360-4. Failure of owner to remove.
In the event that a known owner of a wrecked or abandoned automobile fails to remove the same after
having been notified by the Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills or in the event that the
Police Department of the Borough of Pleasant Hills is unable to ascertain the owner of an abandoned
or wrecked automobile, the Police Department shall then remove or cause to be removed said
automobile to a public storage garage within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 360-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 947]
In the event of a violation of this article concerning abandoned and junked vehicles, the owner(s) of
said vehicle(s) shall be responsible for all costs to tow and/or store said vehicle after the notification
required by § 360-3 above and the vehicle is removed from the property. In addition to the actual costs,
the owner may be subject to a fine of $150 for each violation. Payment of any such fine and the actual
costs shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle before the vehicle may be reclaimed. Prior to obtaining
possession of the vehicle, the owner must provide proof of ownership, current vehicle registration and
insurance as required by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Law.[1]
Editor’s Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1701 et seq.
§ 360-6. Sale of unclaimed vehicles.
The Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby authorized to sell, at public sale, in order to recover the costs
due it for the removal of said automobile, any automobile which has remained in storage for a period in
excess of 30 days. In the event that the sale price of any automobile should exceed the costs and
expenses of said sale and the costs due the Borough of Pleasant Hills for the removal of said vehicle,
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 247/339
such excess shall be held by the Borough Treasurer and shall be paid over to the owner of said
automobile upon adequate proof of the ownership of said automobile.
Article II. Abatement of Nuisances
[Adopted 10-15-1984 by Ord. No. 609]
§ 360-7. Open storage prohibited.
[Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 808]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills hereby declares that the storage of abandoned
or junked automobiles on any property in the Borough of Pleasant Hills is declared unlawful. For
purposes of this article, any automobile without a current license plate or state inspection which
remains on any property for a period of time in excess of 90 days other than in a completely enclosed
building shall be deemed to be an abandoned or junked automobile.
§ 360-8. Notice.
If it is determined that an abandoned or junked automobile, as defined in this article, is located on any
property in the Borough of Pleasant Hills, the Building Inspector of the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall
give written notice of this condition to the owner of the property on which the abandoned or junked
automobile is located. This notice shall require the removal of the abandoned or junked automobile
within a period of 10 days. This notice of removal shall also contain a statement that if the owner of the
property on which the abandoned or junked automobile is located does not remove the same within the
ten-day period, the Borough of Pleasant Hills may cause the same to be done and that the costs
incurred to remove the abandoned or junked automobile, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs,
will be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by an action of
assumpsit. The notice will also inform the property owner that the Borough may seek a bill in equity to
compel the removal of the abandoned or junked automobile.
§ 360-9. Failure to respond to notice.
In the event that the owner of the property on which the abandoned or junked automobile is located
does not remove the same within the ten-day period, then the Borough of Pleasant Hills, pursuant to
the authorization granted to the Borough of Pleasant Hills under the provisions of the Borough Code,
53 P.S. § 46201(5), is authorized to enter upon the property and to remove the abandoned or junked
automobile and to collect the costs thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by an action of assumpsit. In addition to the
foregoing remedies, the Borough of Pleasant Hills is further authorized to seek the removal of the
abandoned or junked automobile by a bill in equity.
Chapter 366. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 336, Wells, adopted 11-10-1947 by Ord. No. 7, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919.]
Chapter 374. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 6-12-1967 by Ord. No.
391; amended in it entirety 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 818.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 75.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 248/339
A.
(1)
B.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 126.
Building construction — See Ch. 166.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 170.
Fees — See Ch. 206.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 216.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 222.
Mining — See Ch. 242.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 268.
Signs — See Ch. 302.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 322.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 326.
Trailers, cabins and house-cars — See Ch. 336.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 360.
Article I. Introduction
§ 374-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills.”
§ 374-2. Zoning Map.
The map herein referred to which is identified by the title “Pleasant Hills Borough Zoning Map” and by
the signatures of the duly authorized officers of the Borough affixed thereto shall be known as the
“Zoning Map” and such map, together with all notations, references and other data shown thereon is
hereby incorporated by reference to this chapter as is more fully described herein. Said Zoning Map
shall be kept up to date regarding additions, planned development and street extension. It shall be on
file and available for examination by persons interested therein at the offices of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.
§ 374-3. Incorporation of county airport zoning.
The Allegheny County Airport Zoning Regulations are incorporated herein by reference for the airport
hazard area within the territorial limits of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as identified in the County of
Allegheny Airport Zoning Regulations for Allegheny County Airport. These regulations are adopted in
compliance with the requirements of the Airport Zoning Act, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
§ 374-4. Interpretation; purpose.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare and shall
not prohibit the adoption of more restrictive requirements of this nature.
Effect on lots and boundary lines.
It is fundamental to the purpose of this chapter to recognize that many existing lots throughout
the Borough are less adequate than others because of their location or size or odd shape or
difficult topography, or any combination of these limitations. A claim of hardship under this
chapter, therefore, shall not be allowable on behalf of any lot because the physical
characteristics of the lot prevent it from being built upon exactly as in another lot abutting or
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 249/339
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
close to it or in the same zoning district. The regulations herein permit most such lots to be
satisfactorily built upon. There can be some alleviation for other lots through variances (minor
concessions) granted by the Zoning Hearing Board when special physical conditions make
literal enforcement of the regulations either unsatisfactory in the interest of the people at large
or actually impossible.
While this chapter applies only to property within the Borough, in the protection of the health
and safety and welfare of the people at large, and in the encouragement of the establishment
and maintenance of reasonable community standards of physical environment, the effect of
such application on adjacent properties and neighborhoods without regard to municipal
boundary lines should be considered. It is the intention that the administration of this chapter,
where it affects properties adjacent to the Borough boundary line, will be such as to promote
cooperation with other political subdivisions involved, for the uniform benefit and protection of
all affected properties.
This section shall be considered, together with all the provisions of this chapter, when
appraising “the spirit of the ordinance” as a guide to its interpretation.
All buildings for which permits have been obtained and the construction of which or a portion of
which has been begun, or for which a contract or contracts have been let pursuant to a permit
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, may be completed and used in accordance with
the plans on which said permit was granted.
All permits for buildings which were issued prior to the adoption of this chapter are declared void if
at the time of the effective date of this chapter:
No construction of such building shall have been made; and
No contract or contracts have been let pursuant to said permit, provided in either case such
building or its use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 374-5. Community development objectives.
These regulations are made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of
Pleasant Hills and the goals and objectives stated therein.
In addition, these regulations are designed to:
Lessen congestion in the streets;
Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
Promote health and general welfare;
Provide adequate light and air;
Prevent the overcrowding of land;
Avoid undue concentration of population; and
Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements.
Reasonable consideration has been given, among other things, to the character of the district and
its particular suitability for particular uses and to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 250/339
Article II. Terminology
§ 374-6. Word usage.
Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; and the word “building” includes the
word “structure” and the word “structure” includes the word “building.”
§ 374-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING
A building subordinate to the principal building on the property and used for purposes customarily
incidental to the use or uses of the principal building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
See “structure, accessory.”
ADULT ARCADE
Any place where the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the images displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE
An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, including but not
limited to video cassettes, movies, books, magazines and other periodicals, which is distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct
or nudity, as defined by this chapter, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
ADULT BUSINESS
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult live theater, adult mini-motion-picture theater, adult motionpicture
theater, adult motel or a nightclub featuring adult entertainment, as defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Movies which are rated “X” by the Motion Picture Coding Association, videos, still or motion
pictures, photographs, slides, films or other visual representations, books, magazines or other
printed material or live dramatic, musical or dance performances which are sexually explicit or
depict nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT LIVE THEATER
Any commercial establishment which features live shows for public viewing in which all, or some,
of the performers are displaying nudity or engaging in sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity for accommodating less than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to sexual conduct or nudity, as defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 251/339
A hotel or motel presenting adult motion pictures by means of closed circuit television, the material
being presented having as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or nudity, as defined
herein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building with a capacity for accommodating 50 or more persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to sexual conduct or nudity, as defined herein.
AIR-CONDITIONING UNIT
Any air-conditioning system, heat exchanger or cooling tower, refrigerant compressor or
mechanical accessories to any such system, where such air-conditioning system is designed for
the air conditioning of all or part of any residence or commercial structure, but not including an
individual window air-conditioning unit designed to air condition a single room of a dwelling.
ARTERIAL ROAD
A public street which serves large volumes of high speed and long distance traffic. Roads
classified as arterial in the Borough are Clairton Boulevard (Route 51), Curry Hollow Road and
Lebanon Church Road.
AWNING
A temporary or permanent structure extending out and over the upper part of a door, window or
porch and serving as protection from sun or rain. A covering over a door, window or porch which
extends more than 48 inches from the building and/or has supports extending below the center
line or more than 12 inches above the opening that the covering is protecting, and/or supports
extending beyond the building walls, shall not be considered an awning within the meaning of this
definition and this chapter.
BILLBOARD
A sign displaying changeable advertising which pertains to a business, organization, event,
person, place, service or product not principally located or sold on the premises on which such
sign is located.
BOARD
All references to the “Board” are to the Zoning Hearing Board created by this chapter.
BOROUGH
All references to the “Borough” are to the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
BUFFER AREA
A landscaped area of a certain depth specified by this chapter which shall be planted and
maintained in trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs, bushes or other natural landscaping material
and shall consist of a mix of types and sizes of plant material which meets the standard of
providing a compact, year-round visual screen at least six feet in height or, upon approval by
Borough Council, any existing natural or graded barrier including differences in elevation, which
duplicates the effect of the required buffer area.
BUILDING
A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF
The total number of stories in a building and the vertical distance measured from the finished
grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gable or hip or gambrel or
pent roofs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 252/339
BUSINESS OFFICE
An office for any permitted or conditional use within an adopted zoning district, providing the
services and functions associated with the operation of the permitted or conditional use.
[Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919]
BUSINESS SERVICES
Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business offices on a fee or contract
basis, including, but not limited to: advertising and mailing; data processing; secretarial; financial;
photocopying and printing; office supplies; building maintenance; equipment servicing, rental and
leasing; employment service; management and consulting services; and other similar business
services.
CEMETERY
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes
including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundary of such property.
CHURCH, CATHEDRAL, SYNAGOGUE or TEMPLE
Any or all of the following: church, manse, rectory, convent, parish school or similar building
incidental to the particular use; school for religious education, convents and other buildings for the
housing of students, teachers, communicants and domestic or maintenance employees; but not
including business offices (except administrative offices housed within the structure), rescue
missions or the occasional use for religious purposes of properties not regularly so used.
COLLECTOR ROAD
A public street which, in addition to giving access to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and
provides a route for carrying considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and
arterial roads. Streets classified as collector roads in the Borough are Arbor Lane, East and West
Bruceton Roads, Gill Hall Road, Green Drive, Lewis Run Road, Old Clairton Road and Old
Lebanon Church Road.
CONDITIONAL USE
An authorized use which may be granted only by Borough Council pursuant to express standards
and criteria after recommendation by the Planning Commission and compliance with the
applicable requirements of this chapter.
COUNCIL
All references to “Council” are to the Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
COVERAGE, LOT
See “lot coverage.”
CURB LEVEL
The elevation of the established curb opposite a point midway between the extremes of the plan of
the existing or proposed structure which faces the curb.
DAY-CARE CENTER
A facility licensed by the commonwealth located within a building which is not used as a dwelling
unit and which is used for the care during part of a twenty-four-hour day of children under the age
of 16 or handicapped or elderly persons.
DRIVEWAY
A paved or prepared surface providing means of access leading directly from a street to an
integral or detached garage, the main structure, a parking stall, parking pad or parking area.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
DWELLING
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 253/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
A building or portion thereof designed for and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including apartment hotels, hospitals,
hotels, boardinghouses, institutional homes, residential clubs, rooming houses, tourist courts,
trailers and the like.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units, each for the exclusive use by
one family, which share a common entrance, usually by means of a common corridor.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
A separate dwelling designed for, or occupied exclusively as, a residence for only one family and
having no party wall in common with an adjacent building. No single-family dwelling shall contain
more than one kitchen, dining room, living room or breakfast room.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
A building containing only two noncommunicating dwelling units, each for exclusive use by one
family and each with its own separate exterior entrance door.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking and sanitary facilities for one person or one
family.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
The maximum number of dwelling units authorized per acre of site area, including all land used for
residential purposes, open space, recreation, streets, driveways and all other purposes.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of underground, surface or overhead
structures for electrical, gas, steam, water and sewerage transmission and collection systems and
the equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of
public service, but not including buildings intended for human occupancy, such as administrative
offices.
FAMILY
One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living together in a dwelling unit and
maintaining a common household, including not more than two boarders, roomers or lodgers, and,
in addition, any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof; or a group of not more than three
unrelated persons who are living together in a dwelling unit and maintaining a common household,
other than for profit.
FENCE
A barrier or ornamental structure constructed of any material other than vegetation, designed to
enclose all or part of a yard, provide a break in openness or as an accent feature in the landscape.
FUNCTIONAL FENCE
- A fence with a maximum height of six feet and having a ratio of open area to solid area of
not less than 1:1. All openings in a functional fence shall permit the passage of a sphere a
minimum of two inches in diameter.
ORNAMENTAL FENCE
- A fence with a maximum height of four feet and having a ratio of open area to solid area of
not less than 10:1. All openings in an ornamental fence shall permit the passage of a sphere
a minimum of four inches in diameter.
VISUAL SCREENING FENCE
- A fence with a maximum height of 10 feet and having a ratio of open area to solid area of
less than 1:1 and which may be solid.
SECURITY FENCE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 254/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
- A fence with a maximum height of 10 feet and having a ratio of open area to solid area of
not less than 10:1. All openings in a security fence shall permit the passage of a sphere a
minimum of two inches in diameter.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY
A single building or a group of accessory structures erected for the use of adjacent property
owners or residents of multiple dwellings, used for the storage of motor vehicles and not for repair
or maintenance thereof.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
Any garage, other than a community garage or accessory structure available to the public which is
used for storage, parking or rental of motor vehicles, but which is not used for the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR
See “repair garage.”
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION
Any premises used for supplying gasoline and oil, tires, accessories and services for vehicles at
retail direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of minor adjustments and repairs when
made indoors, but not including such repairs as:
Spray painting;
Body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs;
Major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of cylinder-head or crankcase pan;
Repairs of radiator requiring removal thereof;
Complete recapping or retreading of tires.
HOME OCCUPATION
An accessory use of a service character, conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents
thereof, which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not, in
any ostensible way, change the residential character of the dwelling. A family day-care home
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for no more than six children shall be deemed to
be a HOME OCCUPATION for purposes of this definition.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY
A building, or portion thereof, or group of buildings, containing more than 10 dwelling units, whose
principal use is occupancy by the elderly or physically handicapped and which may contain special
design features associated with the needs of the elderly or handicapped which are not usual in
construction of multifamily dwellings, including, but not limited to dispensaries, common dining
facilities, handicapped facilities, emergency call systems and similar facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
An all-weather, dust-free surface, such as concrete, asphalt, brick or paving block. Dirt, grass,
gravel or slag are not considered to be impervious surfaces.
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
INDEPENDENT ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
Housing for the elderly, as defined herein, which provides on-site supervision available to
independently mobile residents on an as-needed basis and which offers at least one meal a day in
common dining facilities.
LIGHT TRUCK
A vehicle designed and used as a passenger vehicle and/or to transport cargo on a street or
roadway. A "light truck" is a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds or less; or no
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 255/339
more than seven feet in height; or more than 20 feet in length.
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
LOT
A tract or parcel of land described in a deed or other instrument pursuant to the laws of the
commonwealth.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF
That portion of a zoning lot or an accredited-zoning lot bounded by the required front, rear and
side yards. When a yard is not required, the boundary is the lot line.
LOT, BUILDING LINES OF
The lines that bound the buildable area of the zoning lot, or accredited zoning lot, including front
and rear and side building lines.
LOT, CORNER
A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. Corner lots shall be required to have
two front yards and two side yards. No rear yard shall be required on corner lots, except that a
rear yard shall be provided along the common property line between two corner lots which share a
common street frontage and where one of the corner lots has frontage on a third street.
LOT COVERAGE
That percentage of the lot covered by the principal building, accessory buildings and structures
including, but not limited to, elevated decks, storage sheds, garages, gazebos and similar
structures.
LOT COVERAGE, FRONT YARD
That percentage of the required front yard covered by principal and accessory structures.
LOT, DEPTH
The mean horizontal distance from the street right-of-way line at the front of the lot to the extreme
rear line of the lot measured perpendicular to the street right-of-way line at the front of the lot. On
corner lots, the lot depth shall be measured from the front lot line to the opposite side lot line.
LOT, THROUGH
A lot the front and rear lines of which abut upon streets.
LOT WIDTH
The distance between the side lines of the zoning lot measured at the shortest distance at or
between the front and rear, building lines as determined by the prescribed front and rear yard
requirements.
MEDIATION
A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to
assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement
which the parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY
A facility licensed by the Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons.
MOTEL/HOTEL
A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and which also may
provide additional supporting services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities
and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.
NIGHTCLUB
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 256/339
A place of assembly, including, but not limited to, dance halls and private clubs, which offers
entertainment, either live or recorded, and food and/or drink, whether or not the consumption of
alcohol is permitted on the premises and which is characterized by low light levels and closely
packed tables and a dance floor, if provided, in excess of 200 square feet. A nightclub may be part
of a restaurant or may also operate as a restaurant during all or part of its hours of operation;
however, the area devoted to entertainment shall have a maximum permitted occupancy of more
than 200 persons to be classified as a NIGHTCLUB as defined by this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE OR BUILDING
A nonconforming use or building indicates the lawful use of a building or land, or the lawful
existence of a building at the effective date of this chapter which does not conform with the
requirements of this chapter.
NUDITY
The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male or female genitals or female breast.
NURSING HOME
Any building for the long-term inpatient care of persons requiring full time skilled nursing care.
OFFICE BUILDING
A building designed or used primarily for office purposes, no part of which is used for
manufacturing or a dwelling, other than living quarters for a watchman or janitor.
PARKING AREA
An open space other than a street or way, used for the parking of only passenger vehicles and
light trucks.
PARKING PAD
An open portion of land with an impervious surface designed and used for parking of passenger
vehicles and light trucks used as a passenger vehicle. Parking pads may be located in the front or
rear yard areas.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
PARKING STALL
A space in a community garage or parking area, not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long,
reserved for the parking of only one passenger vehicle or light truck.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE
Act 247 of 1968, as amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), which establishes the basic authority for
the exercise of municipal land use controls in Pennsylvania.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME
A facility licensed by the commonwealth where room and board is provided to more than three
permanent residents who are not relatives of the operator and who are mobile or semimobile and
require specialized services in such matters as bathing, dressing, diet and medication prescribed
for self-administration for a period exceeding 24 hours, but who are not in need of hospitalization
or skilled or intermediate nursing care.
PHARMACY
An establishment not in excess of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area which primarily sells
prescription drugs, patent medicines and surgical and sickroom supplies.
PORCH
Any exterior floor at least 12 inches or more above grade at any point, supported on at least two
opposing ends, with at least one end supported by, or attached to, the principal structure, with or
without a roof, and with or without an enclosed foundation; however, in no case shall the
foundation be habitable space.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 257/339
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
The office of a member of a recognized profession which is maintained for the conduct of that
profession.
PUBLIC BUILDING
A building or structure owned by a government agency and used for public purposes.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by Borough Council or Planning Commission
intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more the 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
REPAIR GARAGE
A building, or part thereof, used for the servicing and repair of motor vehicles, including major
repairs such as engine overhaul, body work, painting and recapping/retreading of tires.
SEXUAL CONDUCT
Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, and patently offensive representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation,
excretory functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person’s
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be female, breast.
SIGN
Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed to convey
information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure (including billboard or poster
panel) designed to carry the above visual information.
SIGN, AREA OF
That area enclosed by one continuous line, connecting the extreme points or edges of a sign. The
area includes all lettering, wording and accompanying design or symbols, together with the
background whether open or enclosed on which they are displayed. On a two-sided sign, only one
face is counted in computing the sign’s area. The area of the sign does not include minimal
supporting framework or bracing, but all other ornamental attachments or decorative structure
shall be included in determining the area of a sign.
SIGN, AUTOMATED
Any sign which moves in any manner by means of any type of power, including natural power.
SIGN, BANNER
Any sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters,
illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of
political subdivisions and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered
banners for the purpose of this chapter.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY
A sign that is designed so that characters, letters or illustrations can be activated and changed,
manually or electronically, without altering the face or surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs
shall be permitted only to advertise on-site goods and services.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 852]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 258/339
SIGN, GROUND OR POLE
Any sign which is freestanding, but supported by structures or supports, independent of support
from any building and which is permanently affixed to the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED
A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or other lighting devices internal to, or external to and
reflected on, the sign, which lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
and which is an integral part of the advertising effect.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING
A sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto,
which does not completely conform to the sign regulation applicable in the district in which it is
located.
SIGN, OVERHANGING
Any sign, other than a wall sign, affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends
beyond such building or wall in excess of six inches beyond the building or wall surface.
SIGN, ROOF
Any sign erected or constructed wholly upon and over the roof of any building and supported
solely on the roof structure.
SIGN, WALL
Any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the face of, or erected and confined
within the limits of, the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or building and
which displays only one advertising surface.
SIGN, WINDOW
Any sign placed on a window facing the outside which is intended to be seen from the outside.
STORY
That part of any building between any floor and the ceiling above; provided, however, that a
basement of any building which is not used as a living quarter shall not be considered as a story.
STORY, HALF
A story with a cubic content of not more than 50% of the cubic content of the first story of the
building.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS
A structural alteration is any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as
bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY
A detached subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to the main structure or to
the use of the land.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL
The main structure or structures on a lot in which the principal use or uses are conducted.
TERRACE
A natural embankment between a building and its lot lines. The height of a terrace shall be the
difference in elevation between the lot line and the finished grade at the line of the building.
TOWNHOUSE
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 259/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
A dwelling unit in a residential building containing three or more dwelling units, each for the
exclusive use by one family, each unit having a separate entrance and being attached to each
other by continuous vertical walls without opening from basement to roof.
USE, ACCESSORY
A subordinate use which is clearly incidental and related to that of a main structure or main use of
the land.
USE OF A BUILDING
Any and every use or activity conducted within a building or any accessory thereto.
VARIANCE
A departure from the strict terms of this chapter as applied to a specific property which can be
authorized only by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
VEHICLE
Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property or cargo, is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street or anywhere else. Devices moved by human power such as unicycles,
bicycles, wheelbarrows or pushcarts shall not be considered a vehicle.
PASSENGER VEHICLE
- A motorized vehicle designed and used primarily for personal conveyance on a street or
roadway. The term “passenger vehicle” shall include a motorcycle, motor bike, motor scooter,
passenger car, sport utility vehicle and passenger or conversion van. Passenger vehicles
shall not exceed 9,000 pounds’ gross vehicle weight; or seven feet in height; or 20 feet in
length.
LIGHT TRUCK
- A vehicle designed and used to transport cargo on a street or roadway. A “light truck” is a
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds or less; or not more than seven feet in
height; or 20 feet in length.
HEAVY TRUCK
- A vehicle designed and used to transport cargo on a street or roadway. A “heavy truck” is a
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of more than 9,000 pounds; or more than seven feet in
height; or more than 20 feet in length.
OTHER VEHICLE
- Any vehicle, other than a passenger vehicle, light truck or heavy truck. “Other vehicles” may
include, but shall not be not limited to, motor homes, campers, buses, snowmobiles, personal
watercraft, off-road motorcycles or any other off-road vehicles, trailers of any type and for any
use, boats on or off a trailer, aircraft, or any other vehicle not defined as a passenger vehicle,
light truck, or heavy truck.
VEHICLE SALES AGENCY
An open area, other than a street or way, used for the display and sale of new passenger vehicles
or light trucks and buildings which may contain offices and showrooms and an area completely
within an enclosed building where repair work may be done. The sale of used vehicles shall be
permitted only as part of an agency that sells new vehicles. Exception: A "vehicle sales agency"
that no longer sells new vehicles due to loss of a franchise or manufacturer's authorization may
sell and service only used vehicles.
[Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 904]
VEHICLE SALES OFF DEALER PREMISES
The sale of vehicles, new or used, off the primary premises of an authorized franchised dealer
shall be permitted for such dealers whose primary premises is located within the Borough of
Pleasant Hills. All such sales shall be subject to all related Code requirements.
[Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 918]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 260/339
VEHICLE WRECKING
The dismantling, compacting or wrecking of used vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale,
compacting or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their
parts.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and abutting the front lot line, the required depth of
which yard is a prescribed minimum distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and abutting the rear lot line, the required depth of
which yard is a prescribed minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot.
YARD, SIDE
A yard abutting a side lot line extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the required width of
which yard is a prescribed minimum distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot.
ZONING OFFICER
The person appointed by the Borough to administer this chapter as required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. The Zoning Officer shall have all the powers and duties and be
subject to all the provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code with
respect to Zoning Officers.
Article III. Districts
§ 374-8. General classification.
[Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 953]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Pleasant Hills is hereby divided into classes of districts
which will be designated as follows:
Residence District R-1
Residence District R-2
Residence District R-3
Residence District R-4
Civic District P-1
Office District O-1
Commercial District C-1
Commercial District C-2
Commercial District C-3
Commercial District C-4
Manufacturing District M-1
Airport District Overlay
§ 374-9. Zoning Map to show boundaries.
The boundaries of said Districts shall be shown upon the Zoning Map. The Zoning Map shall be kept
on file at the office of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and shall be available for public examination at
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 261/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
C.
such office during the hours it is open for business, except that such Zoning Map may be removed
from such office for an official change or for reproduction purposes only.
§ 374-10. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, on either the center line of streets,
roads, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto or on the side or
rear lines of lots or unsubdivided acreage. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a
street, alley, road or railroad right-of-way, and a district boundary line, they indicate that the district
boundary line runs parallel to the street, road, alley or railroad right-of-way at a distance therefrom
equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
Article IV. Residence District R-1
§ 374-11. Permitted uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Single-family detached dwelling.
Essential services.
The following accessory uses:
Accessory buildings and structures.
A private, noncommercial swimming pool.
A nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area.
Home occupations, as defined by this chapter, subject to the standards contained in § 374-58
of this chapter.
§ 374-12. Lot, yard and open space requirements.
In this district, the minimum dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces and the area of lot
required per family housed thereon shall be as follows:
A lot with a minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum area of 7,800 square feet per family shall be
provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in whole or in part as a dwelling,
provided that in the case of a lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date of this
chapter having smaller dimensions, or having an area of less than 7,800 square feet, a dwelling
may be built thereon as a variance when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board.
There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet at any point from the front
property line. Where front yard restrictions greater than 35 feet have already become established,
they shall be continued in the future use of the lot, and in further developing the street, and
nothing in this chapter shall be construed as lessening such existing restrictions.
On each lot other than a corner lot, no side yard of a dwelling or accessory structure shall be less
than five feet wide at any point, and the composite minimum width for both side yards shall be not
less than 15 feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 262/339
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
For dwellings, there shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be not less than 40 feet at any
point. For accessory structures, there shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be not less
than 20 feet at any point.
In the case of a corner lot or through lot, the sides or ends abutting streets shall conform to the
established building lines.
No more than 35% of the area of any lot shall be occupied by the dwelling and all accessory
structures. Front lot coverage on any lot shall not exceed 50% of the required front yard.
Any lot held in single separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter which may have
building lines less than those prescribed in this chapter may continue to maintain such building
lines notwithstanding any building line requirements contained in this chapter.
§ 374-13. Parking requirements.
Uses in this district are further subject to the parking requirements contained in Article XIX of this
chapter.
§ 374-14. Height requirements.
Uses in this district are further subject to the height requirements of Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 374-14.1. Accessory buildings.
In this district no more than one accessory building intended to store personal property of the residents
of the dwelling shall be erected on each lot, subject to the following regulations:
The construction and location of such accessory building shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
No person shall erect, install or replace such accessory building without having first obtained a
permit.
All such accessory buildings shall be of corrosion-resistant material, fully enclosed and shall have
a maximum floor area of 100 square feet for lots of up to 9,999 square feet in area and 144 square
feet for lots over 10,000 square feet in area. Further, all such accessory buildings shall be no more
than 15 feet in width or length, provided that the maximum permitted lot coverage for the district is
not exceeded. The maximum height of the structure shall not exceed 9 1/2 feet.
[Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 848]
All such accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard, except on corner lots which have no
rear yard. On corner lots, the accessory use building shall be located in the side yard which is
opposite the street on which the principal structure fronts. On corner lots, the accessory building
shall be located no closer than 10 feet to the side lot line which is opposite the street on which the
principal structure fronts and no closer to the other side lot line than five feet; on all other lots, the
accessory building shall be located no closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line. On lots other than
corner lots, the accessory building shall be no closer to the side lot line than five feet.
Article V. Residence District R-2
§ 374-15. Purpose; permitted and conditional uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 263/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(1)
B.
The purpose of the R-2 District is to preserve existing single-family densities and to provide the
opportunity for development of two-family dwellings and townhouses which are compatible with the
overall pattern of development in the Borough. In this district, land may be used and buildings and
structures may be erected, altered or used for the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
Essential services.
The following accessory uses:
Accessory buildings and structures.
A private, noncommercial swimming pool.
A nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area.
Home occupations, as defined by this chapter, subject to the standards contained in
§ 374-58 of this chapter.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted or conditional uses
authorized in this district not involving the conduct of a business, including the accessory
uses enumerated in § 374-11.
Conditional uses.
Townhouses, subject to the requirements of § 374-16 and the following express standards
and criteria:
A minimum site area of two acres shall be required.
Townhouse buildings shall have a break in continuity (offset) at intervals of at least every
70 feet. The breaks in continuity shall not be less than five feet. For townhouse buildings
not exceeding 70 feet, there shall be at least one break in continuity.
Townhouse buildings shall contain no more then eight dwelling units.
The maximum length of a townhouse building shall be 200 feet.
Streets within the plan shall be designed to discourage through traffic and ingress/egress
to and from the site shall be designed to minimize congestion, ensure safety and
accommodate peak traffic without hazard or great delay.
Adequate accessibility for emergency vehicles shall be provided to all residential
buildings.
Visitor parking areas shall be located within 150 feet of the units they are intended to
serve. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to link parking areas with dwelling units
and common areas, if any.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines which
adjoin single-family development or single-family zoning classification. The buffer area
shall be at least 15 feet in depth as measured from the property line.
Slopes in excess of 40% shall be considered unsuitable for construction of residential
buildings. Plans for construction of residential buildings on slopes in excess of 25% shall
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 264/339
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
be accompanied by a certification by a registered professional engineer regarding
adequacy of foundation design.
Plans which contain in excess of 50 dwelling units shall provide active and/or passive
recreation appropriate to the needs of the residents subject to the approval of Borough
Council. Provision of the approved open space and/or recreation shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of occupancy permits in the plan.
The method of organization proposed to maintain and operate the common facilities or
common areas within the plan, if any, shall be specified in the conditional use application.
Due consideration shall be given in the design of the plan to the preservation of natural
features, including large trees, groves, waterways, steep slopes, floodplains, historic
points and other community assets.
Security lighting of parking areas and other common areas or facilities shall be provided
and shall be shielded from adjacent properties.
§ 374-16. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Single-family dwellings.
Maximum dwelling unit density: 5.6 units per acre.
Minimum lot area: 7,800 square feet.
Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Maximum lot coverage, front yard: 50%.
Minimum front yard: 35 feet from property line, not less than 65 feet from center line of state
or county road and not less than 60 feet from center line of Borough street.
Minimum rear yard:
All principal structures: 40 feet.
All accessory structures: 20 feet.
Minimum side yards (all principal and accessory structures): two yards totaling 15 feet, neither
less than five feet.
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
Two-family dwellings.
Maximum dwelling unit density: 6 units per acre.
Minimum lot area: 14,500 square feet.
Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 265/339
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(5)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
C.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard (all principal and accessory structures): 35 feet from property line, not
less than 65 feet from center line of state or county road and not less than 60 feet from center
line of Borough street.
Minimum rear yard:
All principal structures: 30 feet.
All accessory structures: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard (all principal and accessory structures): 15 feet on each side.
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
Townhouses.
Maximum dwelling unit density:
Sites with direct access to a road classified as an arterial road: eight units per acre.
All other sites: six units per acre.
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
Sites with direct access to a road classified as an arterial road: 5,000 square feet.
All other sites: 7,250 square feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard: 35 feet from property line, not less than 65 feet from center line of state
or county road and not less than 60 feet from center line of Borough street.
Minimum rear yard:
All principal structures:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All other yards: 30 feet.
All accessory structures: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard:
All principal structures:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All other yards: 20 feet.
All accessory structures: 20 feet.
Minimum distance between buildings. For developments containing more than one
townhouse building on one lot, the following minimum requirements for distances between
buildings shall apply:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 266/339
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
Measurement Distance
Side to side 20 feet
Rear to side 40 feet
Rear to rear 60 feet
Side to front 35 feet
Front to front 50 feet
Front to rear 55 feet
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
§ 374-17. Application for conditional use.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 374-118 of this chapter.
§ 374-17.1. Accessory buildings.
In this district no more than one accessory building intended to store personal property of the residents
of the dwelling shall be erected on each lot, subject to the following regulations:
The construction and location of such accessory building shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
No person shall erect, install or replace such accessory building without having first obtained a
permit.
All such accessory buildings shall be of corrosion-resistant material, fully enclosed, and shall have
a maximum floor area of 100 square feet, and shall be no more than 15 feet in width or length,
provided that the maximum permitted lot coverage for the district is not exceeded. The maximum
height of the structure shall not exceed 9 1/2 feet.
All such accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard, except on corner lots which have no
rear yard. On corner lots, the accessory building shall be located in the side yard which is opposite
the street on which the principal structure fronts. On corner lots, the accessory building shall be
located no closer than 10 feet to the side lot line which is opposite the street on which the principal
structure fronts and no closer to the other side lot line than five feet; on all other lots, the
accessory building shall be located no closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line. On lots other than
corner lots, the accessory building shall be no closer to the side lot line than five feet.
Article VI. Residence District R-3
§ 374-18. Purpose; permitted and conditional uses.
The purpose of the R-3 District is to reserve areas within the Borough which are appropriate for
low-rise, medium density multifamily development consistent with the overall pattern of
development in the Borough.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used
for the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses:
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 267/339
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
(a)
(2)
A.
Essential services.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted or conditional uses
authorized in this district.
Conditional uses:
Multifamily dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 374-19 and the following express
standards and criteria:
A minimum site area of two acres shall be required.
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road as defined in this
chapter.
Multifamily buildings shall contain no more than 24 dwelling units.
Streets within the plan shall be designed to discourage through traffic and
ingress/egress to and from the site shall be designed to minimize congestion, ensure
safety and accommodate peak traffic without hazard or great delay.
Adequate accessibility for emergency vehicles shall be provided to all residential
buildings.
Visitor parking areas shall be located within 150 feet of the units that they are
intended to serve. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to link parking areas with
dwelling units and common areas, if any.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines
which adjoin single-family development or single-family zoning classification. The
buffer area shall be at least 15 feet in depth as measured from the property line.
Slopes in excess of 40% shall be considered unsuitable for construction of
residential buildings. Plans for construction of residential buildings on slopes in
excess of 25% shall be accompanied by a certification by a registered professional
engineer regarding adequacy of foundation design.
Plans which contain in excess of 50 dwelling units shall provide active and/or
passive recreation appropriate to the needs of the residents subject to the approval
of Borough Council. Provision of the approved open space and/or recreation shall be
a condition precedent to the issuance of occupancy permits in the plan.
The method of organization proposed to operate and maintain the common facilities
or common areas in the plan, if any, shall be specified in the conditional use
application.
Due consideration shall be given in the design of the plan to the preservation of
natural features, including large trees, groves, waterways, floodplains, steep slopes,
historic points and other community assets.
Security lighting of parking areas and other common areas or facilities shall be
provided and shall be shielded from adjacent properties.
§ 374-19. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Multifamily dwellings.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 268/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(5)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Maximum dwelling unit density: 13 units per acre.
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 3,350 square feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard (all principal and accessory structures): 35 feet from property line, not
less than 65 feet from center line of state or county road and not less than 60 feet from center
line of Borough street.
Minimum rear yard:
All principal structures:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All other yards: 30 feet.
All accessory structures: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard:
All principal structures:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All other yards: 20 feet.
All accessory structures: 20 feet.
Minimum distance between buildings. For developments containing more than one multifamily
building on one lot, the following minimum requirements for distance between buildings shall
apply:
Measurement Distance
Side to side 20 feet
Rear to side 140 feet
Rear to rear 60 feet
Side to front 35 feet
Front to front 50 feet
Front to rear 55 feet
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
§ 374-20. Application for conditional use.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 374-118 of this chapter.
Article VII. Residence District R-4
§ 374-21. Purpose; permitted and conditional uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 269/339
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
(a)
(2)
B.
The purpose of the R-4 District is to reserve areas within the Borough for higher density
multifamily buildings not exceeding eight stories in height consistent with the overall pattern of
development in the Borough.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used
for the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses.
Essential services.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted or conditional uses
authorized in this district.
Conditional uses.
Multifamily dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 374-22 and the following express
standards and criteria:
A minimum site area of two acres shall be required.
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road as defined in this
chapter.
Multifamily buildings which are three stories or less in height shall contain no more
than 24 dwelling units in one building.
Multifamily buildings which are more than three stories in height shall contain no
more than 100 dwelling units in one building.
Streets within the plan shall be designed to discourage through traffic and
ingress/egress to and from the site shall be designed to minimize congestion, ensure
safety and accommodate peak traffic without hazard or great delay.
Adequate accessibility for emergency vehicles shall be provided to all residential
buildings.
Parking areas shall be located within 200 feet of the units that they are intended to
serve. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to link parking areas with dwelling
units and common areas, if any.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines
which adjoin single-family development or single-family zoning classification. The
buffer area shall be at least 15 feet in depth as measured from the property line.
Slopes in excess of 40% shall be considered unsuitable for construction of
residential buildings. Plans for construction of residential buildings on slopes in
excess of 25% shall be accompanied by a certification by a registered professional
engineer regarding adequacy of foundation design.
Plans which contain in excess of 50 dwelling units shall provide active and/or
passive recreation appropriate to the needs of the residents subject to the approval
of Borough Council. Provision of the approved open space and/or recreation shall be
a condition precedent to the issuance of occupancy permits in the plan.
The method of organization proposed to operate and maintain the common facilities
or common areas in the plan, if any, shall be specified in the conditional use
application.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 270/339
[12]
[13]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
[1]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(5)
[1]
(a)
(6)
A.
Due consideration shall be given in the design of the plan to the preservation of
natural features, including large trees, groves, waterways, floodplains, steep slopes,
historic points and other community assets.
Security lighting of parking areas and other common areas or facilities shall be
provided and shall be shielded from adjacent properties.
§ 374-22. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Multifamily dwellings.
Maximum dwelling unit density:
Developments containing buildings three stories or less only: 13 units per acre.
Developments containing buildings four stories or more only: 30 units per acre.
Developments containing a mix of both types of multifamily buildings: 24 units per acre.
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
Residential buildings three stories or less: 3,350 square feet.
Residential building 11 stories or more: 1,450 square feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard:
Residential building three stories or less (all principal and accessory structures): 35 feet
from property line, not less than 65 feet from center line of state or county road and not
less than 60 feet from center line of Borough street.
Residential buildings four stories or less (all principal and accessory structures): 50 feet
from property line, not less than 80 feet from center line of state or county road and not
less than 75 feet from center line of Borough street.
Minimum rear yard:
All principal structures three stories or less:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All other yards: 30 feet.
All principal structures four stories or more:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 75 feet.
All other yards: 50 feet.
All accessory structures: 10 feet.
Minimum side yards:
All principal structures three stories or less:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 271/339
[2]
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
All other yards: 20 feet.
All principal structures four stories or more:
Yards adjoining single-family use or zoning: 75 feet.
All other yards: 30 feet.
All accessory structures: 20 feet.
Minimum distance between buildings. For developments containing more than one multifamily
building on one lot, the following minimum requirements for distance between buildings shall
apply:
Measurement Distance
Side to side 20 feet
Rear to side 140 feet
Rear to rear 60 feet
Side to front 35 feet
Front to front 50 feet
Front to rear 55 feet
Maximum height of buildings: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
§ 374-23. Application for conditional use.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 374-118 of this chapter.
Article VIII. Civic District P-1
§ 374-24. Permitted uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Any Borough or public building.
Municipal playgrounds, parks, recreational areas or other municipal uses.
Public or parochial schools and school property.
Church.
Fire hall.
Public library.
Public arboretum.
Municipal parking.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 272/339
I.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
H.
Essential services.
§ 374-25. Site, location and building plans required.
In this district, a building or structure may be erected only after the submission to and approval of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, of complete site, location and building plans.
§ 374-26. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Minimum lot area:
Playgrounds: None required.
All other uses: one acre.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
Minimum side yard:
Adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All others: 20 feet.
Minimum rear yard:
Adjoining single-family use or zoning: 50 feet.
All others: 30 feet.
Minimum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
Buffer area. A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines
which adjoin single-family development or single-family zoning classification. The buffer area shall
be at least 15 feet in depth as measured from the property line.
§ 374-27. Termination of public use of property.
In the event the public use of any property located in a P-1 District shall be discontinued or shall be
sold or transferred to a nonpublic or noncharitable entity, then such land and buildings shall
automatically revert to an R-1 zoning classification.
Article IX. Office District O-1
§ 374-28. Purpose.
The purpose of the O-1 District is to provide for the demand for suburban business and professional
offices, including the supporting facilities that such offices may require, and to meet the needs of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 273/339
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(i)
(1)
B.
resident population for convenience in obtaining professional services.
§ 374-29. Permitted and conditional uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses:
Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any of the conditional
uses authorized in the District.
Essential services.
Conditional uses:
Professional and business offices and business services, subject to the following express
standards and criteria:
The site shall have direct access to a street classified as arterial or collector.
Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure safety and
accommodate peak demands without hazard or delay.
All lighting shall be shielded away from the street and adjacent lots.
All materials and equipment shall be stored in a completely enclosed structure or shall
otherwise be screened by a six-foot hedge or fence.
No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 500 feet of residential use or zoning
classification between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Medical offices and clinics and similar offices with frequent turnover of clients shall
provide, in addition to the required one parking space per 300 square feet of floor area,
an additional six parking spaces per professional staff.
Adequate parking shall be provided for the proposed use so that overflow parking on
Borough streets shall not be permitted.
Buildings which are not initially designed to house medical offices or clinics shall indicate
compliance with the additional parking requirements for such uses prior to obtaining
approval for a change in occupancy which includes such uses.
The maximum height of building required by § 374-82 may be increased by Borough
Council to no more than seven stories and 90 feet, subject to:
Yards adjoining residential development or zoning classification shall be increased
one foot for every one foot of building height in excess of 50 feet.
Yards adjoining nonresidential development or zoning classification shall be
increased by one foot for every two feet of building height in excess of 35 feet.
Borough Council shall determine whether differences in elevation between the site
proposed for development and the adjacent properties are such that the increase in
height of the proposed office building may negatively impact existing or future
development of adjacent properties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 274/339
[4]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
At least one side of the site proposed for construction of an office building which is to
exceed three stories in height shall adjoin a nonresidential zoning classification.
Branch banks, employee dining facilities, pharmacies and other supporting commercial
facilities, subject to the requirements of § 374-30 and the following express standards and
criteria:
Borough Council shall determine that the proposed supporting facilities are directly
related to the principal use of the office building.
The proposed supporting facilities shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
of building.
Except for employee dining facilities, all supporting facilities shall be located on the street
level or ground level of the building.
Employee dining facilities such as automats, cafeterias, snack shops or lunch rooms
which are only open during normal business hours of the principal use and which do not
serve the public, except as guests of employees, may be located on any floor of the
building and may exceed the 5,000 square foot gross floor area limit upon approval of
Borough Council, if such increase in floor area is necessary to serve the projected
number of employees.
Pharmacies shall be limited to establishments which are related to medical professional
offices.
Branch banks shall be permitted only in office developments which contain 100,000
square feet or more of gross floor area.
Branch banks which have drive-in windows shall locate the window so as to not interfere
with efficient traffic circulation on the site and shall provide adequate standing lanes
which shall not be counted in determining the parking area required for the authorized
uses.
Any outdoor dispensing facility, including but not limited to such facilities as banking
machines, whether freestanding or included in the principal building, shall be required to
provide at least four parking spaces in addition to those required for the principal and
accessory uses on the site which shall be located within 50 feet of the dispensing facility
and which shall not interfere with the safe and efficient pedestrian and traffic circulation
on the site.
Parking shall be provided for the supporting facilities based on the ratio required in § 374-
88 for retail businesses. No parking shall be required for employee dining facilities which
are restricted to employees and their guests.
§ 374-30. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Minimum site area: two acres.
Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
Minimum front yard:
From property line: 50 feet
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 275/339
(2)
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
From centerline of street: 75 feet.
Minimum rear yard:
Adjoining residential use or development: 50 feet
All others: 35 feet.
Minimum side yard:
Adjoining residential use or development: 50 feet.
All others: 35 feet.
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
Buffer area. A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines
which adjoin single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The
buffer area shall be at least six feet in depth as measured from the property line.
§ 374-31. Loading area.
In this district, a loading and access area shall be provided to the rear or side of all commercial
buildings. This area shall be sufficiently large so that any vehicle, while servicing such commercial
building, shall not protrude into any street or sidewalk and this area, in all cases, shall be at least 20
feet in depth. The purpose of this area shall be to provide rear or side access to the building for fire
and police protection and for the loading and unloading of merchandise, and to protect such property
and the occupants thereof.
§ 374-32. Application for conditional use.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 374-118 of this chapter.
Article X. Commercial District C-1
§ 374-33. Permitted uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
A use permitted in Residence District R-1.
Professional offices.
Essential services.
Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the above permitted
uses and not seriously detrimental to the neighborhood.
§ 374-34. Lot, yard and open space requirements.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 276/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
In this district, the minimum dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces and the area of lots
required per building thereon shall be as follows:
There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet at any point from the property line.
On each lot, there shall be two side yards totaling not less than 15 feet and neither yard being less
than five feet. In the case of a corner lot, the required front yard shall conform to the established
building line on the street or 35 feet, whichever is greater, and there shall be no rear yard required.
Where land extends through in the rear to another street, there shall be a rear yard equal in depth
to that required for the front yard on the opposite side of such street, but not less than 35 feet.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines which adjoin
single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The buffer area
shall be at least six feet in depth as measured from the property line.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet at any point.
The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be 35%.
§ 374-35. Site plan approval required for other than single-family
dwellings.
All authorized uses other than single-family dwellings in this district shall be subject to the application
requirements and approval procedures for the site plan approval specified in § 374-71 of this chapter.
Article XI. Commercial District C-2
§ 374-36. Permitted and conditional uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses. The following listed uses shall be permitted when conducted in an enclosed
building and subject to compliance with the performance standards specified in § 374-56 of this
chapter.
Commercial establishments such as shops or stores for sale of baked goods, books,
beverages, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs, gifts, hardware, dairy products,
jewelry and its repair, notions, periodicals, footwear, stationery, sundry small household
articles, tobacco, or wearing apparel.
Professional offices.
Banks or other financial institutions.
Sales or brokerage offices.
Picture, art or professional studios.
Barbershops, beauty salons, hairdressing salons.
Mortuary, funeral homes, undertaking establishment or cemetery.
Duly licensed private school, nursery school or day-care center.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 277/339
(9)
(10)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[a]
[4]
(c)
(1)
B.
Restaurant.
Essential services.
Conditional uses.
The following conditional uses shall be permitted by Borough Council in accordance with the
provisions of § 374-118 of this chapter and the following express standards and criteria:
Car washes, subject to:
The minimum site area shall be 10,000 square feet.
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street as defined by this
chapter.
All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall be screened
by a buffer area as defined by this chapter which shall be at least six feet in depth
measured from the property line.
Gasoline pumps for servicing cars may be located on the property. Gasoline pumps
when installed shall not be within 15 feet of any street line. Canopies over gasoline
pumps shall be subject to the provisions of § 374-59 of this chapter.
No car repair work and no car lubrication shall be performed on the property.
All car washing shall be performed within an enclosed building.
In addition to all other required parking areas, sufficient paved automobile storage
area shall be provided so that at anticipated peak business hours automobiles
waiting to be washed shall not overflow onto adjacent properties, streets or berms.
Drainage water from the washing operation shall be controlled so as not to become
a nuisance or hazard to persons using adjoining properties, and so that water does
not drain onto berms and roadways.
Veterinary offices and clinics, subject to:
The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
Such uses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line adjoining
residential use or zoning classification and at least 50 feet from any other property
line.
Outdoor runs and similar facilities shall be constructed for easy cleaning, shall be
adequately secured by a fence with self-latching gate and shall be screened by a
buffer area as defined by this chapter which is at least three feet in depth.
Nursing homes, subject to the following express standards and criteria:
The minimum site size required shall be two acres.
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street, as defined by this
chapter.
The facility shall be licensed by the commonwealth.
The minimum yard requirements shall be:
Any yard adjoining single-family use or zoning classification: 50 feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 278/339
[b]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[15]
[1]
(d)
All other yards: As required by C-2 District.
All other area and bulk regulations shall be as required by the C-2 District.
Buildings shall have a capacity of not less than 20 beds nor more than 200 beds.
Nursing homes shall not be considered to be dwelling units and shall not be
governed by the density requirements of the district in which they are located.
Nursing homes may include service facilities such as beauty shops, barbershops,
pharmacies, professional offices, banking facilities and guest rooms for visitors,
provided that such supporting facilities shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area of
the ground floor or first floor of the building.
All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall be screened
by a buffer area, as defined by this chapter, which is at least six feet in depth as
measured from the property line.
Traffic circulation on the site shall be designed to ensure safety, minimize congestion
and provide adequate access for emergency vehicles.
Outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent streets and
properties.
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the ratio of one parking space for each
three beds.
The maximum height of a nursing home building shall be three stories and no more
than 35 feet.
One off-street loading space which is at least 20 feet in depth shall be provided at
the rear or the side of the building for the purpose of loading and unloading
merchandise. The off-street loading space shall be located so that it does not
interfere with the use of the required parking spaces and does not obstruct the free
flow of traffic on the site.
Multifamily dwellings may be constructed on the same site with a nursing home,
provided that all of the following requirements are met:
The dwelling units shall be designed for and occupied exclusively as housing for
the elderly, as defined by this chapter.
Residents of the housing for the elderly shall be eligible to participate in the
services provided by the nursing home facility.
The dwelling unit density shall not exceed 18 units per acre.
All other area and bulk regulations shall be the same as required in Article VI of
this chapter governing low-rise multifamily development in the R-3 District.
In addition to the parking required for the nursing home, parking for the housing
for the elderly shall be provided based on the ratio for multifamily dwellings,
unless the housing for the elderly meets the definition of independent assisted
living in which case the parking required may be reduced to 0.5 spaces per
dwelling unit plus one space for each staff on peak shift.
Independent assisted living, as defined herein, subject to:
The dwelling unit density shall not exceed 18 units per acre.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 279/339
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(e)
(2)
(3)
A.
Parking shall be provided at the rate of 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit plus one parking
space for each staff on peak shift.
Common open space shall be provided on the site to accommodate the leisure and
recreational needs of the residents. These areas shall be adequately buffered from
any commercial uses on adjoining properties.
The facility shall be designed to maximize accessibility by fire-fighting and
emergency vehicles.
The facility shall be designed to provide a protected off-street area for dropping off
and picking up residents.
All buildings which house 100 or more residents shall provide loading facilities in
accordance with § 374-38 of this chapter.
Personal care boarding home, as defined herein, subject to:
Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the sponsoring
agency.
Evidence of certification or licensing by the sponsoring agency shall be provided.
Suspension or revocation of the certification or license shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall result in revocation of the occupancy permit and possible
enforcement of the penalty provisions of this chapter.
The facility shall be designed to maximize accessibility by fire-fighting and
emergency vehicles.
Common areas shall be provided to accommodate the leisure and recreational
needs of the residents. Outdoor areas, if proposed, shall be adequately buffered
from any commercial uses on adjoining properties.
For each acre of land area on the site, the maximum number of residents shall be
25.
All buildings which house 100 or more residents shall provide loading facilities in
accordance with § 374-38 of this chapter.
Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space for each three
residents.
Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the above permitted
uses and not seriously detrimental to the neighborhood.
In this district, no business of any kind may be conducted from any sidewalk or street abutting
said property.
§ 374-37. Lot, yard and open space requirements.
In this district, the minimum dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces and the area of lot
required per building thereon shall be as follows:
There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet at any point from the property line and not less
than 60 feet at any point from the center line of streets or roads.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 280/339
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
A.
On each lot, there shall be two side yards totaling not less than 15 feet and neither yard being less
than five feet. In the case of a corner lot, the required front yard shall conform to the established
building line on the street or 35 feet, whichever is greater and there shall be no rear yard required.
Where land extends through in the rear to another street, there shall be a rear yard equal in depth
to that required for the front yard on the opposite side of such street, but not less than 35 feet.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines which adjoin
single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The buffer area
shall be at least six feet in depth as measured from the property line.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet at any point.
The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be 35%.
§ 374-38. Loading area.
In this district, a loading and access area shall be provided to the rear or side of all commercial
buildings. This area shall be sufficiently large so that any vehicle, while servicing such commercial
building, shall not protrude out into any street or sidewalk and this area, in all cases, shall be at least
20 feet in depth. The purpose of this area, inter alia, shall be to grant rear access to the building for fire
and police protection and for the loading and unloading of merchandise, and to protect such property
and the occupants thereof.
§ 374-39. Site plan approval required.
All authorized uses in this district shall be subject to the application requirements and approval
procedures for site plan approval specified in § 374-71 of this chapter.
Article XII. Commercial District C-3
§ 374-40. Permitted and conditional uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses.
The following listed uses shall be permitted when conducted in an enclosed building and
subject to compliance with the performance standards specified in § 374-56 of this chapter:
Any use permitted in a Commercial C-2 District.
Business offices.
Laundry and cleaning establishments.
Self-service laundry and/or cleaning, tailoring, dressmaking, and shoe repair shops.
Bowling alleys.
Vehicle sales agency, as defined by this chapter.
Public community garages, as defined by this chapter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 281/339
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Furniture store.
Household appliance store.
Telephone, telegraph or other public utility.
Indoor theater.
Gasoline service station, as defined by this chapter.
Health clubs, where the principal use is a gymnasium, swimming pool or other sports
facility and which may offer physical therapy, whirlpool baths, steam rooms, saunas
and/or medical facilities as accessory uses to the principal use.
[Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 868]
Essential services.
The following conditional uses shall be permitted by Borough Council in accordance with the
provisions of § 374-118 of this chapter and the following express standards and criteria:
Hotels and motels, subject to:
The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road as defined by this
chapter.
Ingress, egress and internal circulation shall be designed to ensure safety and access by
emergency vehicles and to accommodate peak traffic without hazard or delay.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with § 374-88 of this chapter.
Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the above permitted
uses and not seriously detrimental to the neighborhood.
In this district, no business of any kind may be conducted from any sidewalk or street abutting said
property.
§ 374-41. Lot, yard and open space requirements.
In this district, the minimum dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces and the area of lot
required per building thereon shall be as follows:
There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet at any point from the property line and not less
than 60 feet at any point from the center line of streets or roads.
There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
Where land extends through in the rear to another street, there shall be a rear yard equal in depth
to that required for the front yard on the opposite side of such street, but not less than 35 feet.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines which adjoin
single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The buffer area
shall be at least six feet in depth as measured from the property line.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet at any point.
The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be 35%.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 282/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
(f)
(1)
A.
§ 374-42. Loading area.
In this district, a loading and access area shall be provided to the rear or side of all commercial
buildings. This area shall be sufficiently large so that any vehicle, while servicing such commercial
building, shall not protrude out into any street or sidewalk and this area, in all cases, shall be at least
20 feet in depth. The purposes of this area, inter alia, shall be to grant rear or side access to the
building for fire and police protection and for the loading and unloading of merchandise, and to protect
such property and the occupants thereof.
§ 374-43. Signalized intersections required on Route 51.
In order to reduce traffic hazards, where physically feasible, access to commercial lots on PA Route 51
shall be limited to signalized intersections. In the event that several properties share access to the
signalized intersection, by way of private driveways, rather than a public street, evidence shall be
provided to the Borough of an easement and/or other acceptable agreement among the parties. In the
event that shared access to a signalized intersection is not physically feasible or practical, the edge of
any driveway which intersects with PA Route 51 shall be located at least 200 feet from the edge of any
other driveway on the same side of the street which intersects with PA Route 51. Lots which cannot
meet the requirement for minimum distances between driveways because of lack of sufficient road
frontage shall locate any driveway at the maximum practical distance from any other driveway on the
same side of the street.
§ 374-44. Site plan approval required.
All authorized uses in this district shall be subject to the application requirements and approval
procedures for site plan approval specified in § 374-71 of this chapter.
Article XIII. Commercial District C-4
§ 374-45. Permitted and conditional uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other:
Permitted uses.
Any of the uses listed below when conducted in an enclosed building and not obnoxious
outside the building by reason of dust, odor, noise or visual impact:
Any use permitted in the C-3 Commercial District.
Drive-in theater.
Roller skating or ice skating rink.
Commercially operated swimming pools.
Stadiums, athletic fields.
Racquet clubs.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(g), regarding health clubs, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 868.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 283/339
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(i)
(1)
(a)
(2)
B.
Essential services.
Conditional uses.
Nightclubs, subject to the requirements of § 374-46 and the following express standards and
criteria:
The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road as defined by this
chapter.
Nightclub and restaurant operations shall cease between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. prevailing time and the establishment shall not be open to the public during those
hours.
All operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building and doors and windows
shall remain closed during hours of normal operation.
Noise in excess of 90 decibels as measured on a decibel or sound level meter of
standard quality and design operated on the A-weighting scale at a distance of 25 feet
from any property line of the property on which the noise source is located shall not be
permitted.
Nightclubs shall be located at least 200 feet from property in a residential zoning
classification.
No nightclub shall be located within 500 feet of another nightclub as measured from
property line to property line.
The owner and/or operator shall provide private security, licensed under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, if warranted during events which attract maximum
permitted occupancy.
Parking areas adjoining single-family zoning or use shall be screened by a buffer area at
least six feet in depth planted with coniferous material at least six feet in height.
Where several uses exist on the same lot which have different hours of normal operation,
Borough Council may authorize shared parking facilities between the nightclub and other
uses on the same lot, provided that:
Not more than 50% of the total number of spaces required for the nightclub by this
chapter may be shared with other uses on the lot.
The total number of spaces available shall not be less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use for which normal operations coincide.
Shared spaces shall not be located on property other than the site of the principal
building in which the nightclub is located.
A written agreement between the parties concerned which is in a form acceptable to
the Borough Solicitor shall be submitted with the application for a building permit for
the nightclub.
Adult businesses subject to §§ 374-46, 374-47, 374-48, 374-49, 374-50 and 374-51 of this
chapter and the following expressed standards and criteria:
An adult business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a church; public or private
preelementary, elementary or secondary school; public library; day-care center or nursery
school; or public park adjacent to any Residential District measured in a straight line from
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 284/339
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(e)
the nearest portion of the building or structure containing the adult business to the
nearest property line of the premises of any of the above listed uses.
An adult business shall not be located within 5,000 feet of any other adult business
measured in a straight line from the closest exterior wall of the building or structure in
which each adult business is located.
No more than one adult business shall be located in the same building, structure or
portion thereof, nor shall any adult business increase its floor area into any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another adult business.
An adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use shall not be rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the adult
business permit, of a church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school, public library, day-care center or nursery school or public park within 1,000 feet.
This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and shall not apply when an
application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
Any adult business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room (a separate compartment or cubicle) of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, a film or video cassette or other video or image production or reproduction which
depicts nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein, shall comply with the following:
At least one employee shall be on duty and shall be situated in each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms
shall not contain video reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has two or
more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one
of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line
of sight from the manager’s station.
It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and any agents and employees
present on the premises to ensure that the viewing area remains unobstructed by
any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated in the application submitted to the Borough as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted.
No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one person at any time. No
connections or openings to an adjoining viewing room shall be permitted.
The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place in which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of
not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the
owners and operators and any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination is maintained at all times that any patron is present on
the premises.
If live performances are to be given, the premises in which such live performances
are to be offered shall contain a stage separated from the viewing area and the
viewing area shall not be accessible to the performers, nor shall the performers have
easy access to the viewers present.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 285/339
[7]
[8]
(a)
(3)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
I.
Liquor or intoxicating beverages shall not be sold on the premises for which the
permit is sought.
The applicant shall agree to renew the certificate of occupancy annually in
accordance with the requirements contained in Article XXII, Administration, of this
chapter.
Methadone treatment facility subject to § § 374-46, 374-47, 374-48, 374-49, 374-50 and 374-
51 of this chapter and the following expressed standards and criteria:
A methadone treatment facility shall not be located within 500 feet of a church; public or
private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school; public library; day-care center or
nursery school; or public park adjacent to any Residential District measured in a straight
line from the nearest portion of the building or structure containing the methadone
treatment facility to the nearest property line of the premises of any of the above listed
uses.
§ 374-46. Area and bulk regulations.
In this district, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to the uses permitted:
Minimum lot area:
Uses permitted in the C-3 District: None required.
All other uses: one acre.
Minimum lot width:
Uses permitted in the C-3 District: None required.
All other uses: 100 feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
Minimum front yard:
From property line: 35 feet.
From centerline of street: 60 feet.
Minimum rear yard:
Abutting a street: 35 feet.
All others: 25 feet.
Minimum side yard:
Corner lot: 35 feet (street side).
All others: 10 feet.
Maximum height of building: See § 374-82.
Parking requirements: See § 374-88.
Buffer area. A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines
which adjoin single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 286/339
(1)
A.
buffer area shall be at least six feet in depth as measured from the property line.
§ 374-47. Loading area.
In this district, a loading and access area shall be provided to the rear or side of all commercial
buildings. This area shall be sufficiently large so that any vehicle, while servicing such commercial
building, shall not protrude into any street or sidewalk and this area, in all cases, shall be at least 20
feet in depth. The purpose of this area, inter alia, shall be to grant rear or side access to the building
for fire and police protection and for the loading and unloading of merchandise, and to protect such
property and the occupants thereof.
§ 374-48. Application for conditional use.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 374-118 of this chapter.
§ 374-49. Site plan approval required.
All authorized uses in this district shall be subject to the application requirements and approval
procedures for site plan approval specified in § 374-71 of this chapter.
§ 374-50. Performance standards to be adhered to.
All uses in this district are subject to the performance standards specified in § 374-56 of this chapter.
§ 374-51. Signalized intersections required on Route 51.
In order to reduce traffic hazards, where physically feasible, access to commercial lots on PA Route 51
shall be limited to signalized intersections. In the event that several properties share access to the
signalized intersection, by way of private driveways, rather than a public street, evidence shall be
provided to the Borough of an easement and/or other acceptable agreement among the parties. In the
event that shared access to a signalized intersection is not physically feasible or practical, the edge of
any driveway which intersects with PA Route 51 shall be located at least 200 feet from the edge of any
other driveway on the same side of the street which intersects with PA Route 51. Lots which cannot
meet the requirement for minimum distances between driveways because of lack of sufficient road
frontage shall locate any driveway at the maximum practical distance from any other driveway on the
same side of the street.
Article XIV. Manufacturing District M-1
§ 374-52. Permitted uses.
In this district, the land may be used and buildings and structures may be erected, altered or used for
the following purposes and no other subject to compliance with the performance standards specified in
§ 374-56 of this chapter:
The following listed uses shall be permitted when conducted in an enclosed building:
Offices, banks and financial institutions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 287/339
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(16)
Sales or brokerage offices.
Vehicle sales or rental.
Warehousing.
Cold storage or locker storage.
Distribution plants.
Freight or truck terminals.
Lumber and building materials storage and sales.
Contractor’s equipment plant or storage yard.
Machine and repair shops.
Plumbing, heating and electrical contracting.
Printing shops.
Repair garages, as defined by this chapter.
Research or testing laboratories.
Welding and electrical repair shops.
Light manufacturing, limited to the following products and processes:
Appliances.
Electrical equipment.
Food products, excluding processes involving the rendering of fats and oils or the
slaughtering of animals.
Machinery.
Mechanical instruments.
Metal finishing.
Optical equipment.
Perfumes and cosmetics.
Pharmaceuticals.
Plastics.
Pottery and ceramics.
Precision instruments.
Precious or semiprecious stones.
Signs and lighting.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 288/339
(o)
(p)
(q)
(17)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(18)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Textiles.
Toys and novelties.
Watches and clocks.
Essential services.
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the principal uses authorized in this
district, including, but not limited to:
Storage, when completely within an enclosed structure or screened on all sides by a sixfoot-
high compact hedge or screening fence.
Administrative offices.
Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees.
On-site retail sales of products authorized in this district as permitted principal uses,
provided that sales shall be conducted within an enclosed building and no more than
15% of the total floor area of all buildings on the site shall be devoted to retail sales.
§ 374-53. Site plan approval required.
All authorized uses in this district shall be subject to the application requirements and approval
procedures for site plan approval specified in § 374-71 of this chapter.
§ 374-54. Lot, yard and open space requirements.
In this district, the minimum dimensions of lots, yards, and other open spaces and the area of lot
required per building thereon shall be as follows:
There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet at any point from the property line and not less
than 60 feet at any point from the center line of streets or roads.
There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
Where land extends through in the rear to another street, there shall be a rear yard equal in depth
to that required for the front yard on the opposite side of such street, but not less than 35 feet.
A buffer area, as defined by this chapter, shall be provided along all property lines which adjoin
single-family development or single-family or civic district zoning classification. The buffer area
shall be at least 15 feet in depth as measured from the property line.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet at any point.
The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be 35%.
§ 374-55. Loading area.
In this district, a loading and access area shall be provided to the rear or side of all commercial
buildings. This area shall be sufficiently large so that any vehicle, while servicing such commercial
building, shall not protrude out into any street or sidewalk and this area, in all cases, shall be at least
20 feet in depth. The purposes of this area, inter alia, shall be to grant rear or side access to the
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 289/339
building for fire and police protection and for the loading and unloading of merchandise and to protect
such property and the occupants thereof.
Article XIVA. Airport District Overlay
[Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 953]
§ 374-55.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create an airport district overlay that considers safety issues around the
Allegheny County Airport, regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures and objects of
natural growth, creates appropriate zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for
changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones, creates the permitting process for use within
said zones and provides for enforcement, assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and
judicial review.
§ 374-55.2. Relation to other zoning districts.
The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any underlying zoning district. Where
identified, the Airport District Overlay shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction
in addition to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
§ 374-55.3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIRPORT ELEVATION
The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above sea level. The airport
elevation of the Allegheny County Airport is 1,250 feet above mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD
Any structure or object, natural or manmade, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required
for flight or aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14
CFR Part 77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA
Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as
provided for in this article and Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania laws relating to aviation).[1]
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and extending
outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each
end of the runway based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach surface is the
same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach.
The approach surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[2] is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface
at a slope of 20 feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The
conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[3] is based on the conical surface.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 290/339
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA
The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT
For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on
the Zoning Map,[4] the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation that is constructed by
swinging arcs of various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then
connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the planned
approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[5] is derived from the horizontal
surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY
A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater
than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE
Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this article or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY
A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with
only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision
instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION
Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height
set forth by this article.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY
A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of
paved runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line. The primary
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[6] is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY
A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE
An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission
lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface that extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to
the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically (7:1). The
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 291/339
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[7] is derived from the transitional surface.
TREE
Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY
A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY
A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 374-55.4. Establishment of airport zones.
There are hereby created and established certain zones within this Airport District Overlay article,
defined in § 374-55.3 and depicted on Figure 1 and illustrated on The Allegheny County Airport (AGC)
Airspace Plan (Drawing 6 of 14 of the AGC Airport Master Plan, as amended), Figure(s) 2 (and 3),[1] all
hereby adopted as part of this article, which include:
Approach Surface Zone.
Conical Surface Zone.
Horizontal Surface Zone.
Primary Surface Zone.
Transitional Surface Zone.
Editor's Note: Figures 1, 2 and 3 and Drawing 6 of 14 of the AGC Airport Master Plan are on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 374-55.5. Permit applications.
As regulated by Act 164[1] and defined by 14 CFR 77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person
who plans to erect a new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain any
object (natural or manmade) in the vicinity of the airport shall first notify the Department's Bureau
of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the
proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The Department's BOA response must
be included with this permit application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's BOA
returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered in
compliance with the intent of this Overlay article. If the Department's BOA returns a determination
of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a
variance from such regulations as outlined in § 374-55.6.
Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures
which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 292/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
No notice or review under this section is required for any of the following construction or
alterations:
Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a permanent and substantial
character or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater height and would be
located in the congested area of a city, town, or settlement where it is evident beyond all
reasonable doubt that the structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air
navigation.
Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height except one that would increase the height of
another antenna structure.
Any air navigation facility, airport visual approach or landing aid, aircraft-arresting device, or
meteorological device, of a type approved by the Administrator, or an appropriate military
service on military airports, the location and height of which is fixed by functional purpose.
Any construction or alteration for which notice is required by any other FAA regulation.
§ 374-55.6. Variances.
Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance with 14 CFR 77, Subpart B
(FAA Form 7460-1 as amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will
depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace. In particular, the request for a variance shall consider in which of the following categories
the FAA has placed the proposed construction:
No objection. The subject construction is determined to not exceed obstruction standards,
and marking/lighting is not required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a
variance shall be granted.
Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to create some
level of encroachment into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under
this determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon implementation of mitigating
measures as described in § 374-55.9, Obstruction marking and lighting.
Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to be a hazard and is thus
objectionable. A variance shall be denied, and the reasons for this determination shall be
outlined to the applicant.
Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not
be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial
justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this article.
§ 374-55.7. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use shall be made of land or water within the
Airport District Overlay in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
Allegheny County Airport.
§ 374-55.8. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 293/339
A.
B.
The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date of this article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. No
nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to grow higher, so as to increase the
nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once substantially abated (subject to the underlying Zoning
Ordinance), may only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
§ 374-55.9. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this article may be conditioned according
to the process described in § 374-55.6 to require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth
in question to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person requesting the permit
or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure
both ground and air safety.
§ 374-55.10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article are subject to the penalties defined in the existing Code or ordinances of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills, as may be amended, and as are defined in Article XXIV of this Chapter 374.
§ 374-55.11. Appeals.
Appeals are subject to the process defined in the existing Code, as may be amended, including the
process defined in Article XXI, § 374-107, of this chapter.
§ 374-55.12. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and
any other regulation applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.
Article XV. Supplementary Regulations
§ 374-56. Performance standards.
The following performance standards shall apply to all uses authorized in the C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1
Districts and to all those other uses where the standards specifically reference this section. As part of
an application for zoning approval, the applicant may be required to provide qualified expert testimony
regarding compliance with these performance standards. The cost of services for qualified expert
consultants shall be paid by the applicant.
Fire hazards and protection. Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive
materials shall be protected by adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment acceptable
to the Board of Fire Underwriters and shall be readily available when any activity involving the
handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
Radioactivity or electrical disturbances. No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point,
or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than
that of the creator of such disturbance.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 294/339
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume or frequency shall be
muffled or otherwise controlled, except for fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
safety purposes. Noise in excess of 90 decibels as measured on a decibel or sound level meter of
standard quality and design operated on the A-weighting scale at a distance of 25 feet from any
property line of the property on which the noise source is located shall not be permitted.
Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on any adjoining
lot or property, except that the temporary vibration as a result of construction activity shall be
permitted.
Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emission permitted shall be determined by use of the
Standard Ringelmann Chart issued by the United States Bureau of Mines. No smoke of a shade
darker than No. 2 will be allowed.
Odors. In any district, no malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible on any
adjoining lot or property.
Air pollution. No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors, or other substances shall be permitted
which is harmful to health, or to animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling of
property.
Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining
properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will carry objectionable substances
onto neighboring properties.
Water pollution. The method for discharging liquid and solid waste to public sewers, drains, or
watercourses, shall be acceptable under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
Act 537 of 1967, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, and all applicable
Borough ordinances.
§ 374-57. Pornography.
The Borough Council of Pleasant Hills has determined that the storage, sale and/or distribution of
pornography and pornographic materials is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Pleasant Hills and to that end hereby prohibits the storage, sale and/or
distribution of pornography or pornographic materials from any building in any zoning district in the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
As the members of the Borough Council of Pleasant Hills are residents of the Borough of Pleasant
Hills, all members of the Borough Council of Pleasant Hills are designated as the representative
group who shall determine whether any material is pornographic so that its storage, sale and/or
distribution is prohibited within the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The Borough Council shall afford a
public hearing, after due notice, to any person storing, selling and/or distributing any alleged
pornographic materials. After the public hearing has been concluded, a vote shall be taken of all
members of Borough Council present at such hearing and the affirmative vote of at least 3/4 of
such members voting shall be required in order to classify any material as pornographic. Upon
such determination that any material is pornographic, the same shall not be stored, sold and/or
distributed from any building within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
In determining whether any material is pornographic, the members of the Pleasant Hills Borough
Council shall apply such standards, guidelines, decisions and laws that may, from time to time, be
established by the Supreme Court of the United States, the Supreme and Superior Courts of
Pennsylvania and the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 295/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
P.
§ 374-58. Home occupations.
In any district where home occupations are authorized as permitted uses, the use shall comply with the
following standards:
There shall be no sign or other exterior evidence of the use.
No person other than residents of the dwelling shall be employed.
No more than 15% of the floor area of the dwelling shall be devoted to the conduct of a home
occupation.
A home occupation shall not be permitted to be conducted in any accessory structure.
The use shall not create any additional environmental impact than those impacts normally
resulting from residential use.
The use shall comply with the performance standards specified in § 374-56 of this chapter.
The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewerage, garbage, public safety or any
other municipal services beyond that which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
The use shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features which are not
customary to a dwelling or which change the fire rating of the structure.
There shall be no use of materials or equipment except those of similar power and type normally
used in a residential dwelling for domestic or household purposes.
There shall be no storage of materials or equipment outside an enclosed building.
The conduct of any home occupation, including, but not limited to, the storage of goods or
equipment, shall not reduce or render unusable any area intended for enclosed parking for the
dwelling unit.
The use shall not create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than that which is normal for the
residences in the neighborhood.
The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to
or from the premises and commercial vehicles shall not be parked on the premises.
There shall be no display of merchandise, other than handcrafted items produced by residents of
the dwelling, available for sale on the premises.
The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs on or off the premises or the
use of any other local advertising media which shall call attention to the fact that the home is being
used for business purposes, other than a telephone listing or small classified ad briefly describing
the service and providing only a phone number.
The following uses shall not be considered to be home occupations and shall be restricted to the
zoning districts in which they are specifically authorized as permitted uses or conditional uses:
Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics.
Auto body repair shops.
Beauty shops and barbershops.
Clinics, hospitals, nursing homes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 296/339
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
[1]
(11)
A.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Kennels, stables or animal holding areas.
Mortuaries.
Private clubs.
Restaurants or tea rooms.
Tourist or transient guest house.
Vehicle or equipment rental or sales.
Food preparation and/or processing for public use as defined by and restricted by the
Allegheny County Health Department Regulations, as may be amended.
[Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 900[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it applies only to food preparation for public
consumption and food offered for sale to the public. It is not intended to restrict bake sales or
other such charitable activities, but is intended to insure compliance with the Allegheny
County Health Department Regulations and to define food preparation/processing as one of
the home occupations prohibited in residential areas unless the kitchen satisfies the
Allegheny County Health Department Regulations.
§ 374-59. Canopies over gasoline pumps.
Canopies may be erected over gasoline pumps, provided that the canopy is not attached to the
principal structure and that no portion of the canopy is closer than 10 feet to any property line or street
right-of-way line. Canopies shall not be enclosed, unless they comply with all the requirements of the
district in which they are located for principal or accessory structures.
Article XVI. Signs
§ 374-60. Definitions; restrictions.
For the purposes of this article, the definitions of SIGN, AREA OF SIGN, ILLUMINATED SIGN,
NONCONFORMING SIGN, BANNER SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, OVERHANGING
SIGN, ROOF SIGN, WALL SIGN and GROUND OR POLE SIGN shall form a part of this article.
In all Zoning Districts, the following signs are expressly prohibited:
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), "A-frame" or sandwich board signs, was repealed 5-
20-2013 by Ord. No. 957.
Banners and pennants, except as temporary special event signs as authorized in § 374-
62B(2) below.
Flashing, mobile, oscillating or animated.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 852]
Portable and wheeled signs.
Overhanging signs.
Signs on a fence, roof or retaining wall.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 297/339
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
B.
Signs on trees.
Signs which imitate traffic control devices.
Signs on parked vehicles. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are
parked on a public right-of-way, public property or private property, other than temporarily for
overnight storage on the site of the business or maintenance, repair, loading, unloading or
rendering of service at any location, so as to be visible from the public right-of-way, where the
primary apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property.
Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or identifies a use conducted on
the property on which said sign is erected must have the sign copy covered or removed within
30 days after written notification from the Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer. The
material covering the sign copy is subject to approval by the Zoning Officer. Upon failure to
comply with such notice, the Borough is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign
copy, and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure
or ground on which the sign is located. The failure to pay the expenses within 30 days shall
result in a lien on the property.
[Added 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 847]
§ 374-61. Permitted signs in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1 and P-1
Districts.
In areas designated as R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residence Districts; C-1 Commercial Districts; and
P-1 Civic Districts, signs may be used for the following purposes and under the following
restrictions. Uses for any other purpose or uses which are not in conformity with these restrictions
are prohibited.
Permitted uses.
Signs advertising sale or rental of premises. An unlighted sign advertising the proposed sale
or rental of the premises on which it is installed may be installed and maintained by the
owner, the agent or any other person, firm or corporation interested in the sale or rental of
such premises, provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed six square feet.
Signs advertising development of subdivision on the premises. Unlighted signs advertising the
development of the premises on which they are installed may be installed and maintained by
the owner, the developer, the builder, the agent, or any other person, firm or corporation
connected with such development, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
20 square feet unless the property advertised for sale or development contains at least five
separate building lots, in which case the area of any such sign shall not exceed 60 square
feet.
Institutional signs. Lighted or unlighted signs of churches, schools, colleges, hospitals and
other institutions of a similar nature and of public utilities, relating exclusively to the identity,
activities and services of such institutions or public utilities, may be installed and maintained
on their own premises, provided that the size of any such signs shall not exceed 30 square
feet.
Nameplates.
A lighted or unlighted nameplate designating the name of the owner of a private, singlefamily
detached dwelling may be installed and maintained on the premises, provided that
its size shall not exceed one square foot.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 298/339
(b)
(c)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A lighted or unlighted nameplate designating the name of the development for a
multifamily dwelling development in the R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts. No more than one
such sign shall be installed and said sign shall not exceed 30 square feet.
In Commercial District C-1, a lighted or unlighted nameplate designating the name or
names of the professional occupants may be erected, provided that such sign does not
exceed 10 square feet in area.
Temporary signs. Unlighted signs of mechanics, painters and other artisans may be erected
and maintained during the period such persons are performing work not prohibited by this
chapter on the premises on which such signs are erected, provided that the size of any such
signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and that such signs shall be removed immediately upon
completion of the work.
§ 374-62. Permitted signs in O-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1 Districts.
In areas designated as O-1 Office Districts; C-2, C-3 and C-4 Commercial Districts; and M-1
Manufacturing Districts, signs may be used for the following purposes and under the following
restrictions. Uses for any other purposes or uses which are not in conformity with these
restrictions are prohibited.
Permitted uses.
All uses permitted by and under the restrictions established in § 374-61 of this article.
Temporary special event display signs, such as banners, as defined by this chapter, may be
displayed on the premises of an establishment having a grand opening or other special event
or promotion, provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 90 days
in any twelve-month period. Portable signs and all other banner signs shall not be permitted.
No more than two temporary special event display signs per establishment shall be permitted
at any time. The temporary special event display signs shall be affixed to the building and
shall not be permitted to be freestanding. The combined maximum surface area of all
temporary special event display signs per establishment shall be 40 square feet. In addition to
the authorized temporary special event display signs, window signs, as defined by this
chapter, shall not exceed a combined surface area of 40 square feet.
One changeable copy sign shall be permitted per lot regardless of the number of buildings or
businesses on the lot. The changeable copy sign shall be permanently affixed to the wall of
the building or to the structure supporting the ground or pole sign identifying the business.
Changeable copy signs attached to the ground or pole sign shall be subject to the height and
locations requirements for ground or pole signs. The changeable copy sign shall not be
counted as one of the permitted business identification signs. The maximum surface area of
any changeable copy sign shall be 30 square feet. The characters, letters or illustrations of a
changeable copy sign shall change at intervals no less frequently than every five seconds. A
lesser change frequency may be granted by Borough Council after a review and
recommendations by the Planning Commission.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 852]
Directory signs which list the names and locations of the occupants of a building shall be
permitted to be affixed to the wall of a building or freestanding and permanently affixed to the
ground. Only one directory sign shall be permitted per lot regardless of the number of
buildings on the lot. Freestanding directory signs shall have a maximum surface area of 20
square feet and the maximum height of the top of the sign shall be six feet above the adjacent
ground level. Freestanding directory signs shall be located at least 10 feet from any property
line or street right-of-way. Directory signs which are attached to the wall of a building shall
have a maximum surface area of 10 square feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 299/339
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
Ground or pole signs located on the business premises which identify the name of the
business and the services or products offered for rent or sale on the premises shall be
permitted subject to approval by the Borough Zoning Officer in regard to their construction,
structure, material and installation.
The maximum height of a ground business identification sign shall be six feet above
adjacent ground level, provided that the location of the sign does not obstruct visibility for
traffic circulating on the site or exiting or entering the site. A ground sign shall be located
at least 10 feet from the outside edge of any curb, street, property line or existing natural
embankment, provided that it shall not be located in any street right-of-way. The
maximum surface area of a ground sign shall be 60 square feet.
The minimum height of a pole business identification sign in the C-2 District shall be six
feet and in all other districts where authorized the minimum height shall be 10 feet above
the ground at the bottom edge of the sign. The maximum height above ground level to
the top of the sign shall be 25 feet. The maximum surface area of the sign shall be 100
square feet.
A pole business identification sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the outside
edge of any curb or street, provided that it shall not be located in any street right-of-way,
and a minimum of 10 feet from any property line other than the front lot line.
Only one ground or pole business identification sign shall be permitted on a lot containing
one building regardless of the number of businesses located within the building. Only one
ground or pole business identification sign shall be permitted on a lot containing two or
more buildings; however, on lots which have frontage on one street of 350 feet or more,
the maximum permitted surface area of a ground sign may be increased to 100 square
feet and the maximum permitted surface area of a pole sign may be increased to 200
square feet, if more than one business is contained in any or all of the buildings.
A-frame or sandwich board signs with a maximum combined surface area of no more
than 40 square feet are permitted. Such signs shall only be permitted for public display
during the hours of operation during which the business they are promoting is open.
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 957]
For the purpose of this section, an "A-frame" or "sandwich board" sign is defined as
follows: a sign having two separate surfaces meeting at the top to form an "A"
supported on these surfaces in a sufficient manner to prevent the sign from
collapsing or moving from its intended location.
Such signs shall be subject to the conditions of § 374-62B(5)(a) of the Code of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills and placed in a location not to constitute a traffic hazard.
Wall signs.
Wall signs which identify the name of the business and the services or products offered
for rent or sale on the premises shall be limited to signs parallel to and directly attached
to the wall of the building projecting no more than eight inches from the wall of the
building and not extending beyond the building parapet.
When attached to the wall of a building, such signs shall be anchored to the wall of the
building with through bolts of a sufficient size to carry the weight of such signs.
Each business establishment shall be permitted to have wall signs which may be
illuminated or nonilluminated. Illuminated signs shall also comply with § 374-65.
Wall signs shall be permitted on any wall of a building except walls that face a Residential
District, which Residential District is within 100 feet of the building wall.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 300/339
(e)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The aggregate area of wall signs shall not exceed two square feet of sign for each linear
foot of building facade on which the signs are placed.
No sign in any Commercial or Industrial District shall be placed so as to obstruct the view of
vehicular traffic seeking ingress to or egress from such commercial or industrial
establishment. In granting a permit to install or place any sign, regardless of whether such
sign is placed on the ground or in the air, or is affixed to a building, the Zoning Officer shall
take into consideration whether such sign will obstruct the view of vehicular traffic and shall
direct that the placement of such sign shall not interfere with the view of vehicular traffic.
§ 374-63. Directional signs.
Signs not exceeding four square feet in surface area, which provide directions or instructions to guide
persons to facilities intended to serve the public, such as entrances, parking areas, telephones, restroom
and similar facilities, shall be permitted on any lot, provided that no advertising of any kind, other
than a corporate logo, appears on the sign. A maximum of four directional signs shall be permitted on
lots of two acres or less and a maximum of 10 directional signs shall be permitted on lots of two acres
or more. The maximum height of any directional sign shall be three feet above the adjacent ground
level. All directional signs shall be located on the same property as the principal use, provided that they
shall not be located in any street right-of-way.
§ 374-64. Billboards.
Billboards shall be permitted only in accordance with all of the following regulations:
Billboards shall not be authorized on any property located in a Residential Zoning District.
Billboards shall be permitted only within 400 feet of the center line (measured horizontally) of U.S.
Route 51 and Curry Hollow Road.
Billboards shall be freestanding, ground-mounted, single-column post supported displays which
have no structural contact with any building or other structure.
The minimum surface area of a billboard shall be 250 square feet and the maximum surface area
of a billboard shall be 750 square feet.
The maximum dimensions of a billboard shall be 20 feet in height and 60 feet in width. This
limitation on the dimensions of a billboard apply to the size of the overall structure of the billboard
and not to the surface area of the message portion of a billboard itself. Rather, the limitations set
forth in Code § 374-64D above continue to apply, and the maximum size of the message area of a
billboard remains limited to 750 square feet, regardless of the fact that the area of the overall
structure may be 20 by 60 feet or a total of 1,200 square feet.
[Amended 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 937]
Billboards shall be located so as to be no higher than 40 feet above the curb of the street from
which they are intended to be viewed. Billboards which are not at grade shall provide a minimum
clearance from the bottom of the sign to grade of 15 feet.
A billboard may have two sign faces per structure placed back to back or in a “V” shaped
configuration on a single support system.
No billboard shall be placed within 400 feet of any residentially-zoned property or any public or
private school property, park, library or church. This required distance shall be measured as a
radius, using the center of the proposed billboard as the center of the circle.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 301/339
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
D.
No billboard shall be erected on a lot which has an existing freestanding ground or pole business
identification sign on the property.
Billboards shall be located at least 10 feet from any street right of way. Billboards shall be subject
to the side yard and rear yard requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, except
where the yard adjoins residential zoning classification, the minimum yard required shall be 100
feet.
No billboard shall be erected closer than 1,000 feet to any other existing or proposed billboard on
the same side of the street or highway.
Billboards shall be nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated, provided that all lighting is shielded and
reflected away from adjacent streets and property.
§ 374-64.1. Inflatable and air-propelled signs and figures.
[Added 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 878]
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms will have the meanings indicated:
INFLATABLE AND AIR-PROPELLED SIGNS AND FIGURES
A sign or figure whose dimensions are expanded or supported by gas or air, this definition
indicates signs or figures with or without a message and placed or tethered on the ground.
The mounting of such signs or figures on structures or a roof is not permitted.
Setback requirements. No portion of any inflatable or air-propelled sign or figure shall be located
closer to any property line than a distance equal to the height of the sign or figure as measured
from ground level to the top of the sign or figure, and in no case closer than 20 feet to any public
right-of-way. This restriction includes any wires, ropes or other stabilizing mechanisms.
General regulations.
The maximum height, at the top of the sign or figure, shall not exceed 20 feet above ground
level.
The maximum diameter or per-side dimension of the sign or figure shall not exceed 12 feet.
No such device may be used which would create glare, confusion or otherwise distract motor
vehicle operators or, by its size or composition, cause a public nuisance.
Such devices shall be permitted for a total of 90 days in any calendar year, but no longer than
30 days at any one time.
The tie-downs and anchoring method for such devices must be able to withstand a threesecond
wind burst of 40 mph.
Permit process.
An application for an inflatable or air-propelled sign or figure permit shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer with a permit fee prior to the proposed time for erection of the device.
The following information shall be provided in the permit application:
Purpose of the device.
Name, address and telephone number of the organization or person proposing the
device with specific information to allow the Borough to contact the responsible person
24 hours per day.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 302/339
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
E.
Proposed time period of use of the device.
The height and diameter or width of the device.
Where on the property the device will be located, including the distance to the closest
property line.
The applicant shall agree to provide a certificate of insurance to the Borough prior to the
issuance of the permit adding the Borough as an additional insured on the applicant's
insurance policies.
Any other information the Zoning Officer deems reasonably necessary to determine that
the permit meets the requirements of this subsection.
Violations. Any property owner who violates the terms and conditions of this section will be subject
to enforcement remedies found in § 374-129 of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, as
amended. Also, the individual or business who caused the air-propelled or inflatable sign or figure
to be erected, which at the judgment of the Zoning Officer constitutes a nuisance or danger to the
public, will immediately be required to take down the sign or figure. If after notice, the individual or
business owner refuses to take down the inflatable sign or figure in question and the Zoning
Officer determines that the sign or inflatable figure obstructs traffic or the view of traffic and/or
constitutes a danger then upon the failure to remove the sign or figure the Borough may remove
the sign or figure and the individual or business responsible for the erection of the figure shall be
responsible for the cost of removal and the appropriate penalty. The costs described herein shall
be collectible in like manner as other municipal claims are now or may be collectible by law.
§ 374-65. Illuminated signs.
All signs permitted under § 374-62B(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter may be illuminated. The body of all
illuminated signs shall be constructed entirely of incombustible materials. No permit shall be issued for
a red, green or yellow illuminated sign or any combination thereof if such sign will interfere with the
effective visibility of a traffic signal. No illuminated sign shall be of the flashing type. Lighting must be
controlled so as not to be bothersome to vehicular traffic nor to unduly glare or reflect onto adjacent
property or streets. The intensity of any source of illumination of any sign, whether direct or indirect,
shall be controlled so as to be compatible with the intensity of illumination on surrounding properties.
§ 374-66. Design data required with application to install sign.
All applications to install any sign, other than a temporary special event display or window sign,
permitted under §§ 374-62, 374-63, 374-64 and 374-65 must be accompanied by complete design
data. This design data must be prepared by a registered engineer or architect, and any such signs
installed must be constructed in accordance with the design data submitted with the application.
§ 374-67. Permit required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to install, reinstall, construct, reconstruct or alter a sign, as
permitted in §§ 374-62, 374-63, 374-64 and 374-65 of this chapter, other than a temporary special
event display or window sign, must apply to the Zoning Officer for a permit before proceeding with the
work. The applicant for such permit shall furnish the Zoning Officer with all the information necessary
to enable the Zoning Officer to ascertain whether the proposed sign will comply with the provisions of
this chapter on a form prescribed by the Zoning Officer.
§ 374-68. Inspection of signs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 303/339
A.
B.
C.
All signs shall be maintained in a safe condition by the owner thereof and any such sign found to be in
an unsafe condition or not used for its intended purpose is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If
any sign is not used for its intended purpose, or, as found by the Zoning Officer, is not being
maintained in safe condition and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
shall give notice in writing to the owner of any such sign to remove the same within 10 days, and upon
failure of the owner to comply with such notice, said sign shall be removed by the Borough at the
owner’s expense. The cost and expense incurred by the Borough in effecting the removal of any sign,
as herein provided, shall be collectible from the owner in like manner as other municipal claims are
now or may hereafter be collectible by law.
§ 374-69. Traffic signs.
Notwithstanding any of the limitations contained in Article XVI it shall be permissible to erect and
maintain traffic regulation signs or traffic safety signs on any property within the Borough of Pleasant
Hills. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to limit the number, size, shape or illumination of such
signs so that they will not be hazardous or dangerous to vehicular traffic.
§ 374-70. Insurance requirements; compliance of existing signs.
This section shall apply to all roof-mounted, ground or pole and billboard signs as permitted in
Article XVI in Zoning Districts O-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1.
Liability insurance. All applicants for permits to install and maintain signs in commercial areas, as
shown above, in the Borough and the owners of all such signs now installed and maintained in the
Borough are hereby required and directed to procure a public liability insurance policy providing
complete third party coverage for the Borough with a reputable insurance company approved by
the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner. The policy shall provide coverage of not less than
$100,000 for injury to one person and not less than $300,000 for injury to more than one person,
and not less than $10,000 for damages to property against any loss, injury and damage that may
hereafter be caused, directly or indirectly, by and in the installation or maintenance of any such
sign. Such public liability insurance policy shall be continued in force for the life of the sign. A copy
of each such policy or a certificate of such insurance shall be kept in the office of the Zoning
Officer not less than 10 days prior to the renewal date. Where such renewal certificates have not
been so delivered, the Zoning Officer is directed to order the sign removed immediately.
The Zoning Officer is hereby directed to refuse to issue a permit for such sign in case of failure of
the applicant to procure the hereinabove specified insurance policy and to deliver the same or a
certificate of such insurance to the Zoning Officer. The owners of such signs now installed and
maintained shall be allowed 30 days from the date of approval of this chapter to comply with the
requirements of this section, following which thirty-day period the Zoning Officer is directed to
order removed any such sign not insured as hereinabove required. Said removal shall be effected
in accordance with the provisions of § 374-68 of this article.
Article XVII. General Use Regulations
§ 374-71. Site plan approval.
All applications for development of a new use of a building, expansion of an existing structure,
structural alteration or change of use of a building which is subject to more stringent area and bulk,
parking and loading or other provisions of this chapter in the O-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1 Districts
and all conditional uses in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts shall be subject to the following requirements
for site plan approval.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 304/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
Application. A site development plan shall be submitted which is based on a survey of the property
and which shows:
Area location map.
Existing and proposed structures.
Existing and proposed contours.
Feasibility of proposals for disposition of stormwater and sanitary waste.
Location and dimensions of yards and evidence of compliance with other zoning
requirements.
Traffic circulation on the site, ingress and egress to and from the site and layout of proposed
parking areas and loading areas.
Landscaping plan.
Dates of preparation and revision.
Evidence of preparation by an architect, landscape architect or engineer.
Approval.
The Planning Commission shall review the application at a public meeting and shall forward
written comments pertaining thereto to Borough Council. Borough Council shall act on the
application within 60 days of final action by the Planning Commission or, if the Planning
Commission fails to act, within 120 days of submission of the application.
No building permits shall be issued until after the site plan and other required elements of the
application shall have been formally approved by Borough Council.
Posting of surety.
Surety in a form acceptable to the Borough and in an amount equal to 10% of the total cost of
site improvements as determined by the Borough Engineer shall be required to be posted for
all projects in excess of $10,000. Upon satisfactory completion of the site improvements and
inspection by the Borough, surety shall be returned to the applicant.
A maintenance bond in an amount determined by the Borough shall be required for a period
of one year from the date of inspection and approval of site improvements to guarantee the
replacement of landscaping materials, if necessary.
Expiration of site plan approval. Site plan approval shall expire 12 months from the date that
Council grants the approval, unless the applicant requests an extension, in writing, from Council
prior to the expiration of site plan approval and Council is satisfied that there is reasonable cause
for the delay in initiating the approved project.
Exceptions to site plan approval may be granted by the Zoning Officer in cases of minor interior
renovations, general maintenance and repair, use and occupancy of permitted accessory uses,
provided that all such exceptions are in compliance with any and all other regulations or codes of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 374-72. Commercial use in dwellings restricted.
In order to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods within the Borough, no business,
industry, profession or commercial enterprise other than a home occupation as authorized by this
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 305/339
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
chapter shall be conducted in any dwelling in any of the R Residence Districts in the Borough.
§ 374-73. General fence requirements.
A zoning permit is required for the installation of any fence. Application for a fence permit shall
include:
A drawing and/or description of the type and style of fence to be constructed, including the
material used to construct the fence.
A survey or plot plan describing where on the lot the fence will be located.
All posts, framing members and other fence elements used in constructing and supporting fences
shall be placed on the side of the fence facing the property where the fence is installed.
No fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to obstruct the view of pedestrians or motorists
in the public right-of-way.
No fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to result in sharp points, salvage ends or
edges or any other condition that may be considered dangerous.
§ 374-74. Fence location requirements.
No fence, other than an ornamental fence, shall be constructed forward of the front building line of
any Residential District and no closer than four feet to the street pavement.
A functional fence, visual screening or ornamental fence may be constructed in the side or rear
yards in any district.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 957]
A visual screening fence not more than six feet in height may be constructed in the rear and side
yard in any residential district.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 957]
For purposes of this section, a "side yard" is defined as being measured from the front corner of
the residence or dwelling to the rear property line.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 957]
A visual screening fence not more than 10 feet in height may be constructed in the side and rear
yards of properties in the M-1 Manufacturing District.
A security fence may be constructed in the rear yard of any property in an Industrial District and
any property housing schools, parks, churches, and other recreational or other P-1 uses in
Residential Districts.
§ 374-75. Line of sight obstructions.
On any lot, in any zoning district, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected, or altered, and no
hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be maintained which may cause danger to traffic on a street
by obstructing the view of persons using such street.
§ 374-76. Compliance of fences with state and federal provisions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 306/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
Fences, as required by state and federal regulations or statute dealing with the possession or storage
of potentially hazardous materials, including but not limited to liquefied petroleum and propane gas,
shall be permitted in type and dimension to comply with, but not to exceed the minimum state or
federal regulation or statute.
§ 374-77. Noncommercial parking areas.
In any district, a noncommercial parking area may be used as an accessory use incident to the
operation of a church, a public or parochial school, a library, or any Borough or public building,
provided that such parking area shall have free access to a public street and the plans of such parking
area shall have been approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 374-78. Noncommercial swimming pools.
A noncommercial swimming pool may be constructed and maintained in a Residence R-1 or
Residence R-2 District, provided that it is solely in the rear yard of any premises and that it is located
no nearer than 10 feet to any lot line. Any swimming pool to be erected in any Residence R-1 or
Residence R-2 District must also comply with any requirements contained in any ordinances of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills relating to the construction and maintenance of swimming pools, including,
without limitation, Chapter 326, Swimming Pools, of the Code of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 374-79. Air-conditioning units.
In all zoning districts, the following regulations shall apply to air-conditioning units, as defined by this
chapter.
Prior to the installation of any air-conditioning unit, or the replacement of air-conditioning units in a
new location on the lot, other than a window unit designed to air condition a single room of a
dwelling, a permit shall be obtained from the Borough Zoning Officer.
An application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications setting forth the location
of the air-conditioning unit on either a survey of the property or a clear plot plan describing the
distances from the property lines to the proposed air-conditioning unit.
The following regulations shall apply to the placement of all air-conditioning units in the Borough of
Pleasant Hills:
No air-conditioning unit shall be placed in the front yard of any residential or commercial
property.
All air-conditioning units shall be placed in the side or rear yards of any residential property
occupied by a single-family dwelling unit, provided that the air-conditioning unit is a minimum
of five feet from any property line. All such units located in the side yard area shall be
screened from view on the front and side locations.
All air-conditioning units shall be placed in the rear yard of any residential property occupied
by a townhouse unit or two-family dwelling.
All air-conditioning units shall be placed in the rear yard or on a rooftop on a property
occupied by a multifamily dwelling, commercial building or industrial building.
§ 374-80. Nonresidential exhaust fans.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 307/339
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
All nonresidential exhaust fans, including but not limited to exhaust from kitchen hoods, furnaces,
radon mitigation systems and other mechanical exhaust systems, shall be placed so that they face
either the rear of the property or vertically.
§ 374-81. Outdoor display and sale of merchandise.
In the Commercial and Industrial Districts, except for those permitted uses such as garden nurseries,
building supply establishments, vehicle sales agencies and other uses which customarily display
and/or sell merchandise outdoors, there shall be no regular or permanent display or sale of
merchandise outside a completely enclosed building. Temporary outdoor display or sale of
merchandise by persons other than the owners or lessees of the principal buildings on the lot shall not
be permitted.
§ 374-81.1. Christmas tree sales.
[Added 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 845]
Intent; location of sales.
The intent of this section is to establish regulations and procedures for the outdoor sale of
Christmas trees and related holiday decorations.
The outdoor sale of Christmas trees described in this section may be conducted on any
vacant lot or on such other land which, in the discretion of the Zoning Officer, shall be deemed
sufficient, suitable or compatible within the C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 or P-1 Zoning Districts of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Violations.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to store for sale or sell Christmas trees and
related holiday decorations outdoors in the Borough of Pleasant Hills without having a permit.
It shall be a violation of this section for any owner to allow his property to be used for the
storage for sale or sale of Christmas trees and related holiday decorations by any person who
does not have a permit therefor.
The foregoing notwithstanding, no permit shall be required for the storage or sale of
Christmas trees and related holiday decorations when conducted indoors in the normal
course of business of any establishment for which a site plan has been approved and a
certificate of occupancy has been granted; or indoor or outdoors in the normal course of
business of any garden shop or nursery for which a site plan has been approved and a
certificate of occupancy has been granted.
Application process.
All applications for a permit for the outdoor storage and sale of Christmas trees and related
holiday decorations shall be made to the Borough Zoning Officer. The application must be
accompanied by a copy of a lease or written consent of the property owner it the applicant is
not the record owner of the property.
All applications must include a copy of the seller's or property owner's certificate of insurance
as proof of general liability insurance coverage.
A permit fee of $50 must be provided with the application. The applicant shall be entitled to a
refund of $25 upon contacting the Zoning Officer upon completion of the sale and the Zoning
Officer finds the location to be clean and returned to its prior condition. The twenty-five-dollar
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 308/339
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
E.
refund is contingent upon the Zoning Officer approving the refund based upon the findings of
the Zoning Officer.
Permits shall commence on November 15 and shall terminate on December 30 of each year.
It shall be understood and agreed by any applicant for and/or any property owner for which a
Christmas tree sale permit has been issued that said applicant and/or property owner shall
release, indemnify and/or hold harmless the Borough of Pleasant Hills, its agents, officials,
employees, officers or representatives from any and all liability arising out of the sale of the
Christmas trees and holiday decorations. Said claims shall include, but not be limited to, any
and all claims related to the sale and those claims involving the electrical and plumbing
systems as well as any other type of claim for personal injury or property damage. The permit
application shall specifically include this indemnification and release as a condition of
receiving the permit.
§ 374-81.2. Defunct business sales.
[Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 907]
Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association, corporation or any
other entity conducting business in the Borough of Pleasant Hills to advertise or hold out by any
means that any sale of goods, wares and merchandise is an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage,
insolvent, assignees, receivers, trustees, removal or close-out sale or sale of goods damaged by
fire, smoke or water unless a license to conduct such sale is first obtained from the Zoning Officer
of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Applicable statute. All such entities described above shall satisfy the requirements of an Act of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania titled "An Act Regulating and Licensing
All Sales at Retail When Such Sales Are Advertised as "Closing Out Sale," "Fire, Smoke or Water
Damage Sale" or "Defunct Business Sale." Such businesses shall satisfy the terms of the Act, with
exceptions, including but not limited to the requirements for the filing of inventory and bond, and
providing for appeals and penalties. The requirements of the Act of July 31, 1963, P.L. 410, No.
217, are hereby adopted as if fully set forth in this section. A copy of the Act and any amendments
thereto shall be available at the office of the Borough Zoning Officer.
Application forms. Application forms for licenses shall be made available at the office of the Zoning
Officer, 410 E. Bruceton Road, Pleasant Hills, PA 15236. A copy of the application form is
attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference.[1] The content of the
application may be amended from time to time by the Zoning Officer.
Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" is attached to Ord. No. 907 and on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
Fees. Applicants for licenses shall pay a fee of $50 upon the granting of a license hereunder and a
fee of $100 upon the renewal of any license granted hereunder pursuant to the provisions of Act
No. 217, P.L. 410. The license fee shall hereafter be included in the document known as the
Borough of Pleasant Hills Fee Resolution.
Bond.
Applicants, before the granting of a license hereunder, shall be required to post a bond
pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 217, P.L. 410, the amount of which shall be determined
as follows:
Five percent of the first $100,000 of the retail value of all goods, wares and merchandise
to be offered at such sale;
Two percent of the next $400,000; and
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 309/339
(c)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
One percent of the balance.
Bond shall be payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as required by Act 217, No.
410.
The amount of such bond shall be determined by the Act, as may be amended.
Duration of license; renewals. Any license so granted as aforesaid shall be good for no more than
a period of 30 consecutive calendar days and may be renewed for one additional period not
exceeding 30 days, provided that a revised inventory is filed with each application for renewal of a
license, showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and that no goods,
wares, or merchandise not included in the original inventory is in stock.
Revocation of license. After a license has been granted and it is established that the licensee has
violated any provisions of this section, the license shall be subject to immediate revocation and
further penalties as defined in this section.
Amendments. The licensing fee and bond amounts set forth herein shall automatically reflect any
subsequent amendments to the fee and bonding amounts as set forth in Act No. 217, P.L. 410, as
may be amended. Therefore, the fees are subject to immediate adjustments consistent with the
Act. To the extent any of the terms of this section are inconsistent with the terms of the Act of the
Legislature, the terms of the Act shall control. However, the remaining terms of this section shall
remain in full force and effect.
Violations and penalties; right of appeal. Any person conducting or being responsible for any sale
requiring a permit or license as set forth above, without first having obtained the permit or license,
or any person making or being responsible for any misrepresentation in connection with the goods
so offered for sale or sold, or continuing the same business at the same location after the
expiration of a license issued for conducting any type of sale subject to this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 and costs of
such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. Each day any sale is conducted in violation of this
section shall be a separate violation of this section and therefore subject to cumulative penalties.
Article XVIII. General Height and Area Regulations
§ 374-82. Height limitations.
The height limitations set by this chapter shall be as follows:
No single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall be erected, altered or constructed to a height
of more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet above ground level.
No townhouse shall be erected, altered or constructed to a height of more than 21/2 stories or 30
feet above ground level.
No multifamily dwelling in the R-3 District shall be erected, altered or constructed to a height of
more than three stories or 35 feet above ground level.
No multifamily dwelling in the R-4 District shall be erected, altered or constructed to a height of
more than eight stories or 90 feet above ground level.
Professional offices erected in the C-1 District shall not exceed a height of 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
above ground level.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 310/339
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
A.
Office buildings erected in the O-1 District shall not exceed a height of three stories or 35 feet
above ground level, unless approved by Borough Council in accordance with the criteria of § 374-
29B(1)(i).
No commercial or industrial building shall be erected, altered or constructed to a height of more
than three stories or 35 feet above ground level.
The minimum height of any dwelling shall be 14 feet.
No accessory structure shall exceed one story or 15 feet above ground level. The accessory
structure shall not be less than 240 square feet and no more than 650 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 848]
§ 374-83. Chimneys and other accessory structures.
In any R Residential District, chimneys, skylights and aerials customarily incidental to and located
on the principal structure shall not be included in calculating the building height. Spires and
belfries on churches and similar places of worship or public buildings shall be permitted to exceed
the maximum permitted building height for the principal building by no more than 30 feet. All other
freestanding accessory structures, except those regulated by § 374-87 of this chapter, shall be
subject to the height limitations for accessory structures.
In any C Commercial, or M Industrial District, penthouses containing mechanical equipment shall
be permitted to exceed the height limitations for the district by not more than 14 feet, provided that
the coverage of the total roof area does not exceed 50%.
Chimneys, smokestacks, towers and other accessory structures customarily incidental to an
industrial building shall be exempt from the height requirements for the district, provided that any
such freestanding accessory structure which exceeds the height limitations of the district shall be
subject to the yard requirements for the principal structure.
In any district, transmission structures which are regulated by the Public Utility Commission (PUC)
are exempt from the height limitations of the district.
§ 374-84. Calculation of height.
The height limitations of this chapter shall be applied as follows:
A cellar shall not be counted as a story.
§ 374-85. Open space to be counted for only one structure.
For the purpose of complying with this chapter, no yard, court, or other open space about a building or
structure shall be construed as a yard, court or other open space for another building or structure.
§ 374-86. Permitted projections into yards.
The following shall be permitted to project into required yards in any district:
Typical architectural features, including, but not limited to, bay windows, window sills, cornices,
eaves, and gutters shall be permitted to project into any required yard not more than two feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 311/339
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Awnings, as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted to project into any required yard not more
than four feet.
Decks and unenclosed porches which are attached to the principal structure shall be permitted to
project into the required rear yard not more than 10 feet and the required front yard not more than
eight feet. A porch roof shall not exceed 15 feet above the floor surface of the porch.
§ 374-87. Freestanding antennas.
The following freestanding antennas may be constructed in any district, subject to compliance with the
specified standards and criteria, and further subject to the issuance of a building permit, upon payment
of the required fee as established by resolution of Borough Council.
Parabolic or satellite dish antennas more than 30 inches in diameter shall be permitted as
accessory structures in any zoning district, provided that:
No such antenna shall be located in any front yard.
No such antenna shall be located on the roof of any accessory building.
No more than one satellite or parabolic dish antenna shall be located on any one lot.
In R Residence Districts, no such antenna exceeding four feet in height, diameter or depth
shall be installed on any roof or above any building.
In C Commercial and M Industrial Districts, no such antenna exceeding 12 feet in height,
diameter or depth shall be installed on any roof or above any building.
In R Residence Districts, when roof-mounted, the satellite or parabolic dish antenna shall be
located so that it is not visible from the street.
The diameter of any satellite or parabolic dish antenna, other than those installed on a roof or
above a building, shall not exceed 12 feet.
No part of any freestanding antenna structure shall be located any closer than 10 feet to any
property line.
The maximum height of any freestanding satellite or parabolic dish antenna shall be 15 feet.
When any satellite or parabolic dish antenna is wholly and clearly visible from the street
adjoining the lot, evergreen screening at least six feet in height shall be provided to reduce
visibility from the street.
Other radio and television antennas which are subject to license by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) shall be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a use by special exception
in any zoning district, subject to the following express standards and criteria:
The antenna shall be located at least 15 feet from the dwelling unit on the lot.
Antennas which do not exceed 30 feet in height shall be located at least 15 feet from any
property line. Antennas which exceed 30 feet in height shall provide an additional one foot of
clearance from the property line for every one foot of height in excess of 30 feet.
The antenna shall not be permitted in any front yard.
The antenna shall be securely anchored in a fixed location on the ground, and the applicant
shall provide qualified evidence that the proposed structure will withstand wind and other such
natural forces.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 312/339
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[2]
(5)
(6)
[1]
C.
D.
A.
The antenna and its associated supports such as guy wires or the yard area containing the
structure shall be protected and secured to guarantee the safety of the general public.
Associated supports and guy wires shall not be closer than five feet to any property line.
In granting the use, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions warranted to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, fencing, screening
and increased setbacks.
Amateur radio service communications antennas and support structures shall be permitted subject
to the following standards:
[Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 919[1]]
The provisions of Act 88 of 2008 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
The height of any such antenna or structure shall not exceed 65 feet above ground level.
Antenna or antenna structures shall be at least 30 feet from the rear of the principal structure
on the lot and may not be located in the front yard area.
Associated supports or guy wires shall be no closer than five feet to any property line.
The construction of all such antennas and antenna structures must conform to the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Uniform.
An applicant for a amateur radio service communications antenna or antenna structure must
provide a copy of their insurance certificate showing general liability coverage in a minimum
amount of $100,000 prior to the issuance of the permit.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C as
Subsection D.
Whenever any antenna, as defined by Subsections A and B of this section, is disconnected or
abandoned for a period of six months, or becomes in a state of disrepair so as to become a
danger to persons or property in the area, then the property owner shall be required to remove
said antenna within 30 days of receipt of a written notice from the Borough Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer is empowered to enforce this provision by entering upon any property affected in
order to determine the status of any antenna.
Article XIX. Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 374-88. Off-street parking.
[Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 861]
There shall be provided, at the time of erection of any principal structure or at the time any
principal structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off-street automobile parking
areas, including the required number of parking stalls. Not less than 25% of the total parking area
shall be provided for adequate ingress, egress and general circulation. All parking stalls shall be
provided on the site of the principal structure which they are intended to serve. When the
determination of parking stalls required for a use results in a fraction, then any fraction shall be
counted as one parking stall and the required number shall be increased to the next whole
number.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 313/339
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
[2]
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
E.
For the purpose of this chapter, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be
used for service to the public, customers, clients or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures
and equipment used for sale or display of merchandise. It does not mean areas used principally
for nonpublic purposes, such as storage areas in retail establishments. In restaurants, the
calculation of floor area shall include all areas devoted to the preparation and serving of food.
In any district, no lot area shall be used for the parking and placing, either permanently or
temporarily, of mobile homes, cap trailers, truck trailers, office trailers, house trailers or storage
trailers. The additional regulations found at Article XIX, § 374-92, shall also apply to this section.
Exceptions. This subsection shall not be deemed to apply to recreational vehicles or recreational
vehicle storage yards when the same are permitted under the terms of this chapter.
Loading and unloading berths in Districts C2, C-3, C-4 and M-1 for the delivery, shipping or
storage of merchandise.
All such berths must be located on the same lot as the principal use they are intended to
serve and must comply with the loading area requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located.
No display, sale of merchandise, office or administrative use shall be permitted from any
storage trailer.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), regarding use of trailers for permanent storage, was
repealed 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 931.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), regarding removal of trailers, was repealed 2-28-2011
by Ord. No. 931.
No loading or storage area shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district.
All loading berths shall be screened by a six-foot hedge, wall or opaque fence on three sides,
unless completely enclosed by building walls, from residential and commercial use districts. A
loading berth in the rear of a commercial district building and not visible to the public need not
be screened.
In all districts, provisions for parking shall be required for each separate use in accordance with
the following table:
Use Required Parking
Adult businesses 1 parking stall for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Auto service station 2 parking stalls for each service bay
Automotive sales 1 parking stall for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Bank, or branch bank 1 parking stall for each 300 square feet of floor area
Barbershops, beauty salons,
hairdressing salons
2 parking stalls for each beauty or barber chair
Bowling alleys 2 parking stalls for each alley in addition to spaces required
for restaurant facilities
Building material storage or
sales
1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Business services 1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Car wash Self-serve: 4 stacking spaces for each wash stall and 1 drying
space for each stall
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 314/339
Use Required Parking
Full-service: 4 stacking stalls for each wash space, plus 1
drying stall for each washing stall, plus 0.5 spaces for each
employee on maximum shift
Church 1 parking stall for each 5 seats provided in the sanctuary or
principal place of worship
Cold or locker storage 1 parking stall for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial establishments 1 parking stall for each 150 square feet of floor area
Commercial swimming pools 1 parking stall for every 50 square feet of water surface area
Contractors plant/yard 1 parking stall for each 1,000 square feet of lot area
Distribution plants 1 parking stall for each 2 employees or 1 parking stall for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater
Employee dining facilities 1 parking stall for each 3 seats
Freight or truck terminal 1 parking stall for each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area or
1 parking stall for each employee on peak shift, whichever is
greater
Funeral home/mortuary,
undertaking establishment or
cemetery
10 parking stalls for each reposing room, but not fewer than
24 parking stalls
Furniture sales 1 parking stall for each 150 square feet of showroom floor
area
Health clubs 1 parking stall for each 2 persons authorized by the Borough
Building Code to occupy the premises at maximum permitted
occupancy
Hotels and motels 1 stall for each sleeping room or suite, plus 1 parking stall for
every 80 square feet of floor area which is accessible to the
public, including but not limited to offices, lobbies, public
corridors, restaurants, lounges, ballrooms, retail shops and
the like
Household appliance stores 1 parking stall for each 150 square feet of showroom floor
area
Indoor theater 1 parking stall for each 3 seats
Laundry and cleaning
establishments
1 parking stall for each 3 washing or drying machine
Light manufacturing 1 parking stall for each employee on shift or 1 parking stall for
each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Machine and repair shop 1 parking stall for each employee on shift or 1 parking stall for
each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Methadone treatment facility 1 parking stall for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Medical professional office 1 parking stall for each 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1
parking stall for each examination room
Multifamily dwelling 1 1/2 parking stalls for each dwelling unit, plus 0.5 spaces per
dwelling unit to be provided as for visitor parking
Nightclubs 1 parking stall for every 30 square feet of floor area devoted to
patron use, plus 1 parking stall for every 2 persons working on
the premises during peak shift
Nursing homes 1 parking stall for each 3 beds
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 315/339
A.
B.
Use Required Parking
Other supporting commercial
uses
1 parking stall for each 150 square feet of gross floor area
Pharmacies 1 parking stall for each 150 square feet of gross floor area
Plumbing, heating, electrical
contractors
1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Printing shops 1 parking stall for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Professional or business office 1 parking stalls for each 300 square feet of floor area
Racquet clubs 4 parking stalls for each court
Repair garage 3 parking stall for each service bay
Research and testing lab 1 parking stall for each 2 persons authorized by the Borough
Building Code to occupy the premises at maximum permitted
occupancy
Restaurant 1 parking stall for each 60 square feet of floor area
Roller/ice-skating rinks 1 parking stall for each 2 persons authorized by the Borough
Building Code to occupy the premises at maximum permitted
occupancy
Sales or brokerage offices 1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
School 1 parking stall for each 5 seats provided in school auditoriums
Self-serve laundry, tailoring,
dressmaking, shoe repair
1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Single-family dwelling 2 parking stalls per dwelling unit, 1 of which must be in an
enclosed garage
Stadiums 1 parking stall for every 4 seats
Townhouse dwellings 2 parking stalls for each dwelling unit, 1 of which must be in
an enclosed garage, plus 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit to be
provided for visitor parking
Two-family dwelling 2 parking stalls for each dwelling unit, 1 of which must be in
an enclosed garage
Veterinary office/clinic 4 parking stalls for each examination room
Warehousing 1 parking stall for each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area or
1 parking stall for each employee on peak shift, whichever is
greater
Welding/electrical repair shop 1 parking stall for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Any use not specifically listed 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area of all
buildings or 1 space for each 3 persons authorized by the
Borough Building Code to occupy the premises at maximum
permitted occupancy
§ 374-89. General parking requirements for single- and twofamily
dwellings.
Heavy truck parking. Except for loading and unloading, heavy truck parking is prohibited in
Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, P-1 and O-1.
In all residential districts, no light truck or other vehicle shall be parked outside an enclosed
building or garage, except that:
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 316/339
(1)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(2)
A.
Other vehicles less than 9,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight; seven feet in height; and 20 feet
in length are permitted on an approved rear yard area parking pad. Temporary storage of
motor homes, motorized campers, boats and buses in the front or side yard area are limited
to 48 hours prior to and after their intended use.
Light trucks, when used as passenger vehicles, are permitted on an approved front or rear
yard parking pad.
In all commercial and manufacturing districts, passenger vehicles, light trucks, heavy trucks and
other vehicles of any size shall be parked on an approved parking pad or in an approved parking
area.
§ 374-90. Continuation of facilities.
Whenever an occupancy permit has been issued and the plans so approved contain automobile
parking and loading space provisions, the subsequent use of such property shall be conditional upon
the continuance and availability of the parking and loading space provisions contained in such plans.
Any other use of such property shall be a violation of this article. Should the owner or occupant of any
structure, as to which an occupancy permit has been issued containing automobile parking or loading
space requirements, so change the use to which such structure is put as to increase automobile
parking or loading space requirements under this article, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this
chapter to begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the increased automobile parking or
loading provisions of this article are complied with and an amended certificate of occupancy obtained
from the Zoning Officer. Existing off-street parking and loading facilities provided at the effective date of
this chapter, and actually being used at that date for the parking of automobiles, or as loading space in
connection with the operation of an existing structure or use of off-street parking and loading facilities
provided after the effective date of this chapter for the parking of automobiles or as loading space in
connection with the operation of a structure or use existing at the effective date of this chapter, shall
not be reduced to an amount less than required by this chapter for a similar new structure or new use.
§ 374-91. Location of off-street parking.
All off-street parking, other than in a driveway, garage or enclosed building, for single-family, twofamily
and townhouse dwellings shall be provided on an approved parking pad and shall comply
with the following regulations:
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 849]
General.
No person shall construct or commence work on a parking pad without having first
obtained a zoning permit from the Borough Zoning Officer.
No vehicle shall project into the cartway when parked on an approved parking pad.
The minimum size for a parking pad shall be nine feet by 20 feet. The maximum size
shall be 10 feet by 24 feet.
All retaining walls, including those associated with the construction of a parking pad, shall
be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills and Chapter 222, Grading and Excavating, of the Code of
the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
Parking pads for single-family dwellings.
Parking pads shall be located no closer than five feet to a side property line.
[Amended 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 850]
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 317/339
(b)
(c)
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
Parking pads perpendicular to the street, adjacent to driveways and/or walkways shall
not have a combined width greater than 20 feet.
Parking pads shall be paved with an impervious surface. It is hereby recognized that an
impervious surface is one which includes a porous surface. This includes material known
as porous pavement which consists of concrete block or brick pavers that have built-in
gaps or openings to allow rainwater to infiltrate. The purpose of porous pavement is to
provide stormwater retention and to assist with the natural water cycle. The impervious
surface may also be constructed of a surface known as "gravel grass." The surface of
gravel grass shall be porous and include a grass cover which permits water retention.
This surface shall consist of a gravel parking space which is then covered with topsoil
and seeded with a grass cover. The specific method that is used is subject to the
approval of the Zoning Officer.
[Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 906]
Required off-street parking for multifamily dwellings shall not be located in the required front yard.
Areas containing required off-street parking for public, multifamily, commercial and industrial uses
shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any property line and the area between the paving and
the property line shall be planted and maintained in grass or ground cover or in landscaping
materials which may be proposed as part of a buffer area required by this chapter.
§ 374-92. Parking and storage of unlicensed or uninspected
vehicles.
Automotive vehicles of any kind without both a current license plate and a current state inspection
sticker shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property for a period of time to exceed
90 days, other than in a completely closed building.[1]
Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 360, Vehicles, Junked and Abandoned.
Article XX. Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 374-93. Applicability.
The provisions of this article affecting the nonconforming uses of land and buildings and
nonconforming structures cited herein shall apply under the provisions of this chapter as enacted
initially, to amendments to this chapter and to zoning or rezoning of areas annexed to the Borough.
§ 374-94. Nonconforming structures.
The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming structures in any zoning district:
Structural alteration. No such structure may be enlarged or structurally altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, except when the Zoning Hearing Board may determine undue
hardship and may authorize a reasonable modification of such structure.
Damage or destruction. Should any such structure, other than a sign, be destroyed by any means
to an extent of more than 75% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that such
damage or destruction is 75% or less than the replacement cost of the structure, repairs or
reconstruction may be undertaken, provided that such restoration is started within 12 months of
the date of destruction.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 318/339
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
Moving. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall
thereafter conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Signs. Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed, subject to the following regulations
and provided that no structural alterations are made which increase the gross surface area of the
sign.
Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged, added to or replaced by another nonconforming
sign, use or structure, except that the interchange of the panels which display the advertising
shall be permitted.
A nonconforming sign which is damaged to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement
value shall not be repaired, reconstructed or moved unless it complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter for signs.
No new conforming business identification sign shall be permitted on any property unless
every sign on the property is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that on lots containing several tenants, a nonconforming sign of one tenant shall not
preclude another tenant from erecting a conforming sign.
Repair or maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the safety of the public.
§ 374-95. Nonconforming lots and/or structures.
The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming uses of structures or lots or structures and lots
in combination in any zoning district.
Continuation. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a lawful use
of a lot or structure exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as
enacted or amended, such use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful.
Enlargement or expansion.
No nonconforming use of a lot or structure shall be enlarged or increased or extended to
occupy a greater area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, unless the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret that the enlargement or
extension is necessitated by the natural expansion and growth of trade of the nonconforming
use.
No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot
occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a structure which was
manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time that the use became nonconforming,
provided that the structure is located on a lot or portion of a lot owned at the time the use
became nonconforming.
Change of use. Any change in the use of a nonconforming use of a lot or structure shall be only to
a use permitted within the district in which the lot or structure is located, unless the Zoning Hearing
Board determines that a change to another nonconforming use is equally appropriate to the district
or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. Once changed to a
conforming use, however, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot is discontinued or abandoned
for six consecutive months or for 12 months during any two-year period, the structure and/or lot
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 319/339
shall not hereafter be used, except in conformance with the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
Article XXI. Zoning Hearing Board
§ 374-96. Appointment.
The Borough Council shall continue to appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of three members
who are residents of the Borough of Pleasant Hills. The Zoning Hearing Board appointed and serving
in accordance with the terms of Ordinance No. 36 of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, the Zoning
Ordinance adopted 1-5-1949, shall continue in office without interruption. As the terms of office of the
members of said Board expire, their successors shall be appointed to serve three years. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term of any member whose term becomes vacant within
30 days after such vacancy first occurs.
§ 374-97. Appointment of alternate members.
Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one, but no more than three, residents of the
Borough to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 374-98 below, an alternate shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member
during the proceedings, and shall have all the power and duties set forth in this chapter and as
otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough, including membership
on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board unless designated
as a voting alternate member pursuant to § 374-98 below.
§ 374-98. Participation by alternate members.
If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the
Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed
to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Board
has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this
section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all
alternates.
§ 374-99. Officers.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall, at its first meeting of each year, elect one member of the Zoning
Hearing Board to serve as Chairman. In addition, it shall elect a Secretary who need not be a member
of the Board.
§ 374-100. Rules and regulations.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as are necessary to reasonably conduct the business of the Board.
§ 374-101. Meetings.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 320/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman, or at the call of
any two members of the Board, and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall be a public
record.
§ 374-102. Contracting of services; hearing fees.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract for
secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Zoning
Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members
of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead
connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning
Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert
witness costs.
§ 374-103. Stenographer’s fees.
The appearance fee for the stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The
cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board, if the transcript is ordered by the Board or
Hearing Officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
Copies of written or graphic materials received into evidence shall be made available to any party at
cost.
§ 374-104. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the Act of Legislature of
Pennsylvania authorizing the zoning of Boroughs, and those prescribed by this chapter, which powers
and duties are summarized and more particularly specified as follows, provided that none of the
following provisions shall be deemed to limit any power of the Board which is conferred by the
aforesaid Act of Legislature; however, the powers of the Board shall be strictly construed so that the
spirit of this chapter is not violated:
Jurisdiction of the Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except curative amendments
brought before Borough Council.
Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken with 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting
or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 321/339
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
B.
and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to
the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land
use ordinance.
Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance.
Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain or flood hazard ordinance
or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer’s determination under Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended), 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development
not involving subdivision and land development.
Variances. Upon appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the rules of procedure of the Board, the Board shall have the power to vary or
adjust the strict application of the requirements of this chapter in the case of an exceptionally
irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lot or other exceptional physical condition not provided for in the
district regulations or as a special exception, where strict application would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land
or structures involved, but in no other case. No variance in the strict application of any provisions
of this chapter shall be granted by the Board unless it finds:
That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the
Board, applying to the land or structure for which the variance is sought, which circumstances
or conditions:
Are peculiar to such land or structure and do not apply generally to land or structures in
the neighborhood, and have not resulted from any act of the appellant or his
predecessors in title subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, whether in violation of
the provisions hereof, or not.
Are such that strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the
appellant of the reasonable use of such land or structure.
That the variance to be granted by the Board is:
One that will require the least modification of the prescribed regulation; and
The minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose; and
That the granting of the variance will:
Be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter;
Be in accordance with the general or specific rules herein contained; and
Be not injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the welfare of the
people at large.
§ 374-105. Special exceptions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 322/339
A.
B.
C.
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide all applications for special exceptions to the terms
of this chapter in such cases as are herein expressly provided for in other sections of this chapter in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, with the power to impose appropriate
conditions and safeguards as the Board may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties
and the public interest. In considering such applications, the Board shall give due regard to the nature
and condition of all adjacent uses and structures and in interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the Borough. In addition, the Board shall consider whether said
exception shall result in an unreasonable density of population in relation to municipal water and
sewers available, whether the existing highways are adequate to serve such exception without causing
traffic congestion or unusual noise or any noise which shall annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, health, peace or safety of others in the operation of such activity.
§ 374-106. Action on appealed issues.
In exercising the above mentioned powers, such Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this
article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in
its opinion should be made. Notice of such decision shall forthwith be given to all parties in interest.
§ 374-107. Appeals.
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer of the
Borough affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning Officer and with the Zoning Hearing
Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Board shall refuse to entertain any zoning appeal hereunder unless the applicant’s notice of appeal
indicates that all other Borough requirements for a building permit have been complied with. In lieu of
meeting all such Borough requirements for a building permit before seeking a zoning permit from the
Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant will comply with all other requirements of the Borough.
§ 374-108. Time limitations.
No person shall file any proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board later than 30 days after a
preliminary or final application for development has been approved by an appropriate Borough
officer, agency or body, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in
any manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after
such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to appeal from an adverse decision by the Zoning
Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map filed pursuant to Section 916.2 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10916.2, shall preclude an appeal from a
final approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the landowner within 30
days after notice of the determination is issued.
§ 374-109. Application and appeal fees.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 323/339
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
All applications and appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be accompanied by the required fee in
accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of Borough Council. A copy of the fee
schedule shall be available in the office of the Zoning Officer.
§ 374-110. Stay of proceedings.
Upon filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or
body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other
appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board
by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings
before the Board. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of
the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
All appeals from decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be taken to the Allegheny
County Court of Common Pleas and shall be filed within 30 days after the entry of the decision or,
in the case of a deemed decision, within 30 days after the date upon which notice of said deemed
decision is given.
§ 374-111. Hearing; decision.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal within 60 days
of receipt of the application, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within 45 days after the hearing or if said hearing is continued,
within 45 days after said continued hearing.
Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required 45 days or fails to hold the public
hearing within 60 days of the date of the applicant’s request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing or on the record, to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to
meet or render a decision within the time required, the Board shall give public notice of said
decision within 10 days of the last day it could have met to render a decision. If the Board shall fail
to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 374-112. Filing of decision.
The Zoning Hearing Board, upon reaching any decision on any appeal filed to it, shall forward a copy
of such decision to the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
§ 374-113. Mediation option.
Parties to proceedings authorized in this article within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board may
utilize mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the Zoning Hearing
Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 324/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in this section once they have been
formally initiated. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police
powers or as modifying any principles of substantive law.
Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of mediation shall be
determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The
Borough, in offering the mediation option, shall assure that in each case, the mediating parties,
assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:
Funding mediation.
Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of municipal zoning
and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation.
Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended) governing proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be, provided that there is written
consent by the mediating parties, and by an applicant or Borough decision-making body, if
either is not a party to the mediation.
Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.
Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the mediation sessions shall be
open or closed to the public.
Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties, and become subject
to review and approval by the appropriate decision-making body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in this chapter.
No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written mediated
agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative
proceedings.
Article XXII. Administration
§ 374-114. Duties of Zoning Officer.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is hereby conferred upon the
Zoning Officer, who shall have all the powers and duties conferred to Zoning Officers by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 374-115. Zoning permit required; application requirements.
No land shall be used nor building erected until a zoning permit shall have been obtained. Each
application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall contain all the information
necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, erection,
construction, structural alteration, occupation, use and/or change in use will comply with the provisions
of this chapter. In addition to other necessary data, the application shall be accompanied by a plot
plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the land involved, the location of all existing and proposed
buildings and other structures thereon, the location of all abutting streets, roads and alleys, and the
location of all existing buildings on abutting land within 120 feet of the side and rear lot lines of the land
involved. The application shall also show the name and address of the applicant. An application for a
zoning permit may be filed by the owner, tenant, lessee, general agent, architect, engineer, or building
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 325/339
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
contractor of the building or premises involved. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to combine or
include the application for a zoning permit with an application for a building permit and may use the
same form for both permits. However, the applicant must meet all of the requirements of this chapter
before either a building permit or a zoning permit shall be issued.
§ 374-115.1. Building permit required.
[Added 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 848]
All structures in excess of 144 square feet in area to be erected or constructed or placed on any
property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills shall require a building permit prior to erection or
placement of this structure on property within the Borough of Pleasant Hills.
In the event that a project requires both a grading permit and a building permit, the application for
building permit will not be considered until all of the requirements for the grading permit have been
satisfied and the grading permit issued. The Borough Engineer is the Administrator of the Grading
Ordinance and shall have a final say in all matters related to the process described in this chapter
after the grading permit has been issued. The initial application for a grading permit shall be
obtained from the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall make an initial determination of whether
a project may require a grading permit. The review of the Zoning Officer is only an initial review
and the Borough Engineer shall make the final determination of whether a grading permit is
required. The Borough Engineer shall also make a final determination on all matters related to
compliance. The application for the building permit will only be processed after all of the
requirements to issue the grading permit have been satisfied and all fees related to the grading
permit have been paid.
[Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 899]
In the event that a project which requires a building permit is started prior to obtaining a building
permit, the property owner shall be subject to penalties set forth in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, as may be amended, and the enforcement remedies set forth in Code Chapter
374-129 of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, including but not limited to judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result.
[Added 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1008]
§ 374-116. Permit application fees.
All applications for zoning permits or building permits shall be accompanied by the required fees in
accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of Borough Council. A copy of the fee
schedule shall be available in the office of the Zoning Officer.
§ 374-117. Referral of application.
In the event that an application for a zoning permit or building permit requires a variance from the
Zoning Hearing Board or site plan approval or conditional use approval by Borough Council,
subject to review by the Planning Commission, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the
proper bodies and shall not issue a zoning permit or building permit until the final decision has
been rendered by those bodies and any conditions of their approval have been noted on the
permit.
All applications which require referral to the Borough Planning Commission shall be submitted at
least 13 working days prior to the regular or special meeting of the Planning Commission at which
the application is to be considered.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 326/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
§ 374-118. Procedure for approval of conditional use
applications.
Borough Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional use approval in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; however, it shall not approve a conditional use unless and until:
A written application is submitted, including a site development plan containing the information
required by § 374-71.
The required fees are paid.
Planning Commission referral:
The application is referred to the Planning Commission for review within 30 days of
submission and the Planning Commission makes a written recommendation to the Borough
Council within 90 days of referral.
If after 120 days from the date of submission, the Planning Commission fails to provide a
written recommendation, Borough Council may act without the Planning Commission
recommendation.
All applicable requirements of this chapter are met. In considering an application for conditional
use approval, Borough Council may hold a public hearing on the application and Borough Council
may prescribe reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards in granting approval of a
conditional use application. If Borough Council determines that an application meets the
requirements of this chapter and receives assurances that any additional conditions deemed
necessary shall be fulfilled, Council shall direct the Zoning Officer to issue zoning approval for the
conditional use.
§ 374-119. Zoning Officer’s decision.
The Zoning Officer shall within two weeks after the filing of an application in proper form, make and file
his written decision as to whether or not the proposed excavation, erection, construction, structural
alteration, occupation, use and/or change in use comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall,
within such period, deliver a copy of this decision, together with a copy of the zoning permit, if any,
issued pursuant to such decision to the applicant in person or by ordinary mail, directed to the
applicant’s address as stated in the application.
§ 374-120. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 374-120, Zoning/building permit time limit, as amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No.
876, was repealed 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 931.
§ 374-121. Certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 920]
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure or lot without obtaining a certificate of
occupancy. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Article XXIV.
Commercial certificates of occupancy shall conform to the procedures as specified in § 403.46 of
Title 34 of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 327/339
C.
(1)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Residential certificates of occupancy shall conform to the procedures as specified in § 403.65 of
the Title 34 of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
All zoning districts.
In the event of denial of the zoning permit and/or certificate of occupancy, the Zoning Officer
shall notify the applicant in writing directed to the applicant at the address stated in the
application and shall cite the specific provisions of this chapter which have not been complied
with.
§ 374-122. Recordkeeping.
A record and copy of all applications filed with the Zoning Officer, of all his decisions and of all zoning
permits and certificates of occupancy and compliance issued by him shall be kept on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary as a public record within the Borough.
§ 374-123. Variances from subdivision standards.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, when considering final approval of any
subdivision request or site plan approval, is hereby authorized to permit variances from the standards
established in this chapter and Chapter 322, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills when such variances are in the public interest and promote the environment,
health, safety and general welfare of the public. If the Borough Council should grant such variances for
any specific project, such variance shall be deemed to apply only to that specific project and shall not
be considered as a precedent for any other subdivision or site plan. If Borough Council should grant a
variance as herein described, the nature and extent of such variance shall be specifically set forth in
the minutes of the meeting granting subdivision or site plan approval and the applicant shall be bound
by the variance as set forth in the minutes of such meeting.
§ 374-124. Enforcement notice.
If the Zoning Officer or his/her duly authorized representative shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, the Zoning Officer or his/her duly authorized representative shall issue a
written enforcement notice to the person responsible for such violation. The enforcement notice shall
contain the following information:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Borough intends to take
action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in
each instance the applicable provisions of this chapter.
The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which
the steps must be completed.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
Article XXIII. Amendments or Changes
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 328/339
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
§ 374-125. Amendment procedure.
This chapter and the district boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map may from time to time be
amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by proceeding in the following manner:
Any request to amend, supplement, change or modify or repeal this chapter or the Borough
Zoning Map shall be initiated by submitting a petition to the Borough Council. Petitions for
amendments to the Borough Zoning Map shall include the following information:
A survey of the property for which a change in zoning classification is sought.
A precise legal description of the property.
A statement justifying the request for a change in zoning classification.
Any petition to amend or change any part of this chapter or the Borough Zoning Map shall be
accompanied by the required fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of
Borough Council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available in the office of the Zoning Officer.
After consideration of the petition, the Borough Council shall fix the time and place of a public
hearing on the proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal.
Borough Council shall give public notice, as defined herein, of the public hearing.
In the case where a proposed amendment involves the rezoning of property, a minimum of five
public notices shall be posted on and around the perimeter of the affected property for a minimum
of seven days prior to the date of the public hearing conducted by Borough Council.
Referral to County Planning Commission. At least 30 days prior to Borough Council’s public
hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit the amendment to the Allegheny County
Planning Commission for review and comment.
Referral to Borough Planning Commission. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared
by the Planning Commission, Borough Council shall submit such amendment to the Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the proposed amendment to provide
the Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
At the time and place stated in the notice, Council shall hold a public hearing, at which time the
parties in interest and the citizens of the Borough shall have an opportunity to be heard.
If, after the public hearing, the proposed amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to
include land previously not affected by it, Borough Council shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
Before voting on enactment, Borough Council shall give notice of proposed enactment in
accordance with the requirements of Section 610 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247, as amended), 53 P.S. § 10610.
Borough Council shall act on any proposed amendment to this chapter within 90 days of the close
of all hearings on the proposed amendment.
Within 30 days after enactment, a certified copy of the amendment to this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Allegheny County Planning Commission.
§ 374-126. Landowner curative amendments.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 329/339
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
Any landowner who wishes to challenge the validity, on substantive grounds, of this chapter or the
Zoning Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest may file a curative amendment together with a written request that the
challenge and the proposed amendment be heard and decided by Borough Council in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 609.2, 53 P.S. § 10609.2, and 1004 (see now 53 P.S. § 10916.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (PA Act 247, as amended).
Borough Council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to public notice, on the matter within 60
days of receiving the request at a regular monthly meeting. Borough Council shall conduct the
hearing in accordance with the requirements for conducting a public hearing specified in Section
908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10908. All references in Section
908 to the Zoning Hearing Board shall apply to Borough Council.
The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Borough Planning Commission
and County Planning Commission for review and comment at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing.
Evaluating merits of curative amendment. If Borough Council determines that a validity challenge
has merit, Borough Council may accept a landowner’s curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. Borough
Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other
public service facilities;
If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing needs
and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available to
and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of this chapter or map;
The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site’s soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
The impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed,
the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental impacts; and
The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are
essential to public health and welfare.
Declaration of invalidity by the court. If the Borough does not accept a landowner’s curative
amendment brought in accordance with this section and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court’s decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this entire
chapter, but only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner’s curative
amendment and challenge.
§ 374-127. Use of mediation option.
The Borough may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings authorized by this
article. In exercising such an option, the Borough and the mediating parties shall meet the stipulations
and follow the procedures set forth in § 374-113 of this chapter.
§ 374-128. Protest.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 330/339
A.
B.
C.
In case of protest against any such change, amendment, supplement, modification or repeal signed by
the owners of 33 1/3% or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change,
amendment, supplement, modification or repeal, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof
extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite lots, such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable
vote of 2/3 of all members of Council.
Article XXIV. Violations, Remedies and Penalties
§ 374-129. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Borough.
The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling
the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other than the Borough the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 374-130. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted maintained or used in violation of this chapter, Borough Council, or
with the approval of Borough Council, any officer of the Borough, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping
or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation.
Appendix
Chapter A381. Telephone Franchise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 7-12-1948 by Ord. No.
30. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A381-1. Grant of franchise; conditions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 331/339
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Permission be and is hereby granted to the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, its successors
and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate its posts, poles, cables, wires, and all other necessary
overhead apparatus on, over and along, and its conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires,
manholes, terminal and distributing poles, and all other necessary underground appliances on, in,
under and through the streets, alleys and highways within the present or future limits of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills; to use the property of other companies and to permit other companies that possess
authority to operate within the limits of the said Borough to use its property, upon such arrangements
as the two companies may agree to, provided that:
That whenever the said company shall desire to erect, lay down or construct any poles, conduits
or manholes, it shall present a plan or plans showing the location number and size thereof to the
Chairman of the Street Committee or such other person as may be designated by Council, who is
hereby authorized for and on behalf of Council to approve or disapprove. The plan or plans, or
copy thereof, with the approval endorsed thereon, shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough
before any work shown thereon is started. In the event the said Chairman of the Street Committee
or other persons designated by Council disapproves any plan or plans submitted by the company,
he shall either designate thereon by appropriate notes or marks, or both, the changes necessary
for approval, or in lieu of the entire plan shall submit another plan, method, manner or location of
accomplishing the results intended for the purposes of the said company.
That the erection of poles and the construction of conduits and manholes, under the provisions of
this ordinance, shall be subject to the supervision of the Borough Engineer, and said Company
shall replace and properly relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may have
been displaced or damaged by it in the construction and maintenance of its aerial and
underground facilities; and in the installation and maintenance of its underground system, said
Company shall not open or encumber more of any street, alley or highway than will be necessary
to enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency.
That space on the poles erected or in any conduits constructed under the provisions of this
ordinance may be used, free of charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police
telegraph system owned and maintained by the said Borough, provided that the said wires are
placed and maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed by the said company, and that no
use shall be made of such space by the said Borough which will result in interfering with or
impairing the operation or use of the said company's property or service or will endanger its
property or employees.
That the said company shall maintain all posts, poles, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes,
manholes, and all other apparatus erected or constructed under the provisions of this chapter in
good and safe order and condition, and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save
harmless the said Borough from and against all actions, claims, suits, damages and charges, and
against all loss, and necessary expenditures arising from the erection, construction and
maintenance of its system, or from its neglect or failure to maintain the said apparatus in good and
safe order and condition.
That nothing in this ordinance contained shall be construed to grant unto the said company any
exclusive right, or to prevent a grant of similar privileges to other companies.
This ordinance shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days from the date when a copy thereof
shall have been filed in the office of the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission,
provided that if the Commission shall, prior to the expiration of such period, institute a proceeding
under the provision of Section 911 of the Public Utility Law affecting its validity, this ordinance shall
become effective only upon approval by the said Commission.
That the said company shall, under its seal and by its proper officers within 60 days from the date
of the final enactment of this ordinance, signify in writing its acceptance of all the terms,
conditions, regulations and restrictions herein contained, in default of which this ordinance shall
become null and void and of no effect.
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 332/339
H. That all legal advertising or printing fees incurred by the Borough of Pleasant Hills in the passage
of this ordinance shall be paid by the said company.
Chapter A382. Water Agreement
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pleasant Hills 9-2-1967 by Ord. No.
392. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A382-1. Sale of water distribution facilities.
The Mayor, President of Borough Council and the Borough Secretary are hereby authorized to enter
into an agreement between the Borough of Jefferson and the Borough of Pleasant Hills, as sellers, and
the MONONGAHELA VALLEY WATER CORPORATION and the SOUTH PITTSBURGH WATER
COMPANY, as buyers, for the sale of the water distribution facilities which are presently owned by the
Borough of Jefferson and the Borough of Pleasant Hills pursuant to a decree of the Court of Common
Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania at number 3471 October Term, 1947. A copy of said
purchase agreement is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, Pleasant Hills Municipal Building,
410 East Bruceton Road, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and said purchase agreement may be inspected
there during regular business hours.
§ A382-2. Grant of authority.
The Mayor of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, the President of Council and the Borough Secretary are
further authorized and empowered to enter into and sign any documents, warranties, agreements,
deeds, easements, rights-of-way or any other document or certificate which may be necessary to
implement or consummate the purchase agreement for the sale of said water distribution system.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Pleasant Hills adopted since the
2003 publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion.
[Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
material (NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code nor on this list is
available from the office of the Borough Secretary. The last legislation reviewed for the 2003
publication of the Code was Ord. No. 818, adopted 7-21-2003. A complete listing, including disposition,
of all legislation reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code is on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
819 12-15-2003 Lewis Run Watershed Commission
and Cable Rate Review Board
repealed
Chs. 13 and 47
820 12-23-2003 Tax rate 2004 NCM
821 2-16-2004 Salaries See Ch. 89
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 333/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
822 3-15-2004 Sewer and solid waste charges 2004 Ch. 298, Art. III
823 5-17-2004 Loitering Ch. 238
824 5-17-2004 Code revisions Chs. 65, 71, 75, 77, 89, 97,
101, 126, 132, 144, 156, 162,
202, 216, 225, 234, 238, 248,
254, 273, 278, 282, 290, 298,
302, 350
825 5-17-2004 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
826 6-21-2004 Removal and impoundment of
vehicles amendment
Ch. 356, Art. VIII
827 6-21-2004 Uniform construction codes
administration and enforcement
Ch. 180, Art. I
828 6-21-2004 Wastewater pretreatment standards Ch. 298, Art. IV
829 6-21-2004 Property maintenance Ch. 268
830 6-21-2004 Swimming pools Repealed by Ord. No. 908
831 6-21-2004 Declaration of taking for right-of-way NCM
832 7-19-2004 Employees pension plan NCM; see Ch. 65
833 7-19-2004 Parking of vehicles in Mowry Park Ch. 356, Art. XIII
834 9-20-2004 Cable franchise agreement NCM
835 11-15-2004 Tapping fee Ch. 298, Art. V
836 11-15-2004 Establish right-of-way for sanitary
sewer line replacement
NCM
837 12-20-2004 Tax rate 2005 NCM
838 12-20-2004 Exotic animals Ch. 150, Art. IV
839 1-17-2005 Salaries See Ch. 89
840 1-17-2005 Sewer and solid waste charges 2005 Ch. 298, Art. III
841 1-17-2005 Pensions amendment See Ch. 65
842 2-21-2005 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 322
843 4-18-2005 Subdivision and land development
amendment; stormwater management
Ch. 322; superseded by Ord.
No. 981
844 5-16-2005 Nuisance properties Ch. 247
845 6-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
846 6-20-2005 Construction activity: time limitations Ch. 178, Art. I
847 6-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
848 7-18-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
849 8-15-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
850 9-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
851 11-21-2005 Street obstructions amendment Ch. 316, Art. I
852 11-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
853 12-29-2005 Sewer tapping fees amendment Ch. 298, Art. V
854 12-29-2005 Tax rate 2006 NCM
855 12-29-2005 Police pension amendment See Ch. 65
856 12-29-2005 Pensions amendment See Ch. 65
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 334/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
857 12-29-2005 2006 Salaries See Ch. 89
858 1-16-2006 Sewer and solid waste charges 2006 Ch. 298, Art. III
859 2-13-2006 Amended tax rate 2006 NCM
860 3-20-2006 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Ch. 322
861 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
862 3-20-2006 Sewer and solid waste charges 2006
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
863 3-20-2006 2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 89
864 4-17-2006 Street acceptance NCM
865 7-17-2006 Street acceptance NCM
866 7-17-2006 Establishing National Incident
Management System (NIMS) as
Borough plan
NCM
867 8-21-2006 2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 89
868 9-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
869 12-18-2006 Taxation: realty transfer tax Ch. 330, Art. VI
870 12-18-2006 Tax rate 2007 NCM
871 12-18-2006 2007 Salaries See Ch. 89
872 1-15-2007 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
873 2-19-2007 Solid waste: disposal and collection
amendment
Ch. 308, Art. II
874 5-21-2007 2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 89
875 7-16-2007 Construction activity: time limitations
amendment; grading and excavations
amendment
Chs. 178, Art. I; 222
876 8-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
877 11-19-2007 2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 89
878 11-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
879 11-19-2007 Local services tax Ch. 330, Art. VII
880 11-19-2007 Peddling and soliciting amendment Ch. 262
881 11-19-2007 Animals: depositing of dog waste
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. III
882 12-17-2007 Tax rate 2008 NCM
883 12-17-2007 2008 Salaries See Ch. 89
884 12-17-2007 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
885 1-21-2008 2008 salaries amendment See Ch. 89
886 1-21-2008 Wastewater pretreatment standards
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. IV
887 2-18-2008 Police pension plan NCM; see Ch. 65
888 2-18-2008 Realty transfer tax amendment Ch. 330, Art. IV
889 3-17-2008 Dog control amendment Ch. 150, Art. I
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 335/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
890 4-21-2008 Street obstructions amendment;
curbing specifications amendment
Ch. 316, Arts. I, III
891 7-21-2008 Open burning amendment Ch. 174
892 7-21-2008 Peddling and soliciting amendment Ch. 262
893 8-18-2008 Pensions See Ch. 65
894 12-15-2008 Insurance Ch. 231
895 12-15-2008 Tax rate 2009 NCM
896 12-15-2008 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
897 12-15-2008 2009 salaries See Ch. 89
898 2-16-2009 2009 salaries amendment See Ch. 89
899 2-16-2009 Grading and excavations amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 222; 374
900 2-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
901 2-16-2009 Streets and sidewalks: openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 316, Art. VI
902 5-18-2009 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
903 6-15-2009 Dog licensing; dog control amendment Ch. 150, Art. I
904 6-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
905 6-15-2009 Peace and good order: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 258, Art. I
906 6-15-2009 Subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Chs. 322; 374
907 7-20-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
908 8-17-2009 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs Ch. 326
909 8-17-2009 Sewers: connections; use amendment Ch. 298, Art. I
910 11-16-2009 Taxation: senior citizens exemption
amendment
Ch. 330, Art. IV
911 12-21-2009 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
912 12-21-2009 Park and recreation areas:
establishment of park and playground
amendment
Ch. 254, Art. I
913 12-21-2009 2010 salaries See Ch. 89
914 12-21-2009 Tax rate 2010 NCM
915 1-18-2010 Uniform construction codes: municipal
code officials
Ch. 180, Art. II
916 1-18-2010 Acceptance of public improvements in
Hi-Tor 5 Plan
NCM
917 2-22-2010 Heaters Ch. 228
918 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 336/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
919 3-15-2010 South Hills Regional Planning
Commission repealer; mining
repealer; real property deed registry;
coal tax repealer; trailers, cabins and
house-cars repealer; utility poles and
wires repealer; vehicles and traffic:
one-way traffic amendment;
pedestrian bridge repealer; wells
repealer; zoning amendment
Chs. 105, reference only; 242,
reference only; 273, Art. I; 330,
Art. I, reference only; 336,
reference only; 350, reference
only; 356, Art. II, Art. X,
reference only; 366, reference
only; 374
920 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
921 5-17-2010 Numbering of buildings amendment Ch. 170
922 5-17-2010 Solid waste: disposal and collection
amendment; placement for pickup
amendment
Ch. 308, Arts. II; III
923 6-21-2010 Solid waste: placement for pickup
amendment
Ch. 308, Art. III
924 6-21-2010 Police Pension Plan amendment See Ch. 65
925 6-21-2010 Police Pension Plan amendment See Ch. 65
926 7-19-2010 Police Pension Plan amendment See Ch. 65
927 11-15-2010 Dog licensing; dog control amendment Ch. 150, Art. I
928 12-20-2010 Tax rate 2011 NCM
929 12-20-2010 2011 salaries See Ch. 89
930 12-20-2010 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
931 2-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
932 2-28-2011 Secondhand dealers Ch. 295
933 2-28-2011 Sewers: pretreatment standards
amendment
Ch. 298, Art. IV
934 2-28-2011 Bank note NCM
935 3-21-2011 Solid waste: recycling amendment Ch. 308, Art. I
936 4-18-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
937 6-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
938 7-18-2011 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 268
939 7-18-2011 Police pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
940 8-15-2011 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
amendment
Ch. 326
941 10-17-2011 Parking restrictions amendment Ch. 356, Art. V
942 12-19-2011 Tax rate 2012 NCM
943 12-19-2011 2012 salaries See Ch. 89
944 12-19-2011 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
945 12-19-2011 Employees pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
946 12-19-2011 Police pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
947 12-19-2011 Junked and abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 360
948 3-19-2012 Annexation NCM
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 337/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
949 4-16-2012 Curb cut permits repealer Ch. 316, Art. IV, reference only
950 4-16-2012 False alarms amendment Ch. 138, Art. II
951 7-16-2012 Prohibited turns amendment Ch. 356, Art. XII
952 10-15-2012 Police pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
953 11-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
954 12-17-2012 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
955 12-17-2012 2013 salaries See Ch. 89
956 1-21-2013 Parking restrictions amendment Ch. 356, Art. V
957 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 374
958 5-20-2013 Vehicles and traffic: weight limits and
trucks amendment
Ch. 356, Art. III
959 6-10-2013 Tax basis 2013 NCM
960 6-10-2013 Tax rate 2013 NCM
961 7-15-2013 Unavailability of Fire Marshal Ch. 180, Art. III
962 11-18-2013 Employees pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
963 12-16-2013 2014 salaries See Ch. 89
964 12-16-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
965 12-16-2013 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
966 1-20-2014 Tax rate 2014 amendment NCM
967 2-17-2014 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
968 2-17-2014 Streets and sidewalks: openings and
excavations amendment; vehicles and
traffic: parking restrictions amendment
Chs. 316, Art. VI; 356, Art. V
969 3-17-2014 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
970 7-21-2014 Floodplain management Ch. 216
971 7-21-2014 Animals: keeping of chickens Ch. 150, Art. V
972 7-21-2014 Cable franchise agreement NCM
973 9-15-2014 Animals: housing of farm animals
within residential zoning districts
Ch. 150, Art. VI
974 10-20-2014 2014 salaries amendment See Ch. 89
975 11-17-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
976 12-15-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
977 12-15-2014 Sewer and solid waste rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
978 12-15-2014 Employees pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
979 12-15-2014 2015 salaries See Ch. 89
980 12-15-2014 Storm sewers: prohibited discharges
and connections
Ch. 312, Art. I
981 12-15-2014 Stormwater management Superseded by Ord. No. 1014
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 338/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
982 5-18-2015 Property maintenance amendment;
streets and sidewalks: maintenance of
sidewalks and curbs
Ch. 268; Ch. 316, Art. VII
983 6-15-2015 Acceptance of public improvements in
Hi-Tor Plan No. 6R
NCM
984 8-17-2015 Animals: dog licensing; dog control
amendment; nuisances: animals
running at large; garbage; obstructions
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I; Ch. 248, Art. I
985 9-21-2015 Emergency services: reimbursement
for costs amendment
Ch. 194, Art. I
986 10-19-2015 Grading and excavations amendment Ch. 222
987 10-19-2015 Property registries: registration of
leased residential dwelling units
Ch. 273, Art. III
988 12-21-2015 Tax rate 2016 NCM
989 12-21-2015 2016 salaries See Ch. 89
990 12-21-2015 Sewers: sewer and solid waste rates
and charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
991 12-21-2015 Uniform construction codes:
maintenance of fire inspection records
Ch. 180, Art. IV
992 1-18-2016 Employees pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
993 2-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 356
994 2-15-2016 Construction activity amendment Ch. 178
995 3-21-2016 2016 salaries amendment See Ch. 89
996 3-21-2016 Sewers amendment Ch. 298
997 4-18-2016 Official newspaper amendment Ch. 59
998 12-19-2016 Public Works superintendent salary
amendment
See. Ch. 89
999 12-19-2016 Employees pension plan amendment See Ch. 65
1000 12-19-2016 Tax rate 2017 NCM
1001 12-19-2016 Sewers: sewer and solid waste rates
and charges amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
1002 12-19-2016 2017 salaries See Ch. 89
1003 5-15-2017 2017 Salaries Amendment See Ch. 89
1004 5-15-2017 Lease Rental Debt NCM
1005 12-18-2017 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
1006 12-18-2017 2018 Salaries See Ch. 89
1007 12-18-2017 Sewers: Sewer and Solid Waste Rates
and Charges Amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
1008 2-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 374
1009 2-19-2018 Property Maintenance Amendment Ch. 268
1010 6-17-2018 Regulations for Medical Marijuana
Facilities
Ch. 242
1011 6-18-2018 Property Maintenance Amendment;
Streets and Sidewalks: Maintenance
of Sidewalks and Curbs Amendment
Ch. 268; Ch. 316, Art. VII
8/17/2020 Borough of Pleasant Hills, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/PL1849?guid=PL1849&children=true 339/339
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1012 8-20-2018 Taxation: Volunteer Service Credit Ch. 330, Art. VIII
1013 8-20-2018 Alarm Systems: Fees for Private
Burglar Alarm Systems Amendment;
False Alarms Amendment
Ch. 138, Art. I; Ch. 138, Art. II
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1014 11-19-2018 Stormwater Management Ch. 323 27
1015 11-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Prohibited Turns
Amendment
Ch. 356, Art. XII 27
1016 12-17-2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM 27
1017 12-17-2018 2019 Salaries See Ch. 89 27
1018 12-17-2018 Sewers: Sewer and Solid
Waste Rates and Charges
Amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III 27
1019 6-17-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM 27
1020 6-17-2019 2019 Salaries Amendment NCM 27
1021 7-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Restricted Parking in
Boulevard Park
Ch. 356, Art. XIV 27
1022 7-15-2019 Employees Pension Plan See Ch. 65 27
1023 8-19-2019 Peace and Good Order:
General Provisions
Amendment; Consumer
Fireworks
Ch. 258, Art. I; Ch.
258, Art. V
27
1024 12-16-2019 Tax Rate 2020 NCM 28
1025 12-16-2019 2020 Salaries See Ch. 89 28
1026 12-16-2019 Sewers: Sewer and Solid
Waste Rates and Charges
Amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III 28
1027 12-16-2019 Sewers: Pretreatment
Standards Amendment
Ch. 298, Art. IV 28
1028 2-18-2020 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit Amendment
See Ch. 330, Art.
VIII
28