Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-372]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Palmer, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 190,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Palmer, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Palmer,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Palmer, and it is the intention of
said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Palmer and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-7-2007.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 PALMER CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 14A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. All those Township ordinances numbered 1 through 149 not presently
contained in the Code are hereby repealed, except that the following
ordinances are hereby saved from repeal: Numbers 149, 148, 142, 138,
137, 136, 121, 120, 113, 109, 106, 105, 104, 103, 102, 93, 87, 75, 70,
69, 61, 60, 59, 53, 52, 46, 42, 37 and 21.
T. Any ordinance dealing with sewer or water connection rates,
specifically Ordinance Nos. 242 and 248.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 PALMER CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after the 5th day of November 2007.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-25-1988 as Ord. No. 227]
§ 1-16. Violations and penalties.
A. For violations of building, housing, property maintenance, health, fire
or other public safety codes or ordinances in the Township of Palmer,
fines and penalties may be imposed not exceeding $1,000.
B. For violations of water, air and noise pollution codes and ordinances in
the Township of Palmer, fines and penalties may be imposed not
exceeding $1,000.
C. For violations of any other codes or ordinances in the Township of
Palmer, fines and penalties may be imposed not exceeding $600.
D. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
E. The fines and penalties stated herein may be collected by suit or
summary proceedings brought in the name of the Township of Palmer
before the Justice of the Peace/the District Magistrate/the District
Justice having jurisdiction. Proceedings for violations of codes and
ordinances in the Township of Palmer and for the collection of fines and
penalties imposed thereby may be commenced by warrant or by
summons, at the discretion of the Justice of the Peace/District
Magistrate/District Justice before whom the proceedings were begun.
No warrant shall be issued, except upon complaint on oath or
affirmation specifying the ordinance for which the violation is issued.
All proceedings shall be directed to, and be served by, a constable of the
Township of Palmer. Warrants shall be returnable forthwith and, upon
such return, like proceedings shall be had, as in cases of summary
conviction. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of the
codes and ordinances of the Township of Palmer shall be paid over to
the township treasury. Upon judgment against any person by summary
conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the cost, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the township lockup for a period not
exceeding five days or to the Northampton County Prison or the
Northampton County Workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
F. The reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in the collection of any
delinquent account, including municipal claims, municipal liens, taxes,
tax claims and tax liens as permitted by the Municipal Claim and Tax
Lien Law, Act of May 16, 1923, PL 207, § 3, as amended, 53 P.S. § 7106,
shall be imposed on persons and property owing such claims and be
assessed according to the attorney fee schedule set forth in Resolution
No. 2005-37 of the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors, as amended
from time to time. [Added 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-402]
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
G. The terms of this ordinance shall be effective five days after its
enactment and further shall be incorporated herein by reference into
the Palmer Township Sewer Use Ordinance § 147-8, governing
violations and penalties; the Palmer Township Taxation Ordinance,
Chapter 173, Article V, governing real property; and the Palmer
Township Water Supply Ordinance, § 184-9, governing violations and
penalties. Said sections of those ordinances are hereby amended to
cross reference this ordinance. [Added 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-402]
§ 1-16 PALMER CODE § 1-16
1:10
Chapter 6
FIRE COMMISSIONER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 43.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Fire fighting — See Ch. 79.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Smoking — See Ch. 153.
§ 6-1. Statutory authority.
The Township of Palmer, by and through its Board of Supervisors, by virtue
of the authority set forth in Section 1803 of the Second Class Township
Code,1 as amended, enacts and ordains as follows.
§ 6-2. Incorporation of whereas clauses.
All whereas clauses referred to above shall be incorporated herein by
reference.2
§ 6-3. Consolidation of positions.
The previous positions of Fire Administrator and Fire Chief shall be
consolidated into one position of employment known as the "Fire
Commissioner."
§ 6-4. Position to be paid employment; appointment; supervision.
§ 6-5. Chief operating officer of Fire Department.
The Fire Commissioner shall be the chief operating officer of the Palmer
Municipal Fire Department.
§ 6-6. Elimination of prior positions.
A. The position of Fire Commissioner shall be a paid employment position
of Palmer Township, and the individual designated to serve that position
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.
B. The Fire Commissioner shall serve solely at the discretion and pleasure
of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.
C. The Fire Commissioner shall also be subordinate to the position: of
Township Manager.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66803.
2. Editor's Note: The whereas clauses are on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-16 FIRE COMMISSIONER § 6-6
6:11
§ 6-7. Powers and duties.
§ 6-8. Residency requirement.
The Fire Commissioner shall reside within the Township boundaries.
§ 6-9. Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshal and Assistant Chiefs.
Immediately upon his appointment, the Fire Commissioner may appoint a
Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshal and one or more Assistant Chiefs
for each division.
§ 6-10. Effect on bylaws.
A. The position of Fire Chief shall be eliminated with all responsibilities of
the previous position of Fire Chief being assumed by the Fire
Commissioner.
B. The position of Fire Administrator shall be eliminated with all
previously imposed responsibilities of that position being assumed by
the Fire Commissioner.
A. The Fire Commissioner shall be subject to the power and authority of
the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors, and the Fire Commissioner
shall be in charge at all fires, emergencies, drills and demonstrations
related to firesafety and fire prevention in Palmer Township.
B. The Fire Commissioner shall possess all the rights, powers and duties
usually vested in a Fire Chief in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The Fire Commissioner shall report monthly in writing to the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors on all activities and fire calls.
D. The Fire Commissioner shall have overall and final responsibility for all
operating records and equipment, including his assignment and shall
see to replacement or repair of defective equipment.
E. The Fire Commissioner shall be entitled to the respect of the members
of the Department.
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall preempt and shall supersede any
provisions of the bylaws of the Palmer Municipal Fire Department, Inc.
which are inconsistent with the terms of this ordinance.
B. The bylaws of the Department shall be amended within 90 days of the
enactment of this ordinance to further implement the intent of the
Board of Supervisors and directives of this ordinance.
§ 6-6 PALMER CODE § 6-10
6:12
Chapter 11
JOINT SEWER BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Sewer Authority — See Ch. 17.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
145.
Sewer rents — See Ch. 147, Art. I.
Sewer regulations — See Ch. 147, Art. II.
§ 11-1. Intention to join; purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Palmer, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, being the governing body of the said municipality, hereby
signifies its intention and desire to join with the Township of Bethlehem,
the City of Easton, the Township of Forks, the Borough of Glendon, the
Township of Lower Mt. Bethel, the Township of Lower Nazareth, the
Borough of Nazareth, the Township of Palmer, the Township of Plainfield,
the Borough of Stockertown, the Borough of Tatamy, the Township of Upper
Nazareth, the Borough of West Easton, the Township of Williams, the
Borough of Wilson and the Borough of Wind Cap, all of the County of
Northampton, State of Pennsylvania, or any of them, or any other
municipalities of the said Northampton County, to organize a Joint Sewer
Board under the provisions of the Township Code for Second Class
Townships, Act 1947, July 10, P.L. (1481), Section 38, as amended, for the
purpose of securing preliminary surveys and estimates and acting generally
as an advisory and administrative agency in constructing, improving,
maintaining and operating sewers and sewer systems, including trunk line
sewers or drains and sewage treatment works.
§ 11-2. Appointment of representative.
One representative of this municipality shall be appointed on the said Joint
Sewer Board by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and any vacancy in
such position may be filled by the Board of Supervisors by resolution from
time to time.
§ 11-3. Authority to appoint.
The Joints Sewer Board is authorized to appoint an engineer, a solicitor
and such other assistants as are deemed necessary, and the Board of
Supervisors may agree to the share of the compensation and costs the
township shall pay to such persons or Board, by resolution.
§ 11-4. Necessary steps to effect participation directed.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Palmer is hereby directed to do
all such other things necessary or appropriate to effect the participation by
the township in a Joint Sewer Board.
§ 6-10 JOINT SEWER BOARD § 11-5
11:13
§ 11-5. Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are inconsistent
herewith, be and the same are hereby repealed.
Chapter 13
MANAGER
§ 13-1. Creation of office.
The office of the Township Manager is hereby created by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Palmer of Northampton County, subject to
the right of the Township, by ordinance, at any time to abolish said office.
§ 13-2. Appointment and removal.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint by a majority vote of all members
one person to fill the office of Township Manager. The person duly appointed
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors in accordance with
§ 1301 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66301, as amended.
The Township Manager shall be subject to removal at any time by a majority
vote of all members of the Board of Supervisors. The Township Manager
need not be a resident of the Township of Palmer or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but as soon as possible
thereafter he shall become and during his tenure as Manager he shall
remain a resident of the Township.
§ 13-3. Conditions, duties and responsibilities.
Conditions of employment may be unilaterally created and/or abolished by
the Board of Supervisors prior to and after the employment of the Township
Manager. Said conditions, duties and responsibilities may be created by
motion or resolution of the Board of Supervisors and may include specific
requirements contained within a written job description approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 13-4. Qualifications.
The Township Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his executive,
administrative, and leadership qualifications and without regard to race,
color, religious creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, or past handicap or
disability pursuant to the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951,
or other applicable local, state or federal law.
§ 13-5. Bond.
Prior to performing and entering upon his duties, the Township Manager
shall give bond to the Township of Palmer with a bonding company as
surety in such a sum as is set by resolution by the Board of Supervisors,
§ 11-5 PALMER CODE § 13-5
13:14
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, premium for said
bond to be paid by the Township of Palmer.
§ 13-6. Compensation.
The Township Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 13-7. General duties.
§ 13-8. Employees. [Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 278]
A. The Township Manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties
assigned to a Township Manager by statute and such other authority as
may be granted to the Township Manager by the Township Board of
Supervisors. The Township Manager shall be charged with the
enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the municipality in so far
as their enforcement is within the powers of the Township, excepting
however, that the Township Manager shall in no way restrict, infringe,
or supplant the authority of the members of the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 278]
B. The Township Manager shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and all other meetings as required by the Board of
Supervisors. The Township Manager shall keep the Board of
Supervisors informed as to the affairs of the Township and shall
recommend to the Board of Supervisors such actions necessary or
expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the Township.
A. The Township manager shall administer, supervise and be responsible
for the activities of all office and clerical employees of the Township,
other than such employees which may be exempted from the
supervision of the Township manager by the Board of Supervisors and
which are exempt from supervision by statute or law. The Township
Manager shall administer, supervise and be responsible for day to day
activities of all Code Enforcement Officials, including, but not limited
to: Zoning Officers, Building Officials, Code Enforcement Officers, and/
or any other employees so directed by the Board of Supervisors. Unless
otherwise preempted by the Board of Supervisors, statute or law, the
Township Manager shall have charge of all personnel of the Township
including the Road Department, Water, Sewer, Parks, Planning,
Recreation Personnel, and General Administration Departments. The
Township Manager shall be authorized to hire and, when he shall deem
it necessary for the good of the service and the Township, shall suspend
or discharge all employees under his supervision provided: that persons
covered by the Civil Service provisions of the Second Class Township
Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance with such
provisions. Provided further: that the Manager shall report, at the next
meeting thereafter of the Board of Supervisors, any action taken by
authority of this section. The Township Manager shall administer,
§ 13-5 MANAGER § 13-8
13:15
§ 13-9. Planning.
The Township Manager shall be responsible for planning, initiating,
supervising, completing, costing and documenting all projects and activities
of all departments of the Township. The Township Manager shall maintain
priorities in accordance with requirements of the Board of Supervisors
and shall be responsible to the appropriate committee of the Board of
Supervisors for all works and projects of these departments. The Township
Manager shall insure that all activities under his jurisdiction are
accomplished in a timely and orderly manner.
§ 13-10. Contracts.
The Township Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the
Township may be a party, and may sign on behalf of the Board of
Supervisors and with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, any contract
excepting where the Board of Supervisors directs that some other
representative or officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Township
Manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the Township is
a party are fully performed by all parties thereof.
§ 13-11. Purchases.
The Township Manager shall be the general purchasing agent for the
Township, and except where specific provision to the contrary is made by
law or by the Board of Supervisors, the Township Manager shall make all
purchases of supplies, materials and equipment authorized by the Board
of Supervisors in the manner prescribed by and subject to the limitations
imposed by law. No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting
upon authorization by the Board of Supervisors and no expense shall be
incurred except for the purpose for which no prior appropriation is required
by law if the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpended appropriation
for the purpose.
§ 13-12. Appropriation and levies.
The Township Manager shall see that all money owed the Township is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the security and
collection of all of the Township's claims.
supervise and be responsible for day-to-day activities of the Police
Department, including the Chief of Police.
B. In addition, the Township Manager shall administer, supervise, and be
responsible for activities of any other Township employees who shall be
assigned to his jurisdiction by ordinance or resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 13-8 PALMER CODE § 13-13
13:16
§ 13-13. Accounts.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to keep current accounts
showing all times and fiscal conditions of the Township, including the
current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and
anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts.
§ 13-14. Budgeting.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to prepare the preliminary
budget for review and final approval by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 13-15. Inventories/property.
The Township Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and
personal property of the Township and its location and shall be responsible
for the care and custody of all such property, including equipment,
buildings, parks, and all other Township property, which is not by law
assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
§ 13-16. Reports and publications.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to see to the publication of
all notices, ordinances, or other documents required by law to be published
and to prepare or caused to be prepared all reports which the Township or
any of the officials thereof are required by law to prepare.
§ 13-17. Records/certificates.
A. The Township Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal
records required by law to be kept by the Township and not specifically
delegated to some other specific Township officer and/or employee.
Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain
records, the Township Manager shall make available to such officer all
necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such records. And in
compliance herewith, the Township Manager shall make available to
the clerk stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the
preparation of the journal of Board of Supervisors proceedings, if
required, and the record of ordinances and all other documents which
by law the Board of Supervisors and/or the Township is required to
keep; and the Township Manager shall perform similar service for the
Treasurer and/or Secretary in the maintenance of bond registers and all
other records or documents which by law the Treasurer/Secretary or
any other employee and/or official is required to keep or prepare.
B. Where the law requires or provides for certification of the records or
documents by any officer of the Township, the Township Manager shall
cause such records or documents to be properly prepared and
presented by such officer for the Township Manager's signature.
§ 13-13 MANAGER § 13-18
13:17
§ 13-18. Maps/plats.
The Township Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and
plats showing the location of all Township utilities and/or properties, all
streets and other public places and all lots or parcels of land subdivided
according to law.
§ 13-19. Offices.
The Township Manager shall maintain an office in the Township Municipal
Building and shall spend such time in the performance of his duties as may
be required by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 13-20. Absence from the Township.
In the event that the Township Manager shall be absent from the Township
or incapacitated from performing the duties of the position, the Board
of Supervisors shall duly appoint such person who shall act as Township
Manager during his absence or incapacity.
§ 13-21. Board of Supervisors' powers and duties.
The Board of Supervisors are hereby authorized to delegate, in writing, to
the Township Manager, subject to recall by written notification at anytime,
in accordance with § 1301 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66301, any of the Township Manager's nonlegislative and nonjudicial
powers and duties.
§ 13-22. Compatibility with Secretary/Treasurer statutory offices.
In accordance with § 1301 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 63301, it is recognized that the office of the Township Manager is
compatible with the office of Township Secretary and/or Township
Treasurer, and with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, the Township
Manager shall perform the duties of Township Treasurer and/or Township
Secretary in accordance with the law.
Chapter 15
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Sewer Authority — See Ch. 17.
§ 15-1. Intention to organize.
The Board of Road Supervisors hereby expresses its intention to organize
and incorporate a Municipal Authority for Palmer Township in accordance
§ 13-18 PALMER CODE § 15-1
15:18
with the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, immediately after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 15-2. Title of proposed authority.
The name of the proposed authority will be "Palmer Township Municipal
Authority."
§ 15-3. Purpose.
The Authority will be organized and incorporated for the purpose of
acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and operating,
owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, a public school
building and its appurtenances.
§ 15-4. First members.
The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Authority will be as follows: Robert Laub, Mt. Rt. 35, Easton,
Pa., term of five years; Arthur Kellow, Mt. Rt. 35, Easton, Pa., term of four
years; John Rau, Mt. Rt. 41, Easton, Pa., term of three years; Jos. Kuebler,
2515 Northampton St., Easton, Pa., term of two years; Harrison T. Sales,
Mt. Rt. 36, Easton, Pa., term of one year.
Chapter 17
MUNICIPAL SEWER AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Sewer Board — See Ch. 11.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
145.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
§ 15-1 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 15-4
15:19

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)3
§ 17-1. through § 17-4. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Palmer Township Municipal Sewer Authority, adopted
1-6-1964 by Ord. No. 56, was repealed 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-407.
§ 17-1 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-1
15:21

ARTICLE II
Agreement With Forks Township Municipal Sewer Authority
[Adopted 4-1-1968 as Ord. No. 89]
§ 17-5. Agreement.
The form of the agreement as presented to this meeting, a true and correct
copy of which is hereby directed to be filed by the Secretary of the township
among the township records, to be entered into by and among Forks
Township and Forks Authority on the one hand and Palmer Township and
Palmer Authority on the other hand, providing, inter alia, for the connection
to the Bushkill interceptor of the proposed sewage collection facilities to
be constructed in Palmer Township for the purpose of delivering into the
Bushkill interceptor sewage and wastes from such collection facilities for
transportation to the City of Easton treatment plant for treatment and
ultimate disposal, and providing for the payment of certain charges therefor
by Palmer Township, is hereby approved, and the Chairman or the Vice-
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute,
acknowledge and deliver, and the Township Secretary or Assistant
Secretary is hereby authorized to affix the corporate seal of the township
and to attest on behalf of the township an agreement in any number
of counterparts, each of which shall be an original, substantially in the
form as presented to this meeting, with such changes therein as may be
recommended by counsel and approved by such officers executing and
attesting the same upon or prior to such execution and attestation.
§ 17-6. Execution of ordinance and agreement authorized.
The proper officers of the township are hereby authorized and empowered
on behalf of the township to execute any and all papers and documents and
to do and cause to be done any and all acts and things necessary or proper
for the execution or carrying out of this ordinance and the provisions of the
agreement.
§ 17-7. Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are inconsistent
herewith, be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 17-5 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-7
15:23

ARTICLE III
Bushkill - Lower Lehigh Joint Sewer Authority
[Adopted 10-4-1971 as Ord. No. 114]
§ 17-8. Intention to organize.
It is the desire and intention of the Township of Palmer, County of
Northampton and State of Pennsylvania to organize a joint municipal sewer
authority with the Boroughs of Tatamy and Stockertown and the Townships
of Bushkill and Plainfield, and such other municipalities as may in the
future become members of the same, under the authority of the Municipal
Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, designated Act No. 164,
together with all supplements thereof and amendments thereto, for the
purpose of exercising and enjoying all the powers of the Act, as
supplemented and amended.
§ 17-9. Proposed Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority, in full, are as
follows:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "Bushkill - Lower Lehigh Joint Sewer
Authority."
B. No other Authority has ever been organized in the Borough of Tatamy
or the Borough of Stockertown, nor in the Townships of Bushkill and
Plainfield, all located in the County of Northampton and State of
Pennsylvania, under any Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
neither is the Borough of Tatamy or the Borough of Stockertown, or the
Townships of Bushkill and Plainfield a party in any Authority which
services the said municipalities for any purpose. The Township of
Palmer formed the Palmer Township Municipal Sewer Authority on the
20th day of January 1964, on which date it was incorporated.
C. The incorporating municipalities will be the Borough of Tatamy and the
Borough of Stockertown, and the Townships of Palmer, Bushkill and
Plainfield. The address of the office of the Borough of Tatamy is 518
Broad Street, Tatamy, Pennsylvania; and the address of the office of the
Borough of Stockertown is Borough Hall, 212 Main Street,
Stockertown, Pennsylvania. The address of the office of Palmer
Township is 3245 Freemansburg Avenue, Easton, Pennsylvania. The
address of Bushkill Township is 423 West Moorestown Road, Nazareth,
Pennsylvania. The address of Plainfield Township is R. D. No. 3,
Nazareth, Pennsylvania.
D. The Councilmen of the Borough of Tatamy and their addresses are as
follows:
§ 17-8 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-9
15:25
Edna Barrall (Mrs.) 441 Broad Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
Luke J. Duignam 613 Broad Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
Karl Lee Johnson 533 Broad Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
Robert Miller, President 447 Broad Street.
Tatamy, Pa.
Sherwood L. Steward 213 Hobson Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
Delbert Fehnel 219 Broad Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
Joseph McHale 205 Hobson Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
E. The Councilmen of the Borough of Stockertown, and their addresses
are as follows:
Robert Siebler, President Lincoln Avenue,
Stockertown, Pa.
Joseph Lopresti Stockertown, Pa.
Martin Bortz 104 Lincoln Avenue,
Stockertown, Pa.
William Barlett 117 Main Street,
Stockertown, Pa.
Luke Siegfried 212 Old Easton Road,
Stockertown, Pa.
Carl Scheffler Stockertown, Pa.
Walter Bartholomew 404 Main Street,
Stockertown, Pa.
F. The names and addresses of the Supervisors of Palmer Township are as
follows:
§ 17-9 PALMER CODE § 17-9
15:26
H. Robert Daws, Chairman 2810 Green Pond Road,
Easton, Pa.
Paul C. Kocher 391 South Nulton Avenue,
Easton, Pa.
B. Jack Anderson 60 Ridgewood Road,
Easton, Pa.
Edward C. Vivian Lynnwood Avenue, Lincoln
Terrace, Easton, Pa.
Harrison T. Sales 1230 Stones Crossing
Road, Easton, Pa.
G. The names and addresses of the Supervisors of Bushkill Township are
as follows:
Gregor Unger, Chairman 556 Cherry Hill Road,
Nazareth, Pa.
Arthur Hess 429 Old Grade Road,
Wind Gap, Pa.
Steve Lakatas 209 E. Douglasville Road,
Nazareth, Pa.
H. The names and addresses of the Supervisors of Plainfield Township are
as follows:
William Danner, President R. D. No. 3, Nazareth, Pa,
Elwood Brewer R. D. No. 1, Pen Argyl, Pa.
John Houck R. D. No. 1, Wind Gap, Pa.
I. The names and addresses and the terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority are as follows:
Name Address Term
Joseph M. McHale 205 Hobson Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
1 year
Delbert R. Fehnel 219 Broad Street,
Tatamy, Pa.
2 years
Martin F. Bortz 104 Lincoln Street,
Stockertown, Pa.
5 years
§ 17-9 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-9
15:27
§ 17-10. Purpose.
The said Authority shall be for the purpose of acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, maintaining and operating sanitary and storm
sewers or parts thereof in portions of the Borough of Tatamy, Borough
of Stockertown and Townships of Palmer, Bushkill and Plainfield, and for
doing any and all lawful things necessary for said purposes; and further,
the Authority may enter into agreements with neighboring municipalities in
order to accomplish said purposes.
§ 17-11. Execution of provisions authorized.
The Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township is hereby authorized and
directed to do and perform every lawful requisite and convenient thing for
the organization of the said Authority which is provided and authorized by
said Act of 1945, as supplemented and amended.4
Frank Ressler 302 Birch Street,
Stockertown, Pa.
1 year
Richard O. Piatt 211 Old Orchard Drive,
Easton, Pa.
(Palmer Township)
3 years
Nicholas Chrin 397 South Greenwood
Avenue, Easton, Pa.
(Palmer Township)
4 years
Marlyn Rader Belfast, R. D. No. 3,
Nazareth, Pa.
(Plainfield Township)
4 years
Donald Rohn R. D. No. 3, Nazareth, Pa.
(Plainfield Township)
3 years
Dwight H. Custer 570 Cherry Hill Road,
Nazareth, Pa.
(Bushkill Township)
2 years
Clarence Bateman 798 Clearfield Road,
Nazareth, Pa.
(Bushkill Township)
5 years
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 17-9 PALMER CODE § 17-11
15:28
ARTICLE IV
Agreement With Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority
[Adopted 2-8-1988 as Ord. No. 226]
§ 17-12. Approval of agreement.
The township hereby approves the service agreement in the form attached
hereto as Exhibit A5 and authorizes the Supervisors of the township to
execute such service agreement in such form with such changes and
modifications, if any, as may be approved by such Supervisors, the execution
of the service agreement to be conclusive evidence of such approval and the
Township Secretary is hereby authorized to affix the Seal of the township,
to attest the same and to deliver the service agreement to the Authority.
§ 17-13. Authorization.
The proper Supervisors of the township are hereby authorized, empowered
and directed to execute and deliver any and all further agreements,
instruments, certificates or other documents and to do or cause to be done
all other acts and things necessary and proper for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 17-14. Appointment of agent.
The Authority is hereby appointed as agent for the township for the
enforcement of the various ordinances in place and to be adopted pertaining
to permits, affluent characteristics and discharges within the boundaries of
said township.
5. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, which comprises the service agreement, and any subsequent
amendments thereto, is currently on file in the Township offices and may be reviewed
there during regular business hours.
§ 17-12 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-14
15:29

ARTICLE V
Agreement with Nazareth Borough Municipal Authority
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-349]
§ 17-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, unless otherwise expressly used, the
following terms shall have the meanings herein respectively indicated:
AUTHORITY — Nazareth Borough Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
DOMESTIC WASTE — The normal waterborne or dissolved waste
discharged by a residential household, as well as toilet wastes discharged
by any user.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the service area
of the Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste
shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole or in part, is the
operation of a business enterprise for the manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product, commodity
or article, or from which any process waste, as distinct from sanitary
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne or dissolved wastes or process contact cooling water, other than
domestic waste, that is ejected, escaping or discharged into the municipal
wastewater system. Industrial waste includes pollutant and toxic pollutants
as defined herein. Industrial waste includes waste from health care facilities
that would be otherwise identified as domestic waste.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from sewer to the
curbline, or if there shall be no curbline to the property line or if no such
lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of or place
in a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity of any kind.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, liquid waste, gaseous waste,
incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes,
§ 17-15 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-15
15:31
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
discharged from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township, owned and
operated by the Authority.
STREET — Any street, alley, public way and public place as now laid out,
whether opened or unopened, dedicated to public use, and all extensions or
additions thereof as may now or hereafter be made.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania,
a municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through
its Board of Supervisors, or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants: 1) listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by EPA under the Act; or 2) discharged
into the municipal wastewater system at a concentration that has been
or can be shown by scientific experiment to inhibit or disrupt any part
or portion of the treatment process; or 3) listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by DEP; or 4) specifically identified by any other state or
federal act as being toxic.
§ 17-16. Provisions of agreement.
The Township, by and through its Board of Supervisors, shall enter into an
agreement with the Authority, which agreement shall provide that:
A. The Board shall designate a service area within the Township for which
service to the Authority will be available.6
B. Township grants to the Authority the license, franchise, right and
privilege of constructing, maintaining and operating within the
Township a collection system for sanitary sewage, which sewage will be
transported by said system to the plant of the Authority. No person shall
extend the sewer lines constructed under this ordinance and the
enabling intermunicipal agreement beyond the service area hereunder.
C. Township authorizes the Authority in the operation of the construction,
maintenance and operation of the collection system to provide for the
payment of the necessary costs of construction, maintenance and
operation in accordance with the terms of this ordinance, laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and rules and regulations which may
6. Editor's Note: The Service Area is set forth on a map entitled "Exhibit B," as amended
12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-427, which map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 17-15 PALMER CODE § 17-16
15:32
§ 17-17. Requirements; prohibitions.
be promulgated by the Authority and the Township. Authority shall
be totally responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance
of the sewer collection system in the service area and shall pay for
all costs of construction, maintenance, operation and administration,
including all engineering, legal and administrative costs incurred by the
Authority and the Township.
D. The Authority's construction, operation and maintenance of the system
shall be performed so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of
persons, or to interfere with new improvements the Township may
deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free
use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property.
E. The Authority shall be responsible to restore the streets in accordance
with the reasonable rules, regulations and conditions as shall be
adopted and specified from time to time, by resolution or ordinance of
this Township, and this Township does reserve the right to adopt and
specify, from time to time, such reasonable rules, regulations and
conditions in connection with exercise by the Authority of such rights
and privileges.
F. In the event that a change is made in the grade of public streets, alleys,
avenues and ground by the Township which may necessitate a change
in the system to conform to the change of grade, Authority shall make
necessary changes to the system at its own expense upon due notice
from the Board.
A. The owner of any property benefitted, improved or accommodated by a
sewer shall connect such property with such sewer, in such manner as
the Authority may require, within 45 days after notice to such owner
from the Authority to make such connection, for the purpose of
discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
property, subject to the rules and regulations as shall be established by
the Authority from time to time.
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any property, after
connection of such property with a sewer, shall be required to be
conducted into a sewer, subject to the rules and regulations as shall be
established herein or as otherwise shall be established by the Authority
from time to time.
C. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A. No person
shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within
this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of
Subsection A, except where suitable treatment has been provided
which is satisfactory to the Authority.
§ 17-16 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-17
15:33
§ 17-18. Permits; connections.
D. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or maintained at any time upon any property which has
been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under Subsection
A above to be connected to a sewer. Every such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall be
abandoned and, at the discretion of the Township, shall be cleaned and
filled at the expense of the owner of such property and under the
direction and supervision of the Authority, and any such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned
and, if required by this Township, cleansed and filled shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the
expense of the owner of such improved property.
E. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
F. The notice by the Authority to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in Subsection A, shall consist of a copy of this part, including any
amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of
each section hereof, and a written or printed document requiring the
connection in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and
specifying that such connection be made within 45 days from the date
such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after a sewer
is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial
waste for treatment and disposal from the particular improved
property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal
service by registered mail or by such other method as at the time may
be provided by law.
A. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb in any manner any sewer or any part of the sewer
system without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the Authority.
B. Application for a permit required under Subsection A of this section
shall be made by the owner of the improved property served or to be
served.
C. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any property
with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the following
conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Authority of the desire and
intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by Subsection A of this section.
(3) Such person shall have given the Authority at least 24 hours' notice
of the time when such connection will be made so that the
§ 17-17 PALMER CODE § 17-18
15:34
§ 17-19. Rules and regulations.
Authority may supervise and inspect the work of connection and
necessary testing.
(4) Such person shall have furnished satisfactory evidence to the
Authority that any tapping fee charged and imposed by the
Authority against the owner of each property who connects such
property to a sewer has been paid.
(5) No person or entity of any kind shall discharge or permit to be
discharged from within the service area into the sewer lines to be
constructed hereunder or on any property any sanitary or
industrial wastes in violation of this or any other Township
ordinance, except where suitable treatment has been provided
satisfactory to Authority and the Township.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown and then only after special permission of the Authority, in
writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations
and conditions as may be prescribed by the Authority.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer, including
testing, shall be borne by the owner of the property to be connected,
and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Authority and
the Township from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly
or indirectly, as a result of connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
F. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by the Authority and where the lateral is provided. The invert of a
building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or a
higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall
be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall be
made secure and watertight.
G. If the owner of any property benefitted, improved or accommodated by
a sewer, after 45 days' notice from the Authority requiring the
connection of such property with a sewer, in accordance with § 17-17A,
shall fail to connect such property, as required, the Authority may make
such connection and may collect from such owner the cost and
expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an action in assumpsit or such
other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
A. Where a property, at the time connection to a sewer is required, shall be
served by its own sewage disposal system or device, the existing house
sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such sewage disposal
§ 17-18 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-19
15:35
§ 17-20. Enforcement.
§ 17-21. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
system or device and attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to
continue such house sewer line as a building sewer.
B. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Authority. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such property.
D. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and all other public property disturbed in the course
of installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to the Authority.
E. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice from the
Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory conditions with
respect to a building sewer, within 45 days of receipt of such notice, the
Authority and the Township may refuse to permit such person to
discharge sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer
system until such unsatisfactory conditions shall have been remedied to
the satisfaction of the Authority.
F. This Township authorizes the Authority to adopt, from time to time,
additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper
relating to connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be
construed as a part of this ordinance.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500
and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or such penalties
and fines as may be prescribed by the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania from time to time. Each day that violation shall continue
shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
B. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this ordinance shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law.
§ 17-19 PALMER CODE § 17-21
15:36
impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance, it being the intent of the Authority that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in flail force and effect.
§ 17-22. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this ordinance is necessary for
the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of this Township.
§ 17-23. Limitations on Authority.
Authority is subject to all requirements of the Township ordinances, rules
and regulations and specifications of the Township heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established, including but not limited to those concerning street
work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a
street and other street work.
§ 17-21 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 17-23
15:37
Chapter 22
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Street and sidewalk construction — See Ch.
160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 22-1. Commission established.
There is hereby created a township planning agency which shall be known
as the "Palmer Township Planning Commission," hereinafter called the
"Commission."
§ 22-2. Membership.
The Commission shall have not less than five nor more than seven members,
all of whom shall be residents of Palmer Township. The members shall be
appointed by the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors for four-year terms.
One of the members of the Commission may be a township employee.
§ 22-3. Vacancies.
When a vacancy occurs in Commission membership, the Palmer Township
Board of Supervisors may appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired
term.
§ 22-4. Advisors.
The Township Engineer and Solicitor shall sit with the Commission in an
advisory capacity. The Supervisors may also provide the Commission with a
recording secretary.
§ 22-5. Conduct of business.
Each year the members of the Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary. The Commission shall make a short yearly report
to the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors and may adopt bylaws not
inconsistent with this ordinance or other applicable legislation.
§ 22-6. Powers.
The Commission shall, with regard to planning, have the following powers:
A. Prepare a Comprehensive Plan.
§ 17-23 PALMER CODE § 22-6
22:38
§ 22-7. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Chapter 24
POLICE RETIREMENT BENEFITS
[The current Palmer Township Police Pension Plan and the Post-
Retirement Benefit Plan, and any subsequent amendments thereto,
are on file in the Township offices.]
Chapter 25
RETIREMENT PLANS FOR NONUNIFORMED EMPLOYEES
[The current Palmer Township Nonuniformed Employee Pension
Plans, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are on file in the
Township offices.]
Chapter 27
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 27-1. Establishment.
A Palmer Township standing committee to be known as the "Palmer
Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Board" is hereby established.
B. Maintain and keep records.
C. Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors and the Zoning
Hearing Board.
D. Prepare suggested amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, Land
Subdivision or Planned Residential Development Ordinances, or other
related ordinances, including the Building or Housing Code.
E. Study the growth of the township, and things related thereto, including
safety and environment, and report on the same.
F. Review, administer and report on proposed land subdivision plans,
planned development and zoning special exceptions, conditional uses
and variances.
G. Make recommendations and reports to other governmental agencies,
and promote public interest in planning.
H. At the request or authorization of the Palmer Township Board of
Supervisors, prepare a new zoning, land subdivision, planned
residential development or other similar ordinance or map.
I. Give notice and hold public hearings consistent with the foregoing.
§ 22-6 PLANNING COMMISSION § 27-2
22:39
§ 27-2. Membership terms of office and attendance.
§ 27-3. Qualifications; compensation.
§ 27-4. Purpose and duties.
The purpose and duties of the Palmer Township Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board are to advise and make recommendations to the Director
of the Department of Parks and Recreation in the planning, regulation of,
and maintenance of parks, recreation facilities, and recreational programs
based upon such written goals and objectives established by the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors. The Advisory Board shall also provide
advice and recommendations to the Director of the Department of Parks
and Recreation on all park and recreation capital planning/budgetary items,
as well as oversight of the planning process for all updates to the Palmer
Township Parks and Recreation Plan.
§ 27-5. Organization.
The Board shall elect its own Chair and Vice Chair and shall create and fill
such other offices from its membership as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
§ 27-6. Election of officers.
A. The Palmer Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Supervisors of
Palmer Township. The members shall each serve for a term of five
years, except that the terms of the members first appointed shall be
staggered so that two vacancies shall occur on December 31 in each of
the next two successive years and three vacancies shall occur on
December 31 in the third year successive of such appointment. The
Palmer Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Board Chair shall
promptly notify the Board of Supervisors concerning any vacancy on
the Board.
B. A member of the Palmer Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
must attend all meetings. The absence of a member for 20% of all
meetings may be deemed nonfeasance in office, and such member may
be considered inactive and just cause for removal by a majority vote of
the Board of Supervisors taken after the member has received 15 days'
advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. Said removal shall be in
compliance with the requirements of applicable laws and regulations.
A. All of the members of the Palmer Township Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board shall be residents of Palmer Township and shall not be
officers or employees of Palmer Township or serve on any other
Township board, commission or committee.
B. All members shall serve without compensation.
§ 27-2 PALMER CODE § 27-6
22:40
§ 27-7. Meetings.
§ 27-8. Removal from office.
Any member of the Palmer Township Parks and Recreation Advisory Board,
once qualified and appointed, may be removed from the Board by majority
vote of the Board of Supervisors. The vote of the Board of Supervisors may
be taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by
removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
§ 27-9. Voting conflict and voting abstention.
All members, in order to discharge their official duties, shall be required
to vote on all matters brought before the Palmer Township Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board unless such vote would result in a conflict of
interest. In such a case, said member shall abstain from voting and, prior
to the vote being taken, publicly announce and disclose the nature of his or
her interest as a public record in a written statement filed with the person
responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting at which the vote is
A. Annual meeting. An annual organization meeting shall be held on the
third Tuesday in January.
B. Nominations. At the annual organization meeting, members shall make
nominations, and the election of officers specified in § 27-5 shall follow
immediately thereafter.
C. Term. A candidate receiving a majority vote of the entire membership of
the committee shall be declared elected and shall serve for one year
until his or her successor shall take office.
D. Vacancies. Vacancies in office shall be filled immediately by regular
election procedure.
A. Meetings shall be held monthly on a regularly scheduled day and time
agreed to by a majority vote of the Board at the Board's annual
reorganization meeting, subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors. All meetings will be held at the Charles Chrin Community
Center located at 4100 Green Pond Road in Palmer Township,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania. In the event of a conflict with
holidays or other scheduled events, a majority of the Board may change
the date and/or location of its meeting, and any such change shall be
publicly advertised in a newspaper of general circulation. A schedule of
meeting dates for any year shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in January of said year.
B. Public meetings. All meetings shall be open to the general public.
C. Conduct of meetings. Unless otherwise specified, Robert's Rules of
Order, Latest Edition, shall govern the proceedings at meetings of the
Advisory Board.
§ 27-6 PLANNING COMMISSION § 27-9
22:41
taken; provided that whenever the Board would be unable to take any action
on a matter before it because the number of members of the Board required
to abstain from voting under this section makes the majority or other legally
required vote of approval unattainable, then such member shall be required
to vote if disclosures are made as otherwise provided.
§ 27-10. Repealer.
This ordinance does hereby repeal and supersede prior ordinances and
resolutions which are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance.
Chapter 30
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 27-9 PALMER CODE § 27-10
30:42
ARTICLE I
Supervisors
[Adopted 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 262]
§ 30-1. Compensation established. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-344]
Each Supervisor of the Township of Palmer, assuming office, by election
or appointment, after the effective date of this ordinance, shall receive
compensation as such Supervisor in the annual amount of $4,125.
§ 30-2. Quarterly installments.
Such compensation to such Township Supervisor shall be paid in quarterly
installments.
§ 30-3. Prior compensation.
For those Supervisors of the Township of Palmer assuming office, by
election or appointment, prior to the effective date of this ordinance, their
compensation as such Supervisor shall remain unaffected and fixed by prior
ordinance of the Township of Palmer.
§ 30-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 30-3
30:43
Chapter 32
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rights-of-way, visual obstructions and
weeds — See Ch. 186.
§ 32-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created a Township Shade Tree Commission which shall
be known as the "Palmer Township Shade Tree Commission," hereinafter
called the "Commission."
§ 32-2. Membership; compensation.
The Commission shall be composed of three persons all of whom shall be
residents of the township. The Commission members shall serve without
compensation for a term of five years and shall be appointed by the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 32-3. Vacancies.
When a vacancy in office occurs, the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors
may appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term.
§ 32-4. Annual report.
The Commission shall report annually to the Palmer Township Board of
Supervisors.
§ 32-5. General powers.
The Commission shall have custody and control of all shade trees in and
upon township lands, roads and rights-of-way and may locate, plant,
remove, maintain and protect such trees. The Commission may also locate,
plant, remove, maintain and protect trees along township roads. All newly
planted trees shall be at points 10 or more feet from curblines consistent
with the Palmer Township Right-of-Way and Weed Ordinance.7
§ 32-6. Employees.
The Township Board of Supervisors may make the services of the Township
Solicitor, Engineer or other employees available to the Commission when
necessary.
§ 32-7. Specific powers.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Weeds; Visual Obstructions.
§ 30-3 PALMER CODE § 32-7
32:44
§ 32-8. Municipal claims.
If any owner, person or other entity shall, after notice, fail to comply with
any lawful directive issued pursuant to this ordinance, the township may
perform the necessary work or authorize others to do so and bill such
person or other entity for the same. If such bill remains unpaid for 30
days, the same may be filed and collected as a municipal claim against the
property in question. The filing of a lien shall not prevent the imposition of
penalties under § 32-10 hereof.
§ 32-9. Prohibited acts.
No person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity shall without
permission or good cause injure or destroy any tree in the custody or control
of the Commission.
§ 32-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or
directive issued thereunder or who takes part in or aids, abets or assists in
any way in such violation, whether through action, inaction, negligence or
otherwise, shall be liable, upon conviction for each offense in a summary
proceeding before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the
Peace, and shall pay a fine or penalty to the township for the use of the
Shade Tree Commission in an amount of not less than $10 nor more than
$300 or be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a period not
A. The Commission may require that the owner or person or entity having
control of any tree located in Palmer Township trim or cut and remove
such tree if the same is afflicted with the Dutch elm or other disease
which threatens to injure or destroy other shade trees in the township,
or if the same is obstructing township roads or rights-of-way or is about
to fall and is dangerous. Such trees are hereby declared to be
nuisances. Trees shall clear roads by at least 14 feet.
B. The Commission may, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors,
require that the owner or person or entity having control of property
adjoining or coincidental with township roads or rights-of-way plant and
maintain shade trees of a type specified by the Commission.
C. The Commission may prohibit any activity which injures shade trees in
and upon township lands, roads and rights-of-way or which injures trees
which immediately adjoin the same.
D. The Commission may purchase and sell or give shade trees to property
owners or persons or entities having control of property adjoining
roads.
E. The Commission may disseminate information to the public relative to
the care and control of trees and the planting of the same.
§ 32-7 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 32-10
32:45
exceeding 30 days as provided by law. Each day on which any violation of
this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 34
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 24.
§ 34-1. Findings of Board.
It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of social security
system to employees and officers of the said township will be of great
benefit not only to the employees of the township by providing that said
employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System, but will also be of great benefit to the said
township by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of
personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 34-2. Acceptance of provisions of enabling legislation.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute known as "Act No.
491," which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the "state agency"
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said Old
Age and Survivors Insurance System. The Board of Road Supervisors is
hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans
and an agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling act and the
Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the
said township and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of
employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 34-3. Payroll deductions authorized.
The Township Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of
payroll deduction, to be matched by payments by the township, to be made
into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the office of
the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from
which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the township.
Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law
and regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security
Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at
the rate of one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) per month until such time as
payments are made.
§ 32-10 PALMER CODE § 34-4
34:46
§ 34-4. Appropriation of funds; commencement of plan.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund, or funds, of the
township in the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution Fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling act and in accordance with the plan
or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President of the Board
and the Township Secretary to enter into an agreement with the state
agency, which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with
Paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall
provide that the participation of this township shall commence as of January
1, 1951.
Chapter 37
TAX COLLECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 173.
§ 34-4 TAX COLLECTION § 34-4
37:47

ARTICLE I
Collector of Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 1-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-312]
§ 37-1. Appointment.
The elected Tax Collector of the Township is hereby appointed, authorized
and directed to act as the Collector of Delinquent Taxes within the
Township, for real estate taxes collected after the end of the tax year, but
before the taxes remaining unpaid are submitted to the County Tax Claim
Bureau for collection.
§ 37-2. Effectiveness.
This appointment and authorization shall remain in effect until the Board of
Supervisors, by ordinance, takes further action, as required by law.
§ 37-3. Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Tax Collector during the term of
this appointment, the successor Tax Collector shall automatically succeed
to the powers and duties set forth herein.
§ 37-4. Additional bond not required.
The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall not be required to give additional
bond on account of this appointment.
§ 37-5. Authority and power.
The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall have all the authority and power
now vested by law in the Collector of nondelinquent Township taxes for the
collection of such delinquent taxes.
§ 37-6. Accounting of collections.
The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall account to the Board of Supervisors
for all delinquent tax collections made in the same manner as required for
the reporting of nondelinquent tax collections.
§ 37-7. Compensation.
The Collector of Delinquent Taxes shall be compensated in the same manner
as provided for in the collection of nondelinquent taxes within the Township.
§ 37-1 TAX COLLECTION § 37-7
37:49
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 43
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire alarm and sprinkler systems — See Ch.
81, Art. II.
§ 43-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide and create a centralized system
for various types of burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means actuating an alarm
console, as hereinafter defined, at the Police Department headquarters
of the Township of Palmer for response thereto by the Police or Fire
Department or other municipal agencies and to provide rules and
regulations governing alarm devices, whether or not connected to such
console.
§ 43-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any person, as hereinafter
defined, who operates, distributes or owns any alarm device designed to
summon the Police or Fire Departments or other municipal agencies of the
township or any private agency to any location in response to any type of
alarm signal, whether or not such alarm devices are connected to the alarm
console, as hereinafter defined.
§ 43-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and
not discretionary.
B. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel providing a visual
or audio response, or both, to an alarm device and located within the
confines of the Police Department of the township.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system providing warning of
burglary, fire or other emergency.
CHIEF — The Chief of the Police Department of the township.
DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the township.
§ 37-7 PALMER CODE § 43-3
43:50
§ 43-4. Rules and regulations.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Any person designated by the
Chief to perform a function required or permitted by the provisions of
this ordinance. The term "designated representative" shall be limited
to members of the Township Police Department and employees of the
township assigned to and working in the Police Department for the
purposes of administrating this ordinance.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence,
intentional mischievous conduct or by malfunctioning of the alarm
device or other relevant equipment, but does not include false alarms
created by malfunction of the alarm console or by natural or man-made
emergency.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device who has obtained a
permit according to the provisions of this ordinance.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association
or other entity.
PREMISES — The property of the permittee to which the alarm device
is connected, including but not limited to residential, professional,
commercial, churches, industrial or otherwise.
A. There is hereby established an alarm console in the township to be
owned by the township and operated by members of the Police
Department.
B. Any connection to said alarm console shall be by an alarm device
approved by the Chief or his designated representative. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Chief or his designated representative
may appeal, in writing, within 10 days to the Township Board of
Supervisors for a hearing.
C. No person, whether presently or in the future, who owns, maintains,
possesses or otherwise operates any alarm device designed to summon
the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal department
of the township or any private agency to any type of alarm signal shall
be required to connect such device to the alarm console. However,
those persons whose alarm devices are presently connected to the
Police Department of the township must, within 30 days after
installation of the alarm console, either connect such device to the
alarm console or remove and disconnect such device, at their expense,
from the Police Department.
D. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit any person from securing the
services of a private agency to provide burglar, fire or other emergency
protection and to connect an alarm device to such private agency for
such purposes without the necessity of connecting the same to the
alarm console at the Police Department.
§ 43-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 43-4
43:51
E. Notwithstanding Subsections C and D aforesaid, any person who owns,
maintains, possesses or otherwise operates any such alarm device in
the township who chooses not to connect the same to the alarm console
is still subject to the rules, regulations and penalties of this ordinance,
specifically, but not limited to, the requirements of obtaining a permit or
license for the same (without paying the annual fee for hookup to the
alarm console), the administrative actions for suspension and
revocation of such license or permit under §§ 43-5 and 43-6 hereof and
the penalties for violations of the ordinance, where applicable, under
§ 43-7 hereof.
F. Any person installing an alarm device on his premises shall make
application therefor, in writing, to the Chief, which application shall
contain the location of the device, the name and address of the installer
of said device, the type of device, provisions relating to false alarms and
testing procedures of the device, a list of persons to be contacted in the
event of an alarm and other information as may be required. Such
application shall be acted upon by the Chief or his designated
representative within 30 days of submission. If approved, such
permission shall continue in force from year to year as long as the
permittee pays the annual fee for connection to the alarm console,
where applicable, registers the same and maintains the same alarm
device. However, upon the substitution of one alarm device for another,
the permittee must submit a new application. At the time of initial
approval of the alarm device, the permittee shall receive a letter from
the Chief or his designated representative setting forth a synopsis of
this ordinance and the permittee's obligations and duties under it,
which the permittee shall countersign upon receipt.
G. Any person who desires to connect his alarm device to the alarm
console shall, in addition to submitting an application as aforesaid, pay
the following fees:
(1) For initial hookup, registration and testing, no fee shall be
required.
(2) An annual fee for the continued privilege of connection to the alarm
console in the sum of $25 per year for a residential premises for
each family unit residing on such premises.
(3) An annual fee for the continued privilege of connection to the alarm
console in the sum of $100 per year for professional, commercial
and industrial premises. In the event that more than one
individually owned business is located on the same professional,
commercial or industrial premises, the aforesaid annual fee shall
be computed on the basis of each such individually owned business.
(4) In the event that any permittee fails to pay the required fees as set
forth in this section on or before January 31 of each year, he shall
be given notification by the Chief, in writing, by registered mail,
and if such fee is not paid within 15 days of the date of mailing said
§ 43-4 PALMER CODE § 43-4
43:52
notice, said alarm device shall be temporarily disconnected from
the alarm console and shall not be reconnected until the overdue
payment and an additional reconnection fee of $25 is paid.
H. Any permittee who conducts repairs to his alarm device or any other
relevant equipment shall so notify the Police Department, in writing,
before such repairs begin as to the commencement and termination
dates thereof.
I. The alarm console and allied equipment are being maintained by the
township at will and are subject to termination at any time upon 90
days' notification. The township is under no duty to any permittee or
any other person to maintain the alarm console or the centralized
system created hereunder for any duration of time. Any permit granted
hereunder shall be accepted upon the express condition that the
permittee shall indemnify and hold the township harmless from and on
account of any and all damages arising out of the township's operation
of the alarm console or the permittee's alarm device.
J. Additional administrative rules and regulations for implementation of
this ordinance may be promulgated by the Chief after consultation with
and approval by the Township Board of Supervisors, which shall pass a
resolution effectuating the same at a regular township meeting.
K. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief or his
designated representative for noncompliance with this ordinance, and
any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this ordinance, as hereinafter provided, and
each and every day that said equipment is in operation shall be
considered a separate violation. Acceptance of the permit by a
permittee shall be deemed as consent to inspection of the premises on
which said alarm device is installed at reasonable hours by the Chief or
his designated representative and to a testing of the same, at
reasonable intervals and at reasonable hours, by the Chief or his
designated representative.
L. Any alarm device which sounds an audible alarm at the premises where
it is installed shall be subject to the following additional rules and
regulations:
(1) The owner, resident or other person in control of the premises must
be able to turn off the alarm device within 30 minutes after
sounding.
(2) Prior to installation, a written statement must be executed between
the alarm company which installed or is responsible for the alarm
device and the owner, resident or other person in control of the
premises permitting such alarm company to enter the premises to
turn off or disable the alarm to stop it from sounding. The alarm
company which installed or is responsible for the alarm device shall
be available to so turn off or disable said device within 30 minutes
upon receiving notification from the Police Department. Habitual
§ 43-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 43-4
43:53
§ 43-5. Revocation of license.
§ 43-6. Revocation of permit.
unavailability of such alarm company for such purpose shall result
in a violation of its business license in the township as hereinafter
provided.
(3) Whenever the provisions of Subsection L(1) and (2) aforesaid
cannot be completed, and after 60 minutes from the time of
sounding, the Police Department has the authority to enter the
premises to turn off or disable the alarm device.
(4) The provisions and penalties pertaining to false alarms of such
devices shall be the same as hereinafter provided.
(5) All and any costs incurred in turning off or disabling such alarm
device shall be borne by the alarm company which installed or is
responsible for the alarm device or by the owner, resident or other
person in control of the premises.
A. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for violation of this
ordinance, the township may, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
revoke the business license of a private alarm business agency in the
township on any of the following grounds:
(1) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in an application for a license.
(2) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in the conduct of the alarm business.
(3) Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment or operation within
48 hours after receipt of notice of the same from the Chief or his
designated representative.
(4) Failure to comply, within a reasonable time, with any order or
notice issued by the Chief or his other designated representative.
B. No alarm business license shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the
Board of Supervisors upon citation issued by the Chief or his designated
representative. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be served on the licensee at least 10 days before the date set for the
hearing. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced
as the basis for the revocation of the license. The licensee shall be
notified, in writing, of the decision as to revocation of his license, the
licensee may continue to operate his business for a period of 30 days
thereafter, and, at the end of that time, such business must terminate.
Said licensee may reapply for such license at the expiration of one year
from the date of notice of the decision.
§ 43-4 PALMER CODE § 43-6
43:54
A. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for violations of this
ordinance, the township may, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
suspend or revoke the permit for the alarm device on any of the
following grounds:
(1) As set forth in § 43-4G(4) herein, nonpayment of the required
annual fee on or before January 31 of each year shall require a
suspension of the permit until such annual fee and an additional
reconnection fee are paid. Such nonpayment as of July 1 of any year
shall result in a revocation of the permit and permanent
disconnection from the alarm console until such time as
reapplication is made and such annual fee paid. Habitual
nonpayment shall result in a refusal to permit the person to
connect to the alarm console system.
(2) As set forth in § 43-4K hereof, the use of unauthorized equipment or
the failure to permit reasonable inspection or reasonable testing by
the Chief or his designated representative shall result in a
suspension of the permit until compliance is forthcoming. Habitual
noncompliance shall result in a revocation of the permit.
(3) Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statements
made in the application for the permit or in the owning,
maintaining, possessing or operating of the alarm device shall
result in the revocation of the permit.
(4) Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment or operation within
48 hours after receipt of notice of the same from the Chief or his
designated representative shall result in a suspension of the permit
until such corrections are made. Habitual failure shall result in a
revocation of the permit.
(5) Habitual false alarms shall result in the revocation of the permit. In
this regard, on a yearly basis, the first and second such false alarms
shall cause written warnings to be issued; the third false alarm
shall result in a fine of $25 to be paid to the township; and the
fourth and each subsequent false alarm shall result in a fine of $50
each, to be paid to the township. When any such false alarm occurs,
the Chief or his designated representative may make a reasonable
inspection concerning the circumstances surrounding the same.
(6) Failure to comply, within a reasonable time, with any order or
notice issued by the Chief or his designated representative shall
result in a suspension of the permit until compliance is
forthcoming. Habitual noncompliance shall result in a revocation of
the permit.
B. Except for nonpayment set forth in Subsection A(1) hereof, no permit
shall be suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of
Supervisors upon citation issued by the Chief or his designated
representative. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be served on the permittee at least 10 days before the date set for the
§ 43-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 43-6
43:55
§ 43-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 43-8. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and all parts thereof are severable, and
if any part of this ordinance or any clause or any sentence hereof is for
any reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions of this
ordinance or any part thereof.
§ 43-9. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after adoption.
§ 43-10. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are inconsistent
herewith, are hereby repealed absolutely.
Chapter 50
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Riding bicycles on sidewalks — See Ch. 109,
§ 109-3E.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 50-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
hearing. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced
as the basis for the suspension or revocation of the permit. The
permittee shall be notified, in writing, of the decision as to the
suspension or revocation of the permit within 10 days after the hearing.
A. Any person found guilty of violation of the terms of this ordinance shall
be subject to a fine not in excess of $600 or imprisonment for a period of
time not in excess of 90 days, or both.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 43-6 PALMER CODE § 50-1
50:56
BICYCLE — A device having two tandem wheels of a diameter not less than
16 inches and propelled by human power.
§ 50-2. Registration.
A. No person who resides within this municipality shall ride a bicycle or
operate it upon any street or public place within this municipality
unless said bicycle has been properly registered and tagged in
accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the Township of
Palmer shall make application for the registration of said bicycle to
the Chief of Police on a form provided for that purpose.
(2) Registrations of bicycles shall be serially numbered and kept on file
by the Chief of Police on a form in his office as a public record.
(3) The Chief of Police shall then issue an identification tag or plate
serially numbered to correspond to the bicycle registration. This
identification tag or plate must then be affixed to the rear
mudguard or frame of the bicycle in such a position as to be plainly
visible from the rear. A registration card shall be issued to the
owner of each properly registered bicycle.
B. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of:
(1) The number of each registration.
(2) The date of registration and the date of inspection.
(3) The name, age and address of the person to whom issued.
(4) The make, color and serial number of each bicycle frame.
C. Bicycles registered under the provisions hereof shall be registered on
or before November 1, 1962, and annually on April 1 thereafter. A
general registration may be applied for on the morning of the first
Saturday of each month at 9:00 a.m. at the Municipal Building. A
temporary registration for a new bicycle may be obtained from the
Chief of Police and shall be valid until the first Saturday of the
succeeding month, when the vehicle shall be inspected and the
registrant required to pass an examination.
D. Within 10 days after the sale or dismantling of any registered bicycle,
such information shall be reported to the Chief of Police by the person
in whose name the bicycle was registered. Such a person in whose
name the bicycle was registered may have the identification tag or plate
of his former bicycle transferred to another bicycle owned by him upon
registration of such bicycle with the Chief of Police.
E. Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report within five days to the Chief of
Police of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving:
§ 50-1 BICYCLES § 50-2
50:57
§ 50-3. Examination of applicant.
Before issuing a bicycle registration, the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate personally, in such a manner as the Chief of Police shall direct,
that he or she is the proper person and is capable of riding a bicycle;
further, such applicant shall satisfactorily pass an examination to determine
his knowledge of safe-riding rules and practices as the Chief of Police may
prescribe.
§ 50-4. Operation.
(1) The name and address of the person from whom purchased or to
whom sold.
(2) A description of such bicycle by name or make.
(3) The frame number thereof.
(4) The number of the identification plate, if any, found thereon.
F. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is properly registered and tagged and unless such bicycle is
provided with the equipment required under the terms of this
ordinance.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the identification tag or plate, frame number
of the bicycle or the registration card issued to the owner thereof.
A. A bicycle shall be operated only on the roadway, as near to the righthand
side as possible.
B. Bicycles whose wheel diameter is 16 inches or over shall not be
operated on the sidewalks.
C. The operator of a bicycle shall obey all official traffic signals, signs and
other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
D. The operator of a bicycle emerging from a driveway or building shall
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on the sidewalk and to all
vehicles on the roadway.
E. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry any other person upon the
handlebar, frame or any part of the bicycle. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of bicycles built to be operated by two or
more persons.
F. The operator of a bicycle shall not indulge in any abnormal or trick
riding and shall keep at least one hand on the handlebar at all times
while in use.
§ 50-2 PALMER CODE § 50-4
50:58
§ 50-5. Inspection.
The Chief of Police or his duly authorized representatives shall inspect each
bicycle presented for registration and shall report to the Chief of Police
any bicycle found to be in an unsafe mechanical condition or lacking the
equipment specified as necessary under the terms of this ordinance and
shall refuse to register such bicycle until and unless it is brought into
conformance with the requirements of this ordinance.
§ 50-6. Equipment.
Every bicycle operated upon a street or public place at any time during the
period one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise, and at any other
time when there is not sufficient light under normal atmospheric conditions
to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street or public
places at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall be equipped with a lighted lamp
on the front thereof, and shall also be equipped with a red reflector or lamp
on the rear exhibiting or reflecting a red light visible, under like conditions,
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear of such bicycle. Said reflector
or lamp on the rear shall be of a diameter of at least 1 1/2 inches. Every
bicycle shall also be equipped with brakes in good condition and with a bell,
horn or other warning device. All mechanical parts of the bicycle shall be in
working condition.
§ 50-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
G. Operators of bicycles shall not ride in any manner other than single file
except on paths or parts of roadway set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
H. Operators of bicycles shall not hitch onto vehicles or buses upon a
roadway.
I. The operator of a bicycle shall park same upon the roadway at the curb,
or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a
building, except windows or glass doors thereof, in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
A. Any person convicted in a summary conviction before an Alderman or
Magistrate of a violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) Impounding of the bicycle for not more than seven days for the first
violation; impounding of the bicycle for not more than 14 days for
the second violation; impounding of the bicycle for not more than
30 days for the third violation.
(2) A fine of not more than $600 or, for minors, revocation of license
plates for not more than six months.
§ 50-4 BICYCLES § 50-7
50:59
§ 50-8. Applicability of ordinance to nonresidents.
Any bicycle owned and operated by any resident of any other municipality
shall not be required to be registered hereunder, but shall be subject to all
other provisions of this ordinance.
§ 50-9. Repeal of prior ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed insofar as they may conflict with this ordinance.
Chapter 55
BUILDING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Mechanical Code — See Ch. 99.
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Unit
Code — See Ch. 112.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
145.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 158.
Street and sidewalk construction — See Ch.
160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 55-1. Short title.
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Basic
Building Code."
§ 55-2. Code adopted. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 186; 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The publication entitled the "International Building Code/2000," (hereafter
"IBC"), and its amendments and errata sheets, published by International
(3) Removal and detention of the license plate from the bicycle as a
penalty for habitual offenders.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 50-7 PALMER CODE § 55-2
50:60
Code Council, hereinafter called the "code," is hereby accepted, adopted
and incorporated in its entirety, except as may be hereinafter otherwise
indicated, as the Palmer Township Basic Building Code. Wherever in said
code blanks appear, the obvious required or indicated insertions are to
be considered made; and wherever in said code the words "municipality"
or "name of municipality" appear, the words "Palmer Township" are to be
considered as inserted.
§ 55-3. Words inserted. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The following words and figures shall be considered inserted in the blanks
appearing in the indicated sections of the code and any equivalent section
of any revision of said code:
Section Title Words Inserted
101.1 Title Palmer Township
§ 55-4. Amended sections. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-2938]
The following sections of the code, denoting work not requiring permits,
shall require a zoning permit, with such fees based upon the adopted
construction valuation and fee schedule and subject to Zoning Ordinance
requirements: Section 105.2 IBC, work exempt from permits, Building:
numbers 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10.
§ 55-5. Construction of code.
Whenever a provision of this ordinance or the code conflicts with a provision
of another township ordinance or law, the most restrictive of the two
provisions shall prevail. Building height, setback and use regulations of
the Township Zoning Ordinance9 shall prevail over provisions pertaining
to similar topics in this ordinance or the code. The standards contained
in amended Township Ordinance No. 36 for street, sidewalk and curb
construction10 shall prevail over any standards in the code for construction
of the same. Provisions of this ordinance shall prevail in any conflict with
provisions of the code incorporated herein.
§ 55-6. Fees.
All fees chargeable hereunder shall be set by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution. Unless separate provisions are made, the value of the building
shall determine the fee for moving or demolition of the same.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 55-4, Excluded
sections, as amended.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Street and Sidewalk Construction.
§ 55-2 BICYCLES § 55-7
50:61
§ 55-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 55-8. Appeals.
Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity aggrieved or
affected by any provision of this ordinance or the code or any order issued
thereunder may appeal the same to the Township Board of Supervisors or
the Board of Appeals.
§ 55-9. Frost line.
The frost line in Palmer Township shall always be taken to be three feet
below finished grade line.
§ 55-10. Sewage and utilities.
Main building traps shall be provided, and whenever possible buildings
accessible to public sewers, water and utilities shall be connected to the
same as provided by amended Ordinance No. 107.11 Unused private sewage
systems and tanks shall be filled or secured. Depths given by the township
for lateral connections cannot be guaranteed as more than approximate.
§ 55-11. Curbing. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-342]
It is the intent of this ordinance that all roads in Palmer Township shall be
curbed. The Board of Supervisors may implement this provision from time
to time and place to place by ordinance and charge expenses to abutting
property owners. In addition, all new Township roads shall be curbed and all
lots upon which new buildings of 1,000 square feet or more are constructed
shall be fully curbed on all sides. Curbing shall be constructed according
to the specifications of Township Ordinance No. 36 as amended.12 The
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
is any way violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or the code or
who or which refuses to obey any lawful order issued thereunder shall
be liable, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before any
Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, to pay a fine or
penalty to the Township of Palmer and for the use of said township in an
amount not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 or be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days,
as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Sewer Use, Art. II, Regulations.
§ 55-7 PALMER CODE § 55-11
50:62
Township Engineer shall supply grades for curbing when curbing is going
to be installed.
§ 55-12. Sidewalks. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-342]
Sidewalks shall be provided when a new building of 1,000 square feet or
more is built upon a lot fronting on a road designated on the Township
Zoning Map as minor arterial or when the street is already equipped with
a sidewalk or when the same is necessary to assure safety or when the
same is required by the Township Supervisors by ordinance. Sidewalks shall
be constructed according to the specifications of Township Ordinance No.
36 as amended.13 The Township Engineer shall supply grades for sidewalks
when sidewalks are going to be installed.
§ 55-13. Streets and driveways.
Dedicated public streets shall adjoin lots containing buildings of 1,000
square feet or more unless special permission is given by the Board of
Supervisors for a private road. If the lot upon which a building of 1,000
square feet or more adjoins an unaccepted or unopened street, an
appropriate bond or unaccepted street agreement authorizing opening of
the street and providing for payment of the costs of the same and utilities
by the lot owner shall be filed. Specifications for street and driveway
construction shall be as set by Township Ordinance No. 36 as amended.14 A
permit shall be required to construct or reconstruct any driveway.
§ 55-14. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
code in addition to the code enforcement personnel appointed by virtue of
this ordinance.
§ 55-15. Building grades.
The grade and elevation for the foundation and surrounding grounds of all
buildings shall be supplied or approved by the township. Grounds, utility
splice boxes and the top of the foundation shall not be below street level
without special permission, and lots built up or filled shall have easements
at least 20 feet wide with pipes and catch basins if natural watercourses are
encroached. Wood and wood scraps shall not be buried underground as fill,
and grading shall not cause water puddles.
§ 55-16. Notification of completion or deviation from plans.
Persons to whom permits are issued shall notify the Building Inspector upon
the completion of work or if deviations are to be made from original plans.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Street and Sidewalk Construction.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Street and Sidewalk Construction.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Street and Sidewalk Construction.
§ 55-11 BICYCLES § 55-17
50:63
§ 55-17. Labor and industry approval.
No building or other permit shall be issued for any structure requiring labor
and industry or other similar approval until such approval has been given.
§ 55-18. Safety during construction.
The Occupational Health and Safety Act and other safety requirements shall
be fully complied with during construction of structures. Buildings under
construction shall be locked, when unattended, as soon as feasible. Lumber
and building materials shall be stacked in a safe manner and location. Cellar
excavations shall be fenced when unattended if required by the Building
Inspector and shall be kept free of water. Temporary services shall be
raintight and sealed or locked so that there is no access to electrically
charged conductors, plug fuses, lugs, bus bars or knife switches. Ladders
shall be taken down when unattended. Portable space heaters shall not be
left unattended or used unless there is adequate ventilation to the outside.
Power tools shall not be left unattended in operable condition.
§ 55-19. Hours of work.
Unless special permission is given, construction which is noise producing
shall not commence until 7:00 a.m. and shall be discontinued by 11:00 p.m.
§ 55-20. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and the code are severable. If any provision
of this ordinance or the code is for any reason invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance or the code.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that
this ordinance or the code would have been enacted without such invalid
provision.
§ 55-21. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 55-22. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect five days from the date of this enactment.
§ 55-23. (Reserved)15
15.Editor's Note: Former § 55-23, Smoke detectors, as amended 12-6-1976 by Ord. No. 164,
was repealed 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293.
§ 55-17 PALMER CODE § 55-24
50:64
§ 55-24. Official placards and stickers. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord.
No. 164]
Unless authorized, no person shall remove, deface or alter any official
township placard, sign, poster, zoning hearing notice or sticker.
§ 55-25. Construction in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No.
164]
Sections 55-25 through 55-38 of the Building Code shall apply, in addition
to all other applicable sections of the Palmer Code, to all construction,
substantial improvements, alterations, reconstruction and related activities,
including earth moving, in any flood-prone area, floodplain district
established by the Zoning Ordinance in § 190-14A, or elsewhere, and any
relatively flat or low land area or other area adjoining a stream, river or
watercourse found by the Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Department
to be a flood-prone area because it is subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source. New construction in any
such area or district is hereby prohibited, and the alteration or
reconstruction of existing buildings or structures is hereby prohibited
except as expressly provided herein.
§ 55-26. Existing structures in floodplains. [Amended 12-6-1976 by
Ord. No. 164]
Structures in any floodplain district or flood-prone area which lawfully
existed before the enactment of this ordinance, but which are not in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, may continue to remain,
subject to the following:
A. Existing structures located in such area or district shall not be
extended, expanded or enlarged, unless any effect of the proposed
extension, expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed at least
1 1/2 feet above the standard project flood or the one-hundred-year
flood, whichever is greater, to the greatest extent possible.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, repair or improvement of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and
regulations.
§ 55-24 BICYCLES § 55-27
50:65
§ 55-27. Plan required for floodplain permits. [Added 12-6-1976 by
Ord. No. 164]
Any application for a building or zoning permit concerning a property which
is located in or adjacent to a floodplain district or flood-prone area as
defined in § 55-25 shall, as a minimum, be accompanied by the following:
§ 55-28. Review of floodplain plans. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No.
164]
A. A plan which accurately locates the construction proposal with respect
to the floodplain district or flood-prone area boundaries, stream
channel and existing flood-prone developments. Included shall be all
plans for proposed subdivision and/or land development to assure that
all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage; that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and that adequate drainage is provided so as to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
B. Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours and
elevations of the ground, storage elevations, size of the structure,
elevation of the lowest floor of the structure, location and elevations of
streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types and floodproofing
measures. [Amended 8-1-1977 by Ord. No. 167]
C. A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that adequate precautions against flood damage have been taken with
respect to the design of any building or structure and that the plans for
the development of the site adhere to the requirements and provisions
of the Palmer Code, including this ordinance.
A. A copy of all applications and plans for construction, alterations or
reconstruction in any floodplain district or flood-prone area to be
considered for approval shall be submitted by the Zoning Officer to the
County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the
issuance of a building permit. The recommendations of the
Conservation District shall be considered by the Zoning Officer for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan, and the plans and
applications may be submitted by the Zoning Officer to any other
appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission,
Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
B. If the plan involves changes in the boundaries of a floodplain district or
flood-prone area, a copy of such plan shall be forwarded to the Federal
Insurance Administration, and no modifications to the boundaries of the
floodplain district or flood-prone area, due to natural or man-made
physical changes, shall be made without the prior approval of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 55-27 PALMER CODE § 55-29
50:66
§ 55-29. Elevations in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No.
164; amended 8-1-1977 by Ord. No. 167]
In a floodplain district or flood-prone area:
§ 55-30. Fill in floodplain area. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No. 164]
If fill is used, in a floodplain district or flood-prone area, it shall:
§ 55-31. Placement of structures in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976
by Ord. No. 164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas, all buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum
effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
§ 55-32. Anchoring in floodplain areas. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord.
No. 164; amended 8-1-1977 by Ord. No. 167]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas:
A. All lowest floor levels and basements in residential structures shall be
constructed at an elevation of at least 1 1/2 feet above the standard
project flood elevation or the one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
whichever is greater.
B. Lowest floor levels and basements in nonresidential buildings may be
constructed below the level of the standard project flood, provided that
they and their attendant utilities and sanitary facilities are designed so
that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
A. Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points.
B. Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not
be permitted.
C. Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to
erosion, scouring or settling.
D. Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless substantiating
data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to and approved by the
Building Permit Officer.
E. Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
A. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral
movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing
§ 55-29 BICYCLES § 55-32
50:67
§ 55-33. Floors, walls and ceilings in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976
by Ord. No. 164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas:
§ 55-34. Electrical systems in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord.
No. 164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas:
§ 55-35. Plumbing in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No.
164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas:
the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted
sections of the watercourse.
B. All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the firstfloor
level shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
A. Wood flooring used at or below the first-floor level shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the
flooring grain, without incurring structural damage to the building.
B. Plywood used at or below the first-floor level shall be of any exterior or
marine grade and of a water-resistant or waterproof variety.
C. Basement ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient wet
strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
D. Window frames, door frames and door jambs used at or below the firstfloor
level shall be made of metal.
A. All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air-conditioning
and ventilating systems and other critical electrical installations shall
be permitted only at elevations of 1 1/2 feet or more above the standard
project flood elevation or the one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
whichever is greater.
B. No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation less
than three feet above the level of the standard project flood elevation or
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation, whichever is greater.
C. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
A. Water heaters, furnaces and other critical mechanical installations shall
be permitted only at elevations of 1 1/2 feet or more above the standard
project flood elevation or the one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
whichever is greater.
§ 55-32 PALMER CODE § 55-35
50:68
§ 55-36. Paints and adhesives in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by
Ord. No. 164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas:
§ 55-37. Storage in floodplains. [Added 12-6-1976 by Ord. No. 164]
In floodplain districts and flood-prone areas no materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human,
animal or plant life shall be stored below an elevation 1 1/2 feet above the
standard project flood elevation or the one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
whichever is greater.
§ 55-38. Applicability of Zoning Ordinance. [Added 12-6-1976 by
Ord. No. 164]
Section 190-154 of the Zoning Ordinance which pertains to floodplains is
expressly incorporated herein by reference. No construction, substantial
improvement reconstruction or alterations shall be made hereunder until
the requirements of these sections of the Zoning Ordinance have also been
complied with.16
§ 55-39. Residential basements. [Added 7-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-359]
B. No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any flood-prone area or floodplain district.
C. Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the system into floodwaters.
D. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
A. Adhesives used at or below the first-floor level shall have a bonding
strength that is unaffected by inundation.
B. Doors and all wood trim at or below the first-floor level shall be sealed
with a waterproof paint or similar product.
C. Paints or other finishes used at or below the first-floor level shall be
capable of surviving inundation.
A. A building permit shall be required where a proposed construction,
renovation or conversion of any new or old basement of a residential
structure involves constructing, renovating or converting such
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 55-35 BICYCLES § 55-39
50:69
§ 55-40. (Reserved)17
Chapter 60
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 55.
Electrical code — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Mechanical code — See Ch. 99.
One- and two-family dwelling unit code — See
Ch. 112.
Plumbing code — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
§ 60-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Palmer Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 60-2. Adoption of code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Palmer Township.
§ 60-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within Palmer Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing
body of Palmer Township from time to time by resolution:
residential basement into a habitable space regardless of whether such
construction, renovation or conversion is structural or nonstructural in
nature.
B. The applicant seeking to construct a residential basement shall be
required to comply with Section R310 of the 2003 International
Residential Code, as amended, entitled Emergency Escape and Rescue
Openings, as adopted by the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors by
Ordinance No. 2004-352 on June 29, 2004.
C. This section shall not apply to any residential basement made habitable
prior to July 6, 2004.
17.Editor's Note: Former § 55-40, Individual lot grading plan required, added 5-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-377, was repealed 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-413.
§ 55-39 PALMER CODE § 60-3
60:70
§ 60-4. Board of appeals.
A board of appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Palmer Township in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said board
of appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 60-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
§ 60-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Palmer Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this ordinance and the code shall be
established by the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township by resolution
from time to time.
A. By the designation of an employee of Palmer Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Palmer Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Palmer Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contact with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Palmer
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Palmer Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions or ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this ordinance and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Palmer Township
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 60-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 60-6
60:71
Chapter 65
DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SEWAGE SLUDGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Sewer Board — See Ch. 11.
Municipal Sewer Authority — See Ch. 17.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
145.
§ 65-1. Definitions.
§ 65-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is as follows:
A. Other words and phrases shall be given their usual and ordinary
meaning.
B. The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows in the
context of this ordinance:
DER — The Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, spreading, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, storing or placing of any sewage sludge or other
similar waste material from municipal sewage treatment plants in any
mode or manner into or on any land in the township, provided that
the spreading of manure generated from conventional agricultural
activities or normal farming operations and/or mushroom compost on
cropland or farmland for agricultural purposes shall not be included
within this term, and such activity shall not be regulated by this
ordinance.
SEPTAGE — All and any waste material being stored in or pumped from
private residential systems.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — As defined in Chapter 75, Page 3, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources Solid Waste
Management Rules and Regulations, i.e., "the coarse screenings, grit
and dewatered or air-dried sludges, septic tanks and holding tank
pumping and other residues from sewage collection and treatment
systems which require disposal," including but not limited to digested
plant sludge from a legally operating sewage treatment plant/facility
which any person or entity seeks to dispose of, as defined above, on or
in any lands of the township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer (Northampton County,
Pennsylvania).
§ 60-6 PALMER CODE § 65-2
65:72
§ 65-3. Statutory authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the following authority:
§ 65-4. Application procedure.
Any person, association, company or entity desiring to store or dispose
sewage sludge in or on any land or property within the township shall
first submit an application to the township, as prepared and certified by a
registered engineer, as follows:
A. To provide for the protection and preservation of natural resources and
agricultural land and activities in the township.
B. To protect and promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of
the citizens of the township.
C. To further the overall purposes of the Palmer Township Zoning
Ordinance.18
D. To permit, in certain limited circumstances, in accordance with
standard agricultural practices and specifically incidental to
agricultural activities and in accordance with the rules and regulations
of this ordinance and DER, the storage, disposal and land surface
application of certain sewage sludge from municipal sewage treatment
plants.
A. The sections of the Second Class Township Code (Act of May 1, 1933,
P.L. 103 et seq., as amended) authorizing the township to enact
ordinances dealing with the protection of the health of township
residents, refuse materials, nuisances and public safety, as codified in
Volume 53 of Purdon's Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at Sections 65708, 65712, 65729 and
65747, as amended.
B. The applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act (Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380 et seq., as amended) codified in Volume
35 of Purdon's Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania at Section 6018.101 et seq., as amended.
C. The applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code dealing with zoning ordinance regulations, codified in Volume 53
of Purdon's Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania at Sections 10601 and 10603, as amended.
A. The request for the agricultural utilization of the sewage sludge shall be
reviewed and permitted only as a conditional use, the same to be
submitted to the Palmer Township Planning Commission for initial
review. The Planning Commission, in accordance with the standards
and regulations set forth herein, shall review the same and make
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 65-2 DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SEWAGE § 65-4
65:73
written recommendations to the Township Board of Supervisors within
30 days after receipt of the application.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors shall, within 60 days after the date
of receipt of the application, render a final decision on the application in
accordance with the standards and regulations set forth herein and
after review of the recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission. The final decision by the Board of Supervisors shall be
either to approve the application as presented, disapprove the
application as presented or approve the application subject to specific
conditions, the failure to comply with which by the applicant to be
grounds for revocation of such approval. As part of the review process,
the Township Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, schedule a
public hearing pursuant to public notice for the purposes of reviewing
the said application and receiving the comments of the public.
C. Any application for the storage or disposal of sewage sludge shall be
joined into by the owner of the property upon which the sludge is to be
deposited. In addition, the application shall include a copy of all and any
agreements between the generator of the sewage sludge, the hauler of
the sewage sludge, the applicator of the sewage sludge and the
landowner of the property upon which the sewage sludge is to be
deposited, setting forth full details of the contractual relationship
among them. Information, records and reports as to the reliability and
responsibility of the generator of the sewage sludge, the hauler of the
sewage sludge, the applicator of the sewage sludge and the landowner
upon whose property the sewage sludge is to be deposited may be
required by the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors of
the township to assist them in carrying out the purpose, spirit and
intent of this ordinance.
D. A minimum, nonrefundable fee in the amount of $500 shall accompany
all such applications. Said application fee shall be used to offset all
township costs, including engineering fees in processing the
application. In the event that the said costs exceed the minimum, the
applicant shall pay such additional fees as the additional costs require
immediately upon notification by the township.
E. In addition, a minimum, nonrefundable fee of $200 per month shall be
paid by the applicant for each month that the sewage sludge disposal
operation is in effect to offset the township costs in monitoring the said
operation.
F. Each site proposed for the storage or disposal of sewage sludge shall
require a separate application.
G. The proposed application shall include all of the necessary information
set forth below to assist in the Township Planning Commission and the
Township Board of Supervisors and DER to review the said application,
together with the required fee. The said application shall be submitted
to the Township Secretary at the Township Municipal Building at 3245
§ 65-4 PALMER CODE § 65-4
65:74
Freemansburg Avenue, Palmer Township, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania. The Secretary immediately shall forward the said
application to the Township Engineer who shall review the same upon
receipt. If the said application does not contain all of the required
information and/or the required fee, the Township Engineer,
immediately shall notify the applicant in writing of the additional
information and/or fee required. The thirty-day period for review by the
Township Planning Commission and/or the sixty-day period for review
by the Township Board of Supervisors shall not commence until the
applicant has supplied the township with all of the required information
and/or all of the required fee.
H. The application to the township shall contain the following information:
(1) A copy of the application submitted to DER, together with copies of
any and all other materials, documents, drawings or other
information submitted to the said DER.
(2) A description in narrative form of the proposed application
program, including the sources of the sewage sludge, the method
of transportation to the site, a timetable for application, a
description of any storage operation, the proposed utilization rate,
the total acreage involved and the useful life of the proposed site.
(3) A topographical drawing to a scale no greater than one inch to 200
feet showing:
(a) The location of the site relative to public roads.
(b) Identity of owners of adjacent properties.
(c) Boundaries of the area to be used for land application.
(d) Location of public and private water supplies, wells, springs,
streams, swamps and other bodies of water within 1/4 of one
mile of the boundaries of the proposed land application site.
(e) Soil classifications of the land application area.
(f) Vegetation.
(4) A soil and geologic report indicating the physical characteristics of
the site with respect to its suitability for the application of sewage
sludge. This report shall be based on available soil survey and
geological data and be accompanied by a field test analysis. The
said field test analysis shall include the following:
(a) Soil borings by a soil scientist to confirm that actual soil profit
characteristics are consistent with published survey soil data.
(b) Groundwater monitoring wells shall be established to test
water quality prior to, during and after the application
program. Groundwater composition shall be included in the
§ 65-4 DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SEWAGE § 65-4
65:75
§ 65-5. Standards and regulations.
The standards and regulations for the storage, disposal and application of
sewage sludge in and to the land in the township shall be in accordance with
all existing standards and regulations of DER, as set forth in Chapter 75,
Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Department of Environmental Resources,
except that the following additional standards and regulations shall be
imposed:
application, along with subsequent quarterly monitoring
during the application program. The locations of the
monitoring wells shall be approved by the Township Engineer
prior to drilling. In the event that groundwater is found to flow
in several directions, a monitor well for each direction shall be
required.
(5) A chemical analysis of the sewage sludge from each proposed
source. The analysis shall be done by an independent laboratory
approved by the township and shall involve a minimum of four
samples. The analysis shall include the following items:
(a) Total moisture content.
(b) Percent of total nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
(c) Percent ammonia nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
(d) Percent organic nitrogen (wet and dry weight).
(e) Biochemical oxygen demand.
(f) pH.
(g) Percent on a dry-weight basis of cyanide, sodium, cadmium,
zinc, copper, nickel, lead, chromium, mercury, molybdenum
and other toxic substances and enteric pathogens.
A. No site shall be approved for the storage, application or disposal of
sewage sludge which is less than 20 contiguous acres in size. A plot
consisting of 20 acres, divided by a public road, is not to be construed
as a single site.
B. Sewage sludge shall not be stored, applied or disposed of within 250
feet of any stream, 500 feet of any water supply, 100 feet of any
property lines and 300 feet of any occupied dwellings.
C. No storage, application or disposal of sewage sludge shall take place on
any slope exceeding 12%.
D. No sewage sludge shall be stored, applied or disposed of that is not
generated by a public sewage treatment facility within the political
subdivision known as "Northampton County, Pennsylvania." The
storage, application or disposal of septage is strictly prohibited.
§ 65-4 PALMER CODE § 65-5
65:76
E. All sites to be considered for sewage sludge storage, application and
disposal shall have direct access by improved public roads of concrete
or macadam of a minimum of 24 feet in width. Access to the site, itself,
must be provided by a mud-free driveway of concrete or macadam. In
the event that access to the proposed site is by a nonimproved road
and/or a nonimproved driveway, the township shall require that the
application bear the sole cost of upgrading the road and driveway to
meet all township standards of a public road or driveway in order to
accommodate the number and weight of trucks anticipated to the site.
The cost to be imposed on the application on such event shall include, if
necessary, the acquisition of rights-of-way and improvements thereof.
F. Each load of sewage sludge shall be accompanied by a manifest
showing the amount of the sludge as well as its origin and destination.
G. All applicants must maintain full and complete records on each
separate application, the same to be submitted to the township upon
request. The records so involved shall include the quantities, dates and
locations of the sewage sludge application, the origin of the same and
the delivery of the same.
H. The proposed operation shall not create a nuisance in the township or
otherwise impose a hardship on adjoining property owners or the
township in general.
I. All operations shall be strictly in conformity and compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance, DER and all and any other
governmental regulatory agencies.
J. Chemical analysis and laboratory testing of the sewage sludge from
each source may be required by the township, at the sole and exclusive
cost of the applicant, by an independent laboratory selected or
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors to ensure that the
sewage sludge content remains within the limits established by DER
and the regulations of this ordinance and shall include a minimum of
four samples a year as part of the monitoring process. The sewage
sludge analysis shall show recommended rates and lifetime loading.
The soil shall be monitored annually during the operation of the sewage
sludge disposal site, at the sole and exclusive cost of the applicant, to
determine the level of metal accumulation.
K. Sewage sludge so applied to the land shall be injected under the surface
of the soil or, if spread on the surface, shall be plowed under within 24
hours after so spreading.
L. Any ponding or standing accumulations of said sewage sludge material
is expressly prohibited.
M. The said sewage sludge materials are to be applied in quantities which
will result in no runoff, spreading, vector or odor problem. In addition,
said materials are not to be applied in quantities which will result in
surface or ground water contamination or pollution.
§ 65-5 DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SEWAGE § 65-5
65:77
§ 65-6. Bonds; indemnification; insurance.
In order to assure that the applicant complies with the standards and
regulations set forth herein, with DER and any other governmental
regulatory body and for the protection of the township in the storage,
application and disposal of sewage sludge, the applicant shall present the
township with the following bonds:
N. The sewage sludge material is not to be applied when the ground is
saturated, snow-covered, frozen or during periods of rain.
O. The storage of sewage sludge is subject to all of the foregoing standards
and regulations together with the following:
(1) Sewage sludge storage facilities shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the prevailing standards and regulations of
DER. No storage site or facility may have a capacity greater than
50,000 gallons of liquid sludge.
(2) All sewage sludge storage facilities must be located underground,
be lined and covered with an impervious, waterproof, leakproof
material and must be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height
of 10 feet, so designed as to prevent trespassing. Entrance and exit
gates shall be located at all times during non-use.
(3) A delivery schedule shall be submitted to the township prior to the
issuance of a permit, indicating the number of deliveries and type
of trucks to be used. All deliveries shall occur on Monday through
Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(4) A groundwater monitoring system shall be required to test water
quality during the storage process. The location of the monitoring
wells shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to drilling.
If groundwater is found to flow in several directions, a monitor well
shall be required for each direction of flow.
(5) An applicant who has obtained approval from the township to
utilize a sewage sludge storage facility, may store a quantity of
sludge equivalent to one day's usage, provided that, at the
expiration of 24 hours from the commencement of the storage, the
said sewage sludge must either be applied or removed from the
property.
(6) All storage facilities must be set back at least 100 feet from all
public roads.
(7) A maximum of two storage tanks shall be permitted per site.
A. Performance bond. The applicant shall assure the township, by means
of a corporate bond, with surety, or the deposit of cash or securities in
escrow sufficient to cover the cost, as estimated by Township Engineer,
of performing the various tests and duties imposed upon him by the
§ 65-5 PALMER CODE § 65-6
65:78
ordinance over the expected useful life of the site plus five years. The
bond shall be furnished under such conditions and form and with such
surety as shall be approved by the Township Solicitor to guarantee and
secure that all such tests and duties are fully and adequately performed
and are paid for by the applicant and that the township shall, in no
event, be held liable for the costs of any such duties or tests. If cash or
securities are deposited in lieu of a bond, the said deposit is to be made
pursuant to an escrow agreement prepared by the Township Solicitor
and approved by the Township Board of Supervisors. The escrow agent
for the deposit of such cash or securities shall be located in Palmer
Township (Northampton County, Pennsylvania) and shall be approved
by the Township Board of Supervisors.
B. Improvement bond. The applicant shall assure the township by means
of a corporate bond, with surety, or the deposit of cash or securities in
escrow sufficient to cover the costs, as estimated by the Township
Engineer, of making and maintaining the necessary improvements
incidental to the sewage sludge site. The bond shall be furnished under
such conditions and form and with such surety as shall be approved by
the Township Solicitor to guarantee and secure that all improvements
are made and maintained and are paid for by the applicant and that the
township shall, in no event, be held liable for the costs of any such
improvements. In the event that cash or securities are deposited in lieu
of a bond, the said deposit is to be made pursuant to an escrow
agreement prepared by the Township Solicitor and approved by the
Township Board of Supervisors. The escrow agent for the deposit of
such cash or securities shall be located in Palmer Township
(Northampton County, Pennsylvania) and shall be approved by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
C. Indemnification. In addition to the foregoing requirements, all
applicants for permits to store or utilize sewage sludge upon property
within the township shall, prior to the issuance of any permit for sludge
application and/or storage, deliver to the township a liability
indemnification agreement with bond for the useful life of the proposed
site for five years on a form prepared by the Township Solicitor and
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors, pursuant to the terms
of which the applicant, individually and with surety on the said bond,
specifically agrees to fully indemnify and hold the township harmless
and all its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability,
expenses or damages whatsoever and all litigation defense costs
accruing to any of the same as a result of any use of any land in the
township pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with this
ordinance. The amount of the indemnification agreement and bond
shall be set by the Township Engineer and Township Solicitor and
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors and shall be at least
equal to the costs of removal and/or cleanup of any sewage sludge site
and any engineering or legal fees pertaining thereto plus 15% per year
for the useful life of the site, plus five years.
§ 65-6 DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SEWAGE § 65-6
65:79
§ 65-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
D. Liability insurance. The Township Board of Supervisors shall require
the applicant to submit to the township an insurance policy covering
liability for all and any harm to persons and/or properties resulting from
the aforesaid activities of sewage sludge storage, disposal and/or
application. Said insurance policy shall be in full force and effect for the
entire duration of the above operations and for at least two years
following the termination of the said operations. The amount of the said
insurance coverage shall be recommended by the Township Solicitor
and Township Engineer and shall be approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors based on the said recommendations and their judgment as
to the potential for such harm or damage.
A. This ordinance and any provisions thereof shall be enforceable in any
proceedings, whether at law or at equity, and these remedies shall be in
addition to the criminal penalties hereinafter set forth.
B. The Township Engineer shall be charged with the enforcement of this
ordinance. Such authorization notwithstanding, any police officer or a
majority of the Township Board of Supervisors shall be able to enforce
this ordinance and/or institute proceedings, civilly or criminally, to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
C. If the township officials outlined in the preceding subsection receive
information by personal observation or from any reliable source of a
violation of any provisions of this ordinance, the aforesaid officials shall
be authorized to file a private criminal complaint with the local District
Justice to enforce this ordinance. However, any township police officer,
while on duty and acting in his official capacity, shall be permitted to file
a citation or utilize any other lawful procedure available to him as a law
enforcement officer.
D. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
(1) Any person, association, proprietorship, partnership, corporation
(whether for profit or not) or any other entity which violates any
provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution, and,
in default thereof, undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
(2) Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and
penalties stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
(3) For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1,
General Provisions.
E. The owner of the property upon which the sewage sludge is being
stored or disposed of, the hauler of the sewage sludge, the applicator of
the sewage sludge and/or the lessee or tenant of the premises upon
§ 65-6 PALMER CODE § 65-7
65:80
§ 65-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after its adoption.
§ 65-9. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable and if any other
provision shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or preempted
by any law, such a determination made by a court of law and of record shall
not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.
§ 65-10. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed.
§ 65-11. Conflicts with other legislation.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed so as to supersede or set aside
any lawful requirement, rule or regulation imposed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
Chapter 67
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 109.
§ 67-1. Running at large prohibited. [Amended 4-9-1974 by Ord. No.
150]
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog to allow
such dog to run at large at any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys
or public grounds in the Township of Palmer or upon the property of any
person other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog, unless
accompanied by and under the immediate control of such owner, custodian
or keeper.
§ 67-2. Seizure; notice; redemption; charges.
which the sewage sludge is stored or disposed of may be liable, in
criminal or civil proceedings as aforesaid, for each and every violation
of all or any of the provisions of this ordinance.
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township of Palmer who
witnesses any dog running at large in conflict with the provisions of
§ 67-1 of this ordinance, or who receives information of any dog so
§ 65-7 DOGS § 67-2
67:81
§ 67-3. Nuisances. [Added 6-26-1973 by Ord. No. 139]
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog or similar
animal to allow the same to defecate, expectorate, menstruate or urinate
upon any public park, place or walkway, or upon any private property if
the owner or custodian of such private property has informed the owner,
custodian or keeper of such dog or similar animal in essence that such dog
or animal shall be kept from trespassing upon such private property.
§ 67-4. Injury to property. [Added 6-26-1973 by Ord. No. 139]
It shall be unlawful, in the absence of a privilege, for the owner, custodian
or keeper of any dog or similar animal to allow the same to injure or
destroy any property or animal of any value without the express or implied
consent of the owner of such property or animal or for such owner, keeper
or custodian to allow feces of such dog or animal to accumulate in any place
in excessive quantities or for excessive periods of time.
§ 67-5. Molestation. [Added 6-26-1973 by Ord. No. 139]
It shall be unlawful, in the absence of a privilege, for the owner, custodian
or keeper of any dog or similar animal to allow the same to injure, molest
or bite any person, and any such dog or animal is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
§ 67-6. Severability. [Added 6-26-1973 by Ord. No. 139]
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any word, sentence,
section or part is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining words, sentences, sections or parts of this
ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors
of Palmer Township that this ordinance would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid word, sentence, section or part not been
included herein.
running at large, to seize such dog and to convey it to the place
designated by the Township Supervisors as a pound. Notice of such
seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog in the manner prescribed
by law, and such dog may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the
time specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred by reason
of such detention. Rates for such charges shall be determined from time
to time by the Township Supervisors.
B. If the dog so picked up and boarded by the Palmer Township police is
unlicensed, said dog shall be returned to its owner upon application
therefor. Within 24 hours after the return of said dog, it shall be the
duty of the owner to apply for a dog license at the proper office of the
Northampton County Courthouse. Upon failure to so do, said owner
shall be prosecuted in accordance with § 67-7 of this Palmer Township
Dog Law. [Added 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 211]
§ 67-2 PALMER CODE § 67-7
67:82
§ 67-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-26-1973 by Ord. No.
13919]
A. Any owner, custodian or keeper, whether a natural person or otherwise,
who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable,
upon conviction before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of
the Peace, to pay a fine or penalty to the township, and for the use of the
township, as follows:
(1) For the first offense in violation of § 67-1, 67-3 or 67-4, a fine of not
more than $10, plus costs or charges incurred by reason of
detention of the dog or restoration, replacement or repair of
property injured or destroyed.
(2) For the first offense in violation of § 67-5 or a second or subsequent
offense in violation of § 67-1, 67-3 or 67-4, a fine of not less than
$10 nor more than $25, plus costs or charges incurred by reason of
detention of the dog or restoration, replacement or repair of
property injured or destroyed, or the costs enumerated in
Subsection A(3) below.
(3) For a second or subsequent offense in violation of § 67-5, a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus costs of medical care for
any person injured or bitten, costs of any detention or rabies study
of any dog or animal and costs of the repair or replacement of any
property injured or destroyed. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
B. In default of payment of any of the above fines, such owner, custodian or
keeper may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days as provided by law, so long as such default
is not due to indigence. Any dog or other animal which is permitted to
habitually violate any of the provisions of this ordinance is a nuisance
and may be seized and destroyed by the township police.
C. The charge for pickup of any dog running at large, whether licensed or
unlicensed, shall be $10, and the charge for boarding such dog shall be
$5 per day. [Added 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 211]
D. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis. [Added 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 227]
E. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
19.Editor's Note: The section providing for violations and penalties, formerly § 67-3, was
amended and renumbered as § 67-7 by this ordinance.
§ 67-7 DOGS § 67-8
67:83
§ 67-8. Presumption of negligence. [Added 6-26-1973 by Ord. No.
139]
This ordinance shall apply to both negligent and intentional acts, and it shall
be rebuttably presumed, if the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog or
similar animal or his or her or its agent or a member of his or her household
is informed that such dog or animal has violated any of the provisions of this
ordinance, that any such owner, custodian or keeper is at least negligent
in allowing such dog or animal to again similarly violate this ordinance,
regardless of whether or not there was any prosecution for the first such
violation.
Chapter 72
ELECTRICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55. Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
§ 72-1. Title.
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Basic
Electrical Code."
§ 72-2. Adoption of Code. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
6-1-1981 by Ord. No. 188; 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The publication entitled "ICC Electrical Code/2000" and its errata sheets,
published by the International Code Council, hereinafter called the "code,"
is hereby accepted and adopted and incorporated herein in its entirety,
except as may be hereinafter noted, as the Palmer Township Basic Electrical
Code. All electrical installations in Palmer Township shall comply with
this code and ordinance. Palmer Township shall issue electrical inspection
permits at a fee set by resolution.
§ 72-3. Authorization to inspect electrical installations. [Amended
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The certified inspectors of any inspection agency approved by the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors to do electrical inspections are hereby
exclusively authorized to make inspections and reinspections of all
electrical installations and work within Palmer Township on behalf of the
Township. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of any such
inspection or reinspection be a charge against the Township of Palmer. For
purposes of liability, the aforesaid approved inspectors and agencies shall
be considered independent contractors. All electrical inspection agencies
§ 67-8 PALMER CODE § 72-3
72:84
shall keep all required Palmer Township licenses current in order to perform
electrical inspections.
§ 72-4. Duties of electrical inspectors. [Amended 12-18-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-293]
It shall be the duty of the Palmer Township approved electrical inspectors
to report violations of the Electrical Code to the Palmer Township Building
Inspector, who may enforce any and all provisions of the Electrical Code. In
addition, the approved electrical inspectors shall make inspections of any
property or electrical project within the Township upon reasonable notice of
a request for such inspection by the holder of a Palmer Township electrical
permit or when deemed necessary by a Palmer Township code officer in
order to protect the health, safety and/or welfare of any person or property.
§ 72-5. Application for permits and inspection. [Amended
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall install or
cause to be installed any service entrance, electrical wiring, or electrical
device in any building or on any property until an application for an
electrical permit has been filed with and approved by the Palmer Township
Code Department. All such service entrances, electrical wiring and devices
must pass inspection by a Palmer Township approved electrical inspector or
agency.
§ 72-6. Exceptions to which ordinance does not apply.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the electrical installations
in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installation
of equipment employed by a railway nor to any work involved in the
manufacture, assembly, tests or repair of electrical machinery, apparatus,
materials and equipment by persons, firms, partnerships or corporations
engaged in the electrical manufacturing as their principal business. They
shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by
the government of the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 72-7. Construction of ordinance. [Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-293]
This ordinance shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to personal property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Township
of Palmer nor any of its approved agencies or inspectors be deemed to have
assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to
this ordinance.
§ 72-3 ELECTRICAL CODE § 72-8
72:85
§ 72-8. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any sentence, clause
or section of this ordinance, including the code, is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this ordinance, including the code. It is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer
Township that this ordinance would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause or section not been
included herein or in the code.
§ 72-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 72-10. Designation of additional agencies. [Added 2-7-1972 by
Ord. No. 119; amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Supervisors of Palmer Township may
designate by resolution an additional agency or agencies as authorized
electrical inspectors of Palmer Township, and these agencies shall have the
same duties, rights, responsibilities and liabilities as set forth in the Palmer
Township Basic Electrical Code.
Chapter 79
FIRE FIGHTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity who violates any of
the provisions of this ordinance, or the code, or who takes part in, or
aids, abets or assists in any way in such violation, whether through
action, inaction, negligence or otherwise, shall be liable upon
conviction before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the
Peace to pay a fine or penalty to the township, and for the use of the
township, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 or be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days,
as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 72-8 PALMER CODE § 79-1
79:86
§ 79-1. Title.
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Fire Fighting
Control Ordinance."
§ 79-2. Unauthorized participation prohibited. [Amended 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-365]
No person, partnership, corporation or organization shall interfere with or
participate in any way in fire fighting activities or respond to any alarm
of fire unless such person, partnership, corporation or organization is
requested to so participate or respond by the Fire Commissioner of Palmer
Township, or by the ranking officer of the Palmer Municipal Fire
Department, or unless such person is a member of the Palmer Municipal
Fire Department or an officer or employee of Palmer Township or the
Pennsylvania State Police.
§ 79-3. Exception.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent any
individual person or industrial fire brigade from engaging in fire prevention
or in emergency fire fighting prior to the arrival of the Palmer Municipal
Fire Department at the scene of a fire.
§ 79-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
A. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization who shall violate
any of the provisions of this ordinance, or any person, partnership,
corporation or organization who takes part in or assists in any way in
any such violation, shall be liable upon conviction before any Alderman,
District Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, to pay a fine or penalty to the
Township of Palmer, and for the use of the Township of Palmer, in an
amount not to exceed $600 or be sentenced to imprisonment in the
county prison not exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 79-1 FIRE FIGHTING § 79-4
79:87
Chapter 81
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 72.
Fire fighting — See Ch. 79.
§ 79-4 PALMER CODE § 79-4
81:88
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 11-9-1971 by Ord. No. 115]
§ 81-1. Title.
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Basic Fire
Prevention Ordinance."
§ 81-2. Adoption by reference; word substitutions. [Amended
2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161; 4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 186; 7-28-1987 by
Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-293]
The publication entitled the "International Fire Code/2000" and its errata
sheets, published by the International Code Council, hereinafter called the
"code," is hereby accepted, adopted and incorporated in its entirety, except
as may be hereinafter otherwise indicated, as the Palmer Township Basic
Fire Prevention Code. Wherever in said code blanks appear, the obvious
required or indicated insertions are to be considered made; and wherever
in said code the words "municipality" or "name of municipality" appear, the
words "Palmer Township" are to be considered as inserted.
§ 81-3. Outside burning. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-293]
All outside burning is prohibited except as required by permit in code
Section 307.2. In addition, only bonfires approved by the Palmer Township
Board of Supervisors may be allowed and will be required the issuance of a
permit.
§ 81-4. Fire zones. [Amended 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 125]
To guarantee access by fire vehicles, the fire official, as defined by the
code, may require that any owner, as defined by the code, of a shopping
center or other large public building mark and set aside fire zones in which
parking of motor vehicles and storage of materials shall be prohibited. Such
marking shall consist of metallic signs or painted lines, or both, bearing the
legend "No Parking — Fire Zone" or "No Parking — Fire Lane." No person
shall park any motor vehicle or store any materials in or block in any
way any fire zone so established. Any township police officer shall have
the authority to enforce this section of the Palmer Township Basic Fire
Prevention Ordinance.
§ 81-5. Fire detection and extinguishing systems mandatory.
No hospital, nursing home, rest home, sanitarium or other establishment
catering to sick, injured, infirm or helpless persons shall be constructed or
operated within Palmer Township which is not equipped with an automatic
§ 81-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 81-5
81:89
sprinkler system or other automatic fire-detection and extinguishing
system.
§ 81-6. Enforcement Officer. [Amended 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 125;
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
The enforcement officer for this code shall be the Fire Commissioner, the
Building Inspector or the Township Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal.
§ 81-7. Permits. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161]
Required permits may take the form of letters on official stationery, and the
permit fee shall be set by resolution of the Township Supervisors.
§ 81-8. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 81-9. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any sentence, clause
or section of this ordinance, including the code, is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this ordinance, including the code. It is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer
Township that this ordinance would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause or section not been
included herein or in the code.
§ 81-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
A. Any person as defined in the code who violates any of the provisions of
this ordinance, or any person as defined in the code who takes part or
assists in any such violation, shall be liable, upon conviction before any
Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, to pay a fine or
penalty to the township, and for the use of the township, in an amount
not to exceed $1,000 or to be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
prison for a period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 81-5 PALMER CODE § 81-10
81:90
ARTICLE II
Fire Alarm and Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 10-23-1973 as Ord. No. 148]
§ 81-11. Title.
This ordinance may be cited and shall be known as the "Palmer Township
Basic Fire Prevention Ordinance, Article II."
§ 81-12. Conflicts.
This ordinance is and shall be supplemental to any other ordinances of
Palmer Township, and in case of any conflict between this ordinance and
any other law, code or ordinance applying to the said township, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 81-13. Applicability; purpose.
§ 81-14. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Conforming to the national fire codes and township
ordinances and approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or Factory
Mutual Laboratories or their successors or approved by some similar
agency designated by the Township Supervisors.
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM — An approved system which can automatically
detect fire at all times and which can also be activated manually, including
alarm horns or bells inside and the same outside with a visual signal.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An approved system with alarm bells
and approved devices which can automatically detect, control and
extinguish fire at all times. The system shall include an adequate supply of
water on at least a six-inch main with manual alarm stations, and may use
agents other than water when necessary in special situations.
BUILDING — Any structure designed for the protection or housing of
persons or chattels.
COMPLETE COVERAGE — Coverage at all locations in a building necessary
for approval of coverage at such locations.
DWELLING UNIT — Separate living quarters of any apartment-type
building or a rental room of any motel or hotel.
A. This ordinance shall apply to all changes in use or structures built or
modified so as to fall within the provisions of this ordinance after the
effective date of this ordinance, which is five days after enactment.
B. The purpose of this ordinance is to safeguard life and property from
fire.
§ 81-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 81-15
81:91
§ 81-15. Automatic alarm systems.
As a minimum, complete coverage with an automatic fire alarm shall be
provided in the following buildings:
§ 81-16. Sprinkler systems.
As a minimum, complete coverage with an automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided in the following buildings, which need not then comply with
§ 81-15 hereof:
§ 81-17. Hydrants.
When automatic sprinkler systems are required under this or any other
township ordinance, a standard fire hydrant with unusual township
connections shall be provided within 100 feet of all fire department standoff
sprinkler feed connections on at least a six-inch main.
§ 81-18. Central stations.
Approved central station protection by direct line connection shall be
mandatory for schools, nursing homes, sanatoriums, hospitals and buildings
more than 65 feet tall.
§ 81-19. Smoking; running of engines during refueling.
Smoking in or on a bed is prohibited in any apartment house, rooming
house, hotel, motel or multiple-family dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units. Running of engines of motor vehicles other than emergency
vehicles is prohibited during refueling of the same with flammable liquids,
and smoking is prohibited within 35 feet of such refueling operations.
A. All apartments, rooming houses, hotels, motels and multiple-family
dwellings containing three or more dwelling units.
B. All churches or nonprofit places of worship, commercial, industrial or
public buildings of 5,000 or more total square feet of floor area or which
can reasonably accommodate 100 or more persons.
A. All apartment houses, rooming houses, hotels, motels and multiplefamily
dwellings containing 10 or more dwelling units.
B. All schools, nursing homes, old-age facilities, sanatoriums, hospitals
and movie theaters.
C. All commercial, industrial or public buildings more than 35 feet high, or
which can reasonably accommodate 250 or more persons or which
contain 10,000 or more total square feet of floor area, except churches
and nonprofit places of worship.
D. Automobile showrooms or garages of more than 2,500 square feet total
floor area, and any building regardless of size or height in which
unusually severe fire hazards are presented.
§ 81-15 PALMER CODE § 81-20
81:92
§ 81-20. Common attics, crawl spaces, etc.
Separate dwelling units of all apartment houses, rooming houses, hotels,
motels and multiple-family dwellings shall be constructed physically
separate from each other, and in no case shall any common attic, crawl
space, cock loft, suspended ceiling or chamber connect them.
§ 81-21. Severability; variances.
§ 81-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 81-23. Existing structures. [Added 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161]
Sections 81-15 and 81-16 of this ordinance shall apply to all new structures
and uses and to any existing structure which is found by the fire official to
be dangerous or hazardous or which is more than fifty-percent damaged in
either value based upon present replacement cost or number of dwelling
units or floor area.
§ 81-24. Fire drills and private hydrants. [Added 2-24-1976 by Ord.
No. 161]
The fire official may require and conduct periodic fire drills in any school,
nursing home or structure containing 10 or more dwelling units or 10,000
or more square feet of floor area, or which is more than 35 feet in height.
No person shall block or park in front of any fire hydrant or fire standoff
A. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any part of this
ordinance is for any reason found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance.
B. The Board may grant hardship variances if the fire risk is low.
A. Any structure constructed or operated in violation of this ordinance is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such construction or operation
may be enjoined by equitable proceedings. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the
foregoing, any person, partnership, corporation or trust which in any
way violates or fails to comply with this ordinance shall be liable, for
each offense, upon conviction before any Magistrate or Justice of the
Peace in a summary proceeding, to a fine or penalty for the use of the
township of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 81-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 81-24
81:93
connection pertaining to such a facility or any commercial or industrial
building.
§ 81-25. Location of fire zones. [Added 6-6-1977 by Ord. No. 166;
amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
Unless expressly waived or reduced in size by the Township Fire
Commissioner or Enforcement Officer, the periphery of all public buildings
10,000 or more square feet in size shall be surrounded by a fire lane or
fire zone extending from the outer edge of the open or covered sidewalk
immediately adjoining said buildings to a point 12 feet away and out from
said edge or, in places where no sidewalk is present, from the wall of said
building to a point 12 feet away and out from said wall. Such fire lanes
and fire zones shall be deemed established and enforced under § 81-4 of
this Code with such appropriate markings and signs as the Township Fire
Commissioner or Enforcement Officer may require. Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent the Township Fire Commissioner or Enforcement
Officer from requiring that fire lanes be established pursuant to § 81-4 of
this Code at other particular locations designated by him to provide and
guarantee access by fire and emergency equipment. In cases where an
unattended motor vehicle is parked in or is blocking access to such a fire
lane or fire zone, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner of
such vehicle parked it there.
§ 81-26. Posting of signs at service stations. [Added 6-6-1977 by
Ord. No. 166; amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
The Township Fire Commissioner or Enforcement Officer may require that
owners or operators of vehicle filling and service stations post signs on
all pumps dispensing gasoline warning persons against running vehicle
engines or smoking in said area during refueling.
§ 81-24 PALMER CODE § 81-26
81:94
ARTICLE III
Key Lock Box System
[Adopted 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-300]
§ 81-27. Title.
This ordinance may be cited and shall be known as the "Palmer Township
Basic Fire Prevention Ordinance, Article III."
§ 81-28. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM — A box designed to contain building entrance
keys and keys to other areas of the building.
§ 81-29. Requirements.
A. Structures subject to the use of a key lock box system. The following
structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main
entrance or such other location specified by the Fire Commissioner:
[Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
(1) Any commercial or industrial use, as defined by of the Palmer
Township Zoning Ordinance.20
(2) All buildings within the Township that have an automatic alarm
and/or sprinkler system.
(3) Any preexisting commercial or industrial building or structures
which have been approved for the construction of building
additions equal to or greater than 33% of the total square footage
of the structure prior to the construction of said addition.
(4) Any other property determined by the Palmer Township Fire
Commissioner as being required to install a key box. Upon
examination of the physical condition and characteristics of any
property and upon notice in writing to the assessed owner and
principal occupant, the Fire Commissioner may further require a
key lock box in a specific location whenever access to or within a
structure is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where
immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighter
purposes. [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
B. All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the
key lock box installed and operational before issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 81-27 FIRE PREVENTION § 81-29
81:95
§ 81-30. Exceptions.
§ 81-31. Specifications.
C. The owner or operator of the structure required to have a key lock box
shall at all times keep a key in the lock box that will allow access to the
structures.
D. The Fire Commissioner shall designate the type of key lock box to be
implemented within the Township and shall have the authority to
require all structures to use the designated system. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
E. Owners or operators of controlled vehicle parking areas which use
mechanical parking gates to control motor vehicle ingress and egress
shall install and maintain emergency override control devices on each
gate. Said device shall be a master-key-operated-type switch approved
by the Fire Commissioner of the Township of Palmer. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
F. All costs associated with the purchase and installation of the key lock
box system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises.
G. All buildings equipped with elevators shall install a key lock box system.
The building owner/manager shall provide two sets of keys for entry to
the building and all portions of the premises and two sets of elevator
control keys if elevators are equipped with bypass switches.
H. Except as otherwise noted herein, the provisions of this ordinance shall
not apply to structures completed before the adoption of this ordinance.
A. Any property protected by an on-site twenty-four-hour seven-day-aweek
security guard service or maintenance personnel shall be exempt.
B. All residential properties, including apartments of two stories or less,
shall be exempt.
C. Any commercial or industrial structures constructed prior to the
adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt.
A. Key box contents:
(1) Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of
such buildings;
(2) Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
(3) Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
(4) Keys to the elevator controls;
(5) Keys to any fence or secured areas;
§ 81-29 PALMER CODE § 81-31
81:96
§ 81-32. Administration, recordkeeping, notification and
registration.
§ 81-33. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this ordinance is a summary offense and carries with it a
fine of $500 and shall be enforced in the manner and by the procedure
established by 53 P.S. § 1601(C.1)(2).
§ 81-34. Repealer.
All ordinances or resolutions or parts of ordinances or resolutions, in so
far as they are inconsistent herewith, be and the same they are hereby
repealed.
(6) Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Commissioner;
[Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
(7) A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
B. Key box types specifications. The key lock box shall be approved by the
Fire Commissioner of Palmer Township, along with the location for
installation. [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
A. Recordkeeping. The Fire Commissioner shall record pertinent data
regarding each property protected by a key lock box. The Fire
Commissioner shall include whatever information is necessary for
recordkeeping purposes. [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-365]
B. Registration fee. There shall be a twenty-five-dollar registration fee
when a lock box is initially installed.
C. The Fire Department shall be in complete control of the key lock box
system authorization and operation. Each key lock box system shall
utilize approved signatures from the Fire Department for the release of
keys and all lock products from the manufacturer.
D. Notification. If locks are changed at any location with the key lock box
system, the Fire Commissioner shall be notified immediately.
[Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
E. Enforceability. This ordinance may be enforced by the Palmer Township
Fire Department and/or Palmer Township Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 81-31 FIRE PREVENTION § 81-34
81:97
Chapter 85
FORECLOSED AND ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Nuisances — See Ch. 109.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Real estate — See Ch. 135.
Refuse disposal — See Ch. 138.
Weeds and visual obstructions — See Ch. 186.
§ 85-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Township to establish a process to
address the deterioration and blight of Township neighborhoods caused
by an increasing amount of foreclosed or abandoned real property located
within the Township and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number
of abandoned properties located within the Township. It is the Township's
further intent to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect
neighborhoods from becoming blighted due to the lack of adequate
maintenance and security of foreclosed and abandoned properties.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any real property in the Township that has
become both vacant and blighted.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property or structure that is
accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a
structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow
access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, the Township's
Property Maintenance Code, the Township's Building Code, the Township's
Zoning Code, the Township's Code of Ordinances ("Township Code"), and
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Township codes;
or
B.
§ 81-34 PALMER CODE § 85-2
81:98
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any building official, zoning officer, code
enforcement officer, building inspector, fire inspector, law enforcement
officer, or other person authorized by the Township to enforce the applicable
code(s).
FORECLOSED PROPERTY — Any real property located in the Township,
whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on the property,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is subject to
an application for a tax deed or pending Tax Assessor's lien sale, or has
been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "foreclosed" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
management and/or maintenance of real property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building or structure that is not legally
occupied.
§ 85-3. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather shall be an
additional remedy available to the Township above and beyond any other
state, county or local provisions for same.
§ 85-4. Establishment of a registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 85-5, the Township or its designee shall
establish a registry cataloging each foreclosed or abandoned property
within the Township, containing the information required by this chapter.
§ 85-5. Registration of foreclosed or abandoned real property.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the Township codes.
C.
A. Upon default by the mortgagor of the mortgage on any real property
located within the Township of Palmer, the mortgagee (lender) who
holds such mortgage shall perform an inspection of the property to
determine vacancy or occupancy. The mortgagee shall, within 10 days
of the inspection, register the property with the Codes Department, or
its designee, on forms or a website provided by the Township, and
§ 85-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 85-5
81:99
indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be
vacant or occupied.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in mortgage default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgage or his designee monthly until:
(1) The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
(2) The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at
which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall,
within 10 days of that inspection, update the property registration
to a vacancy status on forms or website access provided by the
Township.
C. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
D. This section shall also apply to properties that have been identified by
the Codes Department as being vacant and abandoned, through the
investigation of code violations or blighted conditions on such
properties.
E. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
property owner, the mortgagee and the foreclosure process server or
attorney; the direct mailing address of the owner, the mortgagee and
the server or attorney; a direct contact name and telephone number for
all parties; a facsimile number and e-mail address for all parties; the
Northampton County tax parcel identification number of the property;
and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of any
property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property.
(1) If the property is vacant, the front door of the property shall be
posted legibly and clearly with the name and twenty-four-hour
contact telephone of the owner, mortgagee or designated local
agent. The posting shall contain the following language:
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY:
TO REPORT ANY PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS, CALL:
F. A nonrefundable annual registration fee shall accompany the
registration form or website registration, the amount of which shall be
set by resolution as part of the Township's fee schedule. The annual
registration fee shall be valid for one calendar year and shall be due on
the date of registration and every year thereafter until such property
becomes legally occupied.
G. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, server,
trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees will not be accepted
§ 85-5 PALMER CODE § 85-5
81:100
§ 85-6. Maintenance requirements.
without the prior consent of the Township and/or its authorized
designee.
H. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
Once the property is no longer in foreclosure or is sold to a person or
entity other than the mortgagee, the mortgagee must provide proof of
sale or written notice of termination of the foreclosure proceedings to
the Township.
I. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
J. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this chapter is a violation of the chapter
and shall be subject to enforcement.
K. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this chapter, the Township may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be compliant with all applicable
Township codes. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly
maintain the property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s)
and issuance of a citation or notice of violation. Pursuant to a finding
and determination by the Township Code Enforcement Officer, District
Magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Township may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance.
B. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of trash, junk, or
debris; building materials; unlicensed or junk vehicles; any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, printed material or
notices, except those required by federal, state or local law; discarded
personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, and
appliances; and any other items that give the appearance that the
property is abandoned.
C. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior-grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
D. Yard and/or landscape maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or
landscape. All sidewalks adjoining the property shall be kept clear of
snow and ice.
§ 85-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 85-6
81:101
§ 85-7. Security requirements.
§ 85-8. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which, pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to
be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of Palmer
Township.
§ 85-9. Penalties; schedule of civil penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter may be cited
and fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Township of Palmer
Code of Ordinances. The following table shows violations of these sections,
as may be amended from time to time, which may be enforced pursuant
to the provisions of this regulation, and the dollar amount of civil penalty
for the violation of these sections as it may be amended. The descriptions
of violations below are for informational purposes only and are not meant
to limit or define the nature of the violations or the subject matter of
the Township Code sections, except to the extent that different types of
violations of the Code section may carry different civil penalties. For each
Code section listed in the schedule of civil penalties, the entirety of the
E. Yard and/or landscape material shall include, but not be limited to,
grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for
residential installation. Acceptable yard and/or landscape material shall
not include weeds, fallen trees or branches, gravel, broken concrete,
asphalt or similar material.
F. Pools, spas and other bodies of water, including ponds, shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair. Pools
and spas shall be secured in accordance with Township codes.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a person to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a person to access the interior of the property or structure must
be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the
window, not by placement of wood or other material.
C. If the mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become
vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into
compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must
perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and any other applicable laws.
§ 85-6 PALMER CODE § 85-9
81:102
section may be enforced by the mechanism provided in this section,
regardless of whether all activities prescribed or required are described in
the "Description of Violation" column. To determine whether a particular
activity is prescribed or required by this Code, the relevant Township Code
section(s) shall be examined.
Description of Violation Civil Penalty
Failure to register abandoned or foreclosed real
property on an annual basis and/or any violation of
the sections stated within
$500
§ 85-10. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any person, legal entity or
agent from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s) which
may apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of title to the property,
the owner shall be responsible for all violations of the applicable code(s),
and the owner shall be responsible for meeting with the Township's Code
Department within 45 days for a final inspection report.
§ 85-11. Opposing or obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable
code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 85-12. (Reserved)
§ 85-13. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Township to
enforce the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or
criminal, for reasonable, good-faith entry upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed by this chapter.
§ 85-14. Exemptions.
The federal government, its instrumentalities, and agents shall be exempt
from the payment of fees and fines under this chapter.
§ 85-15. Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding
shall in no way affect or impair any of the remaining portions of this chapter.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Palmer Township Board
of Supervisors that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
§ 85-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 85-15
81:103
Chapter 87
HEALTH CODE
§ 85-15 PALMER CODE § 85-15
87:104
Part 1
Adoption
ARTICLE I
Title; Health and Sanitary Officer
§ 87-1. Title.
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Health and
Sanitary Code."
§ 87-2. Health and Sanitary Officer.
The Supervisors may appoint a Health and Sanitary Officer who shall have
primary responsibility for the enforcement of the Palmer Township Health
and Sanitary Code, and who may enforce other Township laws pertaining
to health. The Zoning Officer, Building Inspector and Plumbing Inspector
are hereby declared to be ex officio Assistant Health and Sanitary Officers
with the same powers as the Health and Sanitary Officer, including the
power to quarantine. For the purposes of the code, the Health and Sanitary
Officer shall be the "Public Officer." The public officer responsible for the
enforcement of the Palmer Township Health and Sanitary Code shall be
certified as a qualified health officer or inspector by the Department of
Environmental Protection, the Department of Agriculture and the
Department of Health in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 87-1 HEALTH CODE § 87-2
87:105

Part 2
Subchapter A. General Provisions
ARTICLE II
Definitions; Licensing
§ 87-3. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADULTERATED FOOD — Food which:
CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIAL — A material which maintains its
original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food,
cleaning compounds and sanitizing solutions which may be in contact with
it.
EASILY CLEANABLE — Readily accessible and of such material and finish,
and so fabricated, that residue may be completely removed by normal
cleaning methods.
EQUIPMENT — All stoves, ranges, hoods, meatblocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables and similar items,
other than utensils, used in the operation of a food-service establishment.
FOOD — Raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient intended in whole or in part for human consumption.
FOOD CONTACT SURFACES — Surfaces of equipment and utensils which
normally come in contact with food, directly or indirectly.
GARBAGE — Putrescible wastes, except sewage and body waste, including
animal and vegetable offal.
Bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity
which may render it injurious to health.
A.
Bears or contains added poisonous or deleterious substance for which
no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in excess of
such tolerance if one has been established.
B.
Consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
C.
Has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary
conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or
rendered injurious to health.
D.
Is in whole or in part of the product of a diseased animal, or an animal
which had died otherwise than by slaughter.
E.
Is in a container composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
F.
§ 87-3 HEALTH CODE § 87-3
87:107
LICENSOR — A health agency approved by the Department of Agriculture
to grant licenses to places serving food or drink.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Perishable food which consists in
whole or in part of milk, or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish
or other ingredients capable or supporting rapid and progressive growth or
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACES — A public establishment which
serves food or drink to customers or patrons, and which is regulated by this
chapter.
REFUSE — Nonputrescible wastes generally regarded and classified as
rubbish, trash, junk and similar designations which have been rejected by
the owner or possessor thereof as useless or worthless.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A place, whether temporary or
permanent, stationary or mobile, where food or drink is packaged, stored,
served, sold or offered for sale directly to the consumer.
SAFE TEMPERATURE — Applied to potentially hazardous food, an internal
temperature of 45º F. or below, and 140º F. or above.
SANITIZE — Effective bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces of equipment
and utensils by a process which has been approved by the Department
of Agriculture as being effective in destroying microorganisms, including
pathogens.
SEWAGE — A substance which contains waste products or excrements
or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and any
noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — A system, whether community or individual,
publicly or privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewerage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature, or both, including various devices for
the treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Cups, containers, lids or closures; plates,
knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles; straws, place mats, napkins, doilies,
wrapping materials; and all similar articles which are constructed wholly or
in part from paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetic
or other readily destructible materials, and which are intended by the
manufacturers and generally recognized by the public for one use only and
then to be discarded.
SOURCE — A well, spring, cistern, infiltration gallery, stream, reservoir,
pond or lake from which water is taken, by any means, either intermittently
or continuously, for use by the public.
TEMPORARY PUBLIC EATING OR DRINKING PLACE — A public eating
or drinking place which operates at any location for a temporary period
of time not to exceed more than 14 consecutive calendar days, regardless
of whether the establishment operates continuously during this time, in
§ 87-3 PALMER CODE § 87-3
87:108
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar
transitory gathering.
WATERS OF THIS TOWNSHIP — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, lakes,
dammed water, ponds, springs and other bodies of surface and underground
water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER SUPPLY — A source of water, as well as water treatment, storage,
transmission and distribution facilities.
§ 87-4. Purpose.
This chapter is to provide regulations for the sanitary treatment and serving
of food and drink in the various food establishments of the Township of
Palmer.
§ 87-5. License requirement.
§ 87-6. (Reserved)
§ 87-7. (Reserved)
§ 87-8. (Reserved)
§ 87-9. (Reserved)
§ 87-10. (Reserved)
A. Proprietors may not operate or conduct a food establishment within this
Township except in compliance with this chapter.
B. A proprietor in possession of a valid license to operate a food
establishment who fails to comply with this chapter may have the
license either revoked or suspended by the licensor during the license
period.
§ 87-3 HEALTH CODE § 87-10
87:109

Part 3
Subchapter B. Public Eating And Drinking Places
ARTICLE III
Food Supplies
§ 87-11. General.
§ 87-12. Milk products.
§ 87-13. Shellstock and shellfish.
A. Food in public eating or drinking places shall be clean, wholesome, free
from spoilage, free from adulteration and safe for human consumption.
B. No food prepared in a private home or processed in a place other than a
commercial food processing establishment shall be sold or used in
preparation of foods offered for sale, sold or given away in a public
eating or drinking place unless the place is regulated by a health
authority or other appropriate official regulatory agency.
A. Only pasteurized fluid milk and fluid milk products shall be used or
served. Dry milk products may be reconstituted in the establishment if
used for cooking purposes only.
B. Milk and fluid milk products for drinking purposes shall be purchased
and served in the original individual container in which they were
packaged at a milk plant or shall be served from an approved bulk milk
dispenser.
C. Cream, whipped cream or half and half which is to be consumed on the
premises may be served from the original container of not more than 1
quart capacity or from a dispenser approved by the Department of
Agriculture for the service. For mixed drinks requiring less than 1/2
pint of milk, milk may be poured from 1 quart or 1/2 gallon containers
packaged at a milk plant.
A. A person in this Township may not have in his possession for
processing, offer for sale or sell shellfish (oysters, clams and mussels)
unless the shellfish have been obtained from interstate dealers who are
approved by the Department of Agriculture and are listed in the United
States Food and Drug Administration's Interstate Certified Shellfish
Shippers List or are intrastate dealers permitted by the Department.
B. An individual package of shellstock, and each individual package of
fresh or frozen shucked shellfish, shall have permanently affixed on the
package an easily visible, durable, waterproof tag or label approved by
the Department of Agriculture.
(1) The tag or label on the shellstock container shall contain the
following information: the dealer's name, address, shellfish permit
§ 87-11 HEALTH CODE § 87-13
87:111
§ 87-14. Examination of food.
number, growing area identification, the date of harvest, type and
quantity of shellstock. When waxed cardboard boxes are used, the
required information may be printed on the sides of the box.
(2) An individual package of fresh or frozen shucked shellfish shall
have permanently recorded on the principal display panel the
dealer's or processor's shellfish plant permit number and "sell by"
date. The sidewall is considered the principal display panel.
Packages of shucked shellfish containing 1/2 gallon (64 ounces) or
more shall have the dealer's shellfish plant permit number and the
packer's name printed or embossed on the sidewall of the package
and the date shucked marked on both the lid and also the sidewall
or bottom. The date shall consist of either the number of the day of
the year or the abbreviation for the month and number of the day of
the month. The year shall be added for frozen shellfish. Frozen
shellfish shall be clearly labeled as frozen in a type size of equal
prominence to the name of the shellfish and located immediately
adjacent thereto.
(3) Required label and product identification shall be provided in a
legible and indelible form.
(4) The fraudulent use of tags or the placing of fraudulent or
misleading information on the tags is considered a violation of this
chapter.
(5) The tags and accurate records of the sources and quantity of all lots
of shellfish shall be maintained for 90 days.
(6) Shellstock shall be packed and shipped in clean single-use
containers or clean, nontoxic material, and shucked shellfish shall
be packed and shipped in single-use containers of clean,
impervious, nontoxic material and shall be sealed so that
tampering can be detected.
C. Shellfish, crabs and lobsters, if served in the shell, shall be served in the
original shell. The reuse of the shells as food containers in the
preparation or serving of food is prohibited.
A. Food may be examined or sampled by the licensor as often as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration.
B. The Public Health Officer may, upon written notice to the owner or
person in charge, place a hold order on any food which he determines
or has probable cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise
adulterated. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably
stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold
order, notice or tag placed on food by the Public Health Officer, and
neither the food nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled,
repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without
§ 87-13 PALMER CODE § 87-14
87:112
§ 87-15. (Reserved)
§ 87-16. (Reserved)
§ 87-17. (Reserved)
§ 87-18. (Reserved)
§ 87-19. (Reserved)
§ 87-20. (Reserved)
permission of the Public Health Officer, except on order by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 87-14 HEALTH CODE § 87-20
87:113

ARTICLE IV
Food Protection and Storage
§ 87-21. General.
§ 87-22. Poisonous and toxic materials.
§ 87-23. Cold storage facilities.
A. Food, while being stored, prepared, displayed, served or sold at public
eating or drinking places, or during transportation between the
establishments, shall be protected from contamination and stored to
prevent rodent haborage and permit ease of cleaning of the food service
facilities.
B. Perishable food shall be stored at temperatures to protect against
spoilage. Potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe
temperatures. Foods shall be stored in the refrigerator so as to permit
the free circulation of cold air and to prevent contamination. To
promote rapid cooling, potentially hazardous food shall be stored in the
refrigerator in shallow containers or by means which insure cooling of
the total mass to a temperature of 45º F. or less within two hours, unless
otherwise specified by the Department of Agriculture.
C. Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed before use. Stuffings,
poultry, stuffed meats and stuffed poultry and pork and pork products
shall be thoroughly cooked before being served.
D. No food which has been previously served to any person or returned
from a counter or table shall be used in the preparation of foods, offered
for sale or given away. However, wrapped food which has not been
unwrapped and which is wholesome may be reserved.
E. Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops and other suitable utensils
shall be provided and shall be used by employees to reduce manual
contact with food to a minimum. For self-service by customers, similar
implements shall be provided.
A. Only those poisonous and toxic materials which are required to
maintain sanitary conditions and for sanitization purposes may be used
or stored in public eating or drinking places. The materials shall be
identified and shall be used only in such a manner as will not
contaminate food or constitute a hazard to employees or customers.
B. When not in use, poisonous and toxic materials shall be stored in
cabinets which are used for no other purpose or in a place which is
outside the food storage, food preparation and cleaned equipment and
utensil storage rooms.
C. Bactericides and cleaning compounds may not be stored in the same
cabinet or area of the room with insecticides, rodenticides or other
poisonous materials.
§ 87-21 HEALTH CODE § 87-23
87:115
§ 87-24. Frozen food.
§ 87-25. (Reserved)
§ 87-26. (Reserved)
§ 87-27. (Reserved)
§ 87-28. (Reserved)
§ 87-29. (Reserved)
§ 87-30. (Reserved)
A. Each cold storage facility used for the storage of perishable food in the
nonfrozen state shall be provided with an indicating thermometer
accurate to -2º F., located in the warmest part of the facility in which
food is stored, and of a type and so situated that the thermometer may
be easily and readily observed for reading.
B. The temperature in each cold storage facility used to store potentially
hazardous food in the nonfrozen state may not be higher than 45º F.
C. Wet storage of packaged, canned and bottled food or drink is
prohibited.
A. Frozen food shall be kept at temperatures to remain frozen, except
when being thawed for preparation or use. Potentially hazardous frozen
food shall be thawed:
(1) At refrigerator temperatures of 45º F. or below.
(2) Under cool, potable running water (70º F. or below).
(3) Quick-thawed as part of the cooking process.
(4) By any other method satisfactory to the Department of Agriculture.
B. Once thawed, frozen foods may not be refrozen.
§ 87-23 PALMER CODE § 87-30
87:116
ARTICLE V
Preparation of Certain Foods
§ 87-31. Stuffed meats and poultry.
Stuffings, poultry and stuffed meats and stuffed poultry shall be heated
throughout to a minimum temperature of 165º F., with no interruption of
the initial cooking process.
§ 87-32. Custards and cream fillings.
§ 87-33. (Reserved)
§ 87-34. (Reserved)
§ 87-35. (Reserved)
§ 87-36. (Reserved)
§ 87-37. (Reserved)
§ 87-38. (Reserved)
§ 87-39. (Reserved)
§ 87-40. (Reserved)
A. Potentially hazardous custards, cream fillings or similar products,
which are prepared by hot or cold processes and which are used as
puddings or pastry fillings, shall be kept at safe temperatures and shall
meet the following requirements, as applicable:
(1) Pastry fillings shall be placed in shells, crusts or other baked goods
either while hot (not less than 140º F.) or immediately following
preparation if a cold process is used.
(2) The fillings and puddings shall be refrigerated at 45º F. or below in
shallow pans immediately after cooking or preparation, and held
there until combined into pastries or served.
B. Completed custard-filled and cream-filled pastries shall, unless served
immediately following filling, be refrigerated at 45º F. or below
promptly after preparation, and held thereat pending service.
§ 87-31 HEALTH CODE § 87-40
87:117

ARTICLE VI
Health and Disease Control for Employees
§ 87-41. Employees with diseases.
§ 87-42. Control of infectious employees.
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from
an employee, the Public Health Officer is authorized to require the following
measures:
§ 87-43. Cleanliness.
A. An employee with a disease in a communicable form or who is a carrier
of such disease may not work in a public eating or drinking place in a
capacity which brings him into contact with the production, handling,
storage or transportation or food or equipment used in public eating or
drinking places.
B. A proprietor may not employ a person suspected or having a disease in
a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease.
C. An employee who has a discharging or infected wound, sore or lesion on
hands, arms, or an exposed portion of the body shall be excluded from
those operations which will bring him into contact with food,
beverages, utensils or equipment used in public eating or drinking
places.
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from the eating or drinking
place.
B. The immediate closing of the eating or drinking place concerned until,
in the opinion of the Public Health Officer, no further danger of disease
outbreaks exists.
C. Restriction of the services of the employee to some area of work where
there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
D. Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates,
with laboratory examinations if necessary.
A. Employees shall wear and clean outer garments, maintain a high
degree of personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic practices while
on duty. They shall wash their hands thoroughly in an approved
handwashing facility before starting work and as often as may be
necessary to remove soil and contamination. An employee may not
resume work after visiting the toilet room without washing his hands
with soap and warm water.
B. Hair nets, caps or other effective hair covering shall be used by
employees engaged in the preparation and service of food or washing of
§ 87-41 HEALTH CODE § 87-43
87:119
§ 87-44. (Reserved)
§ 87-45. (Reserved)
§ 87-46. (Reserved)
§ 87-47. (Reserved)
§ 87-48. (Reserved)
§ 87-49. (Reserved)
utensils and equipment to keep hair from food and food contact
surfaces.
C. Persons engaged in the preparation, handling or service of food may not
use tobacco in any form while in equipment and utensil washing, food
preparation, or food serving areas. However, designated locations in
such areas may be approved by the Public Health Officer for smoking
where no contamination hazards will result.
§ 87-43 PALMER CODE § 87-49
87:120
ARTICLE VII
Design and Installation of Equipment and Utensils
§ 87-50. Sanitary design and installation.
§ 87-51. Accessibility for cleaning.
Equipment shall be so installed and maintained as to facilitate the cleaning
thereof and of all adjacent areas.
§ 87-52. Single-service articles.
Single-service articles shall be made from nontoxic materials and shall
have been manufactured, packaged, transported, stored and handled in a
sanitary manner, and shall be used only once.
§ 87-53. (Reserved)
§ 87-54. (Reserved)
§ 87-55. (Reserved)
§ 87-56. (Reserved)
§ 87-57. (Reserved)
§ 87-58. (Reserved)
A. Utensils and show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves,
tables, chairs, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or
utensils shall be so constructed as to be cleaned easily, be durable and
shall be kept in good repair.
B. Food contact surfaces of the equipment and utensils shall be easily
accessible for cleaning, nontoxic, corrosion resistant and relatively
nonabsorbent.
C. Equipment shall be designed, installed and operated in accordance with
the criteria set forth by the National Sanitation Foundation, Automatic
Merchandising Health Industry Council, Baking Industry Sanitation
Standards Committee and the Committee for 3-A Sanitary Standards or
Dairy Equipment or other nationally recognized testing laboratory or
agency.
D. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium, lead or zinc may not be
used, although solder containing lead may be used for jointing.
E. Glassware, china, crockery, pottery and utensils or equipment of a
similar character or coating shall be free from breaks, cracks and
chipped places.
§ 87-50 HEALTH CODE § 87-59
87:121
§ 87-59. (Reserved)
§ 87-60. (Reserved)
§ 87-59 PALMER CODE § 87-60
87:122
ARTICLE VIII
Cleaning and Sanitizing of Equipment and Utensils
§ 87-61. General.
§ 87-62. Manual dishwashing.
A. Eating or drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and
sanitized after each usage.
B. Kitchenware and food contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or serving of food or drink and multiuse food storage
utensils, exclusive of cooking surfaces of equipment, shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use. Cooking surfaces of equipment shall
be cleaned at least once a day.
C. Utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or storage of potentially hazardous food shall be thoroughly
cleaned, rinsed and sanitized prior to use, except that food contact
surfaces of equipment or utensils which will be heated in the baking or
cooking process of food preparation to above 140º F. are not required to
be sanitized prior to usage. Surfaces of equipment which do not come
into contact with food shall be cleaned at such intervals as to keep them
in a clean and sanitary condition. After cleaning and until use, food
contact surfaces of equipment and utensils shall be so stored and
handled as to be protected from contamination.
A. If manual dishwashing is employed, equipment and utensils shall be
thoroughly washed in a warm detergent solution which is kept
reasonably clean, and then shall be rinsed free of such solution. Eating
and drinking utensils and, if required, the food contact surfaces of other
equipment and utensils, shall be sanitized by one of the following
methods:
(1) Immersion for at least 1/2 minute in clean hot water at a
temperature of a least 170º F. Thermometers accurate to -3º F. shall
be provided convenient to the sink to permit frequent checks of the
water temperature.
(2) Immersion for a period of at least one minute in a sanitizing
solution containing one of the following:
(a) At least 50 parts per million of available chlorine at a
temperature not less than 75º F.
(b) At least 12.5 ppm of available iodine in a solution having a pH
not higher than 5.0 and a temperature of not less than 75º F.
(c) Any other chemical sanitizing agent which has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department of
Agriculture to be effective and nontoxic under use conditions
and for which a suitable field test is available. The sanitizing
§ 87-61 HEALTH CODE § 87-62
87:123
agents, in use solutions, shall provide the equivalent
bactericidal effect of a solution containing at least 50 ppm of
available chlorine at a temperature not less than 75º F.
(3) Equipment too large or impractical to treat by the methods in
Subsection A(1) or (2) may be treated with one of the following:
(a) With live stream from a hose, in the case of equipment in which
stream can be confined.
(b) By rinsing with boiling water.
(c) By spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing solution of
at least twice the minimum strength required for the particular
sanitizing solution when used for immersion sanitization.
B. Public eating or drinking places shall conduct manual washing and
sanitization of utensils only in three-compartment sinks, with the
following exceptions and conditions:
(1) Licensing jurisdictions in which greater than 50% of the
establishments are employing manual means of washing and
sanitization of utensils and equipment do not have threecompartment
sinks shall submit for approval to the Public Health
Officer a plan for the orderly transition to effect compliance with
the provisions of this subsection.
(2) In establishments where the only utensils to be washed are limited
to spatulas, tongs and similar devices, and when the only
equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does not require
disassembly for proper cleaning, a one-compartment sink may be
approved by the licensor for such purpose.
(3) At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and used for
washing kitchenware and equipment which does not require
sanitization.
C. Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall be of
adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete immersion of
the equipment and utensils, and each compartment of the sinks shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
D. If there is a need for a slop sink or device to discard liquid waste, the
sink or device shall be provided in addition to the three-compartment
sink. Cleaning wastes may not be emptied into sinks used for the
preparation of food or the cleaning and sanitizing of utensils.
E. If hot water is used as the sanitizing agent in manual operations, dish
baskets shall be designed to permit complete immersion of the utensils
and equipment components being sanitized therein. The sink
compartment used for the sanitization process shall be equipped with
heating facilities which are capable of maintaining the temperature of
the water at not less than 170º F.
§ 87-62 PALMER CODE § 87-63
87:124
§ 87-63. Machine dishwashing.
A. Dishwashing machines, including prewashing units, shall be designed,
constructed, installed, maintained and operated so as to comply with
the following criteria, if applicable:
(1) When chemicals are relied upon for sanitization, they shall be of a
class or type approved by the Department of Agriculture and shall
be applied in a concentration and a period of time to provide
effective bactericidal treatment of the equipment and utensils.
(2) An easily readable thermometer shall be provided in each tank of
the dishwashing machine which will indicate to an accuracy of -3º
F. the temperature of the water or solution therein. In addition, a
thermometer of equal accuracy shall be provided which will
indicate the temperature of the final rinse as it enters the manifold.
Thermometers shall be so placed as to be easily read by the
operator, and so located as not to be exposed to breakage.
(3) The wash and final rinse cycles of machines shall be automatically
timed.
(4) The flow pressure of the final rinse water may not be less than 15
pounds per square inch or more than 25 pounds per square inch in
the line at the machine.
(5) Appropriate connections shall be provided to enable the testing of
the temperature and pressure of the final rinse water, and
plumbing connections shall be located immediately adjacent to the
supply side of the valve control in the line carrying the final rinse
water to the dishwashing machine.
(6) When automatic cold water glass washers are employed for
washing and sanitizing glasses, the following provisions shall be
met:
(a) The washer shall be self-cleaning and sanitizing.
(b) All used water shall flow out of the washer immediately
following use.
(c) The washer shall contain brushes or employ other effective
means which will adequately clean both the inside and outside
of the glass.
(d) The detergent-sanitizer used shall be one which is expressly
for use in cold water glass washers and is effective.
B. Other types of machines, devices or facilities and procedures may be
approved by the Department of Agriculture for cleaning or sanitizing
equipment and utensils if it can be readily established that the machine,
device or facilities and procedure will routinely render equipment and
§ 87-63 HEALTH CODE § 87-63
87:125
§ 87-64. Lack of adequate facilities.
Public eating or drinking places which do not have adequate and effective
facilities for cleaning and sanitizing utensils shall use single-service articles
which may be used only once.
§ 87-65. Utensils for frozen desserts and drink.
§ 87-66. (Reserved)
§ 87-67. (Reserved)
§ 87-68. (Reserved)
§ 87-69. (Reserved)
§ 87-70. (Reserved)
utensils clean to sight and touch and provide effective bactericidal
treatment.
A. Spoons, dippers, scoops and other utensils used in serving and
packaging ice cream and allied products shall be cleansed thoroughly
with hot water and soap at least once each day immediately following
the day's operation. During the period when they may be used, the
utensils shall be kept in running water, if practicable. Otherwise, the
water shall be changed frequently enough to keep it clean.
B. Straws offered for use shall be wrapped, and the use of bulk,
unwrapped straws is prohibited.
C. Dispensing scoops, spoons and dippers used in serving frozen desserts
shall be stored, between uses, either in an approved running-water
dipper well or in a manner approved by the Department of Agriculture.
§ 87-63 PALMER CODE § 87-70
87:126
ARTICLE IX
Sanitary Facilities and Controls
§ 87-71. Water supply.
§ 87-72. Ice.
§ 87-73. Sewage disposal.
Sewage disposal systems serving public eating and drinking places shall
be approved by the Public Health Officer. Approval of the sewage disposal
system shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with Chapter 73
(relating to standards for sewage disposal facilities) of the Department
of Environmental Protection and the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1
through 691.1001).
§ 87-74. Plumbing.
Plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in order to:
A. Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided in all
areas where food is prepared or where equipment, utensils or
containers are washed.
B. Water used in the operation of a public eating or drinking place shall be
provided from a supply approved by the Public Health Officer. Approval
of a water supply shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with
construction standards for water supplies approved by the Department
of Agriculture.
C. The water supply shall be adequate in quantity and shall meet the
bacteriological and chemical water standards of the Department of
Agriculture. Unapproved water supplies shall be made inaccessible to
the public in a manner deemed satisfactory to the Public Health Official.
D. When bottled water is used in an establishment, it shall be from a
source under permit from the Department of Agriculture.
A. Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water which comes from a
safe and satisfactory source and shall be used only if it has been
manufactured, stored, transported and handled in a sanitary manner.
B. Ice shall meet the bacteriological and chemical standards for drinking
water.
A. Carry adequate quantities of water to required locations throughout the
establishment.
B. Prevent contamination of the water supply.
C. Properly convey sewage and liquid wastes from the establishment to
the sewage disposal system.
§ 87-71 HEALTH CODE § 87-74
87:127
§ 87-75. Toilet facilities.
§ 87-76. Hand-washing facilities.
D. Avoid any creation of unsanitary conditions or nuisance.
A. For employees. Each public eating or drinking establishment shall be
provided with adequate, conveniently located toilet facilities for its
employees. If approved by the Public Health Officer, public eating or
drinking places may be authorized to use toilet facilities not located
directly within the establishments.
B. For patrons. For new establishments or establishments undergoing
alterations, toilet facilities, separate for each sex, shall be provided on
the premises for patrons and shall be located so as not to require the
patrons to pass through a food preparation area. Toilet facilities need
not be installed for the patrons whenever food is not consumed within
an eating or drinking place or when only carry-out food is provided.
C. Sanitary design. Toilet rooms shall be maintained in compliance with
the following requirements:
(1) Toilet fixtures shall be of sanitary design and be readily cleanable.
(2) Facilities shall be kept in a clean condition and good repair.
(3) Doors in toilet rooms shall be self-closing.
(4) Toilet tissue shall be provided.
(5) Rooms shall be ventilated to outside air.
(6) Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials.
(7) Receptacles shall be provided in toilet rooms for women for
sanitary napkins, and the containers shall have covers.
A. Each public eating or drinking place shall be provided with adequate,
conveniently located hand-washing facilities for its employees,
including a lavatory equipped with hot and cold or tempered running
water, hand cleansing soap or detergent and approved sanitary towels
or other approved hand-drying devices.
B. Hand-washing facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(2) Hands may not be washed in sinks used for the preparation of food
or the cleaning or sanitizing of utensils.
(3) When the hot water is above 110º F., a mixing valve or combination
faucet shall be provided.
§ 87-74 PALMER CODE § 87-76
87:128
§ 87-77. Garbage and refuse disposal.
§ 87-78. Insect and rodent control.
Adequate measures for the control of arthropods and rodents which the
Department of Agriculture deems a public health hazard shall be taken in a
manner satisfactory to the licensor.
§ 87-79. (Reserved)
§ 87-80. (Reserved)
§ 87-81. (Reserved)
§ 87-82. (Reserved)
§ 87-83. (Reserved)
§ 87-84. (Reserved)
§ 87-85. (Reserved)
§ 87-86. (Reserved)
(4) Facilities shall be located within toilet rooms, including those
provided for the public.
(5) In new establishments and establishments which are extensively
altered, a hand-washing facility shall be located within the area
where food is prepared, not more than 50 feet from a work area.
(6) Lavatories shall be adequate in size and number and be so located
as to permit convenient and expeditious use by employees.
A. Food waste. Garbage and refuse containing food wastes shall, prior to
disposal, be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent, rust- and corrosionresistant
containers of adequate number, which shall be kept covered
with tight-fitting lids when filled or stored or not in continuous use.
Other garbage and refuse storage may be used if approved by the
licensor.
B. Other rubbish. Other rubbish shall be stored in containers, rooms or
areas of sufficient numbers and size so as to prevent arthropod or
rodent problems and other nuisances. Adequate cleaning facilities shall
be provided, and each container, room or area shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each emptying or removal of garbage and rubbish. When
disposal or garbage or refuse is accomplished within or upon the
premises of the establishment, the disposal facilities shall be operated
and maintained so as not to create a nuisance or a health hazard.
§ 87-76 HEALTH CODE § 87-87
87:129
§ 87-87. (Reserved)
§ 87-88. (Reserved)
§ 87-89. (Reserved)
§ 87-90. (Reserved)
§ 87-87 PALMER CODE § 87-90
87:130
ARTICLE X
Care of Other Facilities and Operations
§ 87-91. Floors, walls and ceilings.
§ 87-92. Floor drains.
Floor drains shall be provided in all rooms where floors are subjected to the
type of cleaning which involves the use of water hoses. The floors shall be
graded to drain.
§ 87-93. Surface of exterior areas.
§ 87-94. Lighting.
A. The floor surfaces in kitchens, in other rooms and areas in which food is
stored or prepared, and in which utensils are washed, and in walk-in
refrigerators, rubbish or food waste rooms, dressing or locker rooms
and toilet rooms shall be of smooth, nonabsorbent materials and so
constructed as to be easily cleanable. The floors on nonrefrigerated dry
food storage areas need not be nonabsorbent.
B. The juncture between the floor and wall shall be closed, and in new
establishments or those extensively altered, it shall also be covered.
C. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair.
D. Walls or rooms or areas in which food is prepared, or utensils or hands
are washed, or rubbish or food waste is stored shall be easily cleanable,
smooth, light colored and shall have washable surfaces up to the
highest level reached by splash or spray. Ceilings in food preparation
and utensil washing areas shall be light colored.
A. Exterior areas where food is served shall be kept clean and properly
drained, and surfaces in those areas shall be finished so as to facilitate
maintenance and minimize dust.
B. The walking and driving surfaces of exterior areas where food is served
shall be kept clean and free of debris and shall be properly drained so
that water will not accumulate. The areas shall be surfaced with
concrete or asphalt or with gravel or similar material effectively treated
to facilitate maintenance and to minimize dust.
A. Areas in which food is prepared or stored or utensils are washed, handwashing
areas, dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage and
rubbish storage areas shall meet the minimum illumination standards
of the Department of Agriculture.
B. Lights and fixtures suspended over exposed food or equipment shall be
of the safety type or otherwise constructed to protect food products and
equipment from damage by breakage.
§ 87-91 HEALTH CODE § 87-94
87:131
§ 87-95. Ventilation.
§ 87-96. Dressing rooms and lockers.
§ 87-97. General cleanliness.
C. During cleanup activities, adequate light shall be provided in the area
being cleaned, and upon or around equipment being cleaned.
A. Rooms in which food is prepared or served or utensils are washed,
dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage or rubbish storage
areas shall be well ventilated.
B. Mechanical ventilation facilities, which meet the standards of the
Department, shall be provided as needed to prevent the condensation
or accumulation of offensive or dangerous gases, moisture, excessive
heat, steam, dust, offensive odors, smoke, grease and vapors.
C. Mechanical ventilation devices, including blowers, canopies, hoods and
ducts, shall be so constructed as to be easily cleanable and shall be
maintained so as to prevent grease or other materials from dropping
into or onto food preparation surfaces.
D. Exhaust outlets from mechanical ventilating devices shall be designed
and installed so as to avoid creating a nuisance.
E. Filters, where used, shall be readily removable for cleaning or
replacement.
F. Ventilation systems shall comply with applicable state and local fire
prevention requirements.
A. Adequate facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of the
clothing and personal belongings of employees. Where employees
routinely change clothes within the establishment, one or more
dressing rooms or designated areas shall be provided for this purpose.
The designated areas shall be located outside of the food preparation,
storage and serving areas and the utensil washing and storage areas.
B. If approved by the licensor, the area may be located in a storage room
where only completely packaged food is stored. Designated areas as
well as dressing rooms shall be provided with lockers or other suitable
facilities and shall be kept clean.
A. All parts of public eating or drinking establishments and their premises
shall be kept neat, clean and free of litter, garbage and rubbish.
B. Cleaning operations shall be conducted so as to prevent contamination
of food and food contact surfaces.
C. The operations connected with a public eating or drinking place shall
not be conducted in any room used for living or sleeping quarters.
§ 87-94 PALMER CODE § 87-97
87:132
§ 87-98. (Reserved)
§ 87-99. (Reserved)
§ 87-100. (Reserved)
D. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in suitable containers until
removal for laundering.
E. Live birds or animals are not allowed in an area where public eating or
drinking place operations are carried on, except that guide dogs
accompanying blind persons may be permitted in dining areas.
F. Vacuum cleaning, wet cleaning, or other dustless methods of floor and
wall cleaning shall be used or dust-arresting sweeping compounds and
pushbrooms shall be employed. The cleaning, except emergency floor
cleaning, shall be done during those periods when the least amount of
food is exposed, such as after closing or between meals.
§ 87-97 HEALTH CODE § 87-100
87:133

ARTICLE XI
Plan Review
§ 87-101. Review by Public Health Officer.
§ 87-102. (Reserved)
§ 87-103. (Reserved)
§ 87-104. (Reserved)
§ 87-105. (Reserved)
§ 87-106. (Reserved)
§ 87-107. (Reserved)
§ 87-108. (Reserved)
§ 87-109. (Reserved)
§ 87-110. (Reserved)
A. Before work is begun in the construction, remodeling or alteration of an
eating or drinking place where food is prepared, stored or served, or in
the conversion of an existing establishment to an eating or drinking
place, properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted
and approved by the Public Health Officer.
B. The plans and specifications submitted to the licensor by the owner of a
future eating or drinking place shall include, where applicable, data
relating to the following:
(1) Surrounding grounds.
(2) Buildings.
(3) Equipment.
(4) Sewage disposal.
(5) Water supply, including plumbing.
(6) Reuse disposal.
(7) Any other such information required by the licensor.
§ 87-101 HEALTH CODE § 87-110
87:135

Part 4
Subchapter C. Temporary Eating And Drinking Places
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 87-111. Food supplies.
The provisions regulating food supplies for temporary eating and drinking
places shall be the same as the provisions of §§ 87-11 through 87-14
(relating to food supplies).
§ 87-112. Food protection and storage.
§ 87-113. Custards and cream fillings.
Treatment of custards and creamed fillings shall be as prescribed in § 87-32
(relating to custards and cream fillings).
§ 87-114. Health and disease control.
Control of employee health and infections shall be as prescribed in §§ 87-41
through 87-43 (relating to health and disease control for employees).
§ 87-115. (Reserved)
§ 87-116. (Reserved)
§ 87-117. (Reserved)
§ 87-118. (Reserved)
A. Temporary eating and drinking places shall comply with §§ 87-21
through 87-24 (relating to food protection and storage).
B. Wet storage of packaged, canned or bottled food or drink shall be
prohibited, except that beverages may be stored in direct contact with
chipped or crushed ice when the following requirements are met:
(1) Drains are provided which prevent the accumulation of water in the
storage compartment.
(2) The cap, top, crown or pouring lip of the container is not
submerged in the ice.
(3) Waste water from the storage facility is disposed of so as not to
create a nuisance or any sanitation problems.
(4) The ice and storage facility is kept clean at all times.
(5) Potentially hazardous beverages, prior to icing, having an internal
temperature of not more than 45º F. and are kept properly iced.
§ 87-111 HEALTH CODE § 87-119
87:137
§ 87-119. (Reserved)
§ 87-120. (Reserved)
§ 87-119 PALMER CODE § 87-120
87:138
ARTICLE XIII
Design and Installation of Equipment And Utensils
§ 87-121. General.
The design and installation provisions shall be as prescribed in §§ 87-51
through 87-53 (relating to design and installation of equipment and
utensils).
§ 87-122. Additional requirements.
Mobile food-service establishments shall also meet the following
requirements:
§ 87-123. (Reserved)
§ 87-124. (Reserved)
§ 87-125. (Reserved)
A. Power equipment shall be installed so as to eliminate the danger from
electrical shock.
B. Service openings may be no larger than necessary to carry out the food
operation and shall be a size to prevent health hazards. Service
openings shall be kept closed except when food is actually being served.
When the mobile unit is in motion, the openings shall be covered with a
solid material so as to prevent the entrance of dust, flies and other
sources of contamination.
C. Equipment shall be installed to protect unwrapped foods from customer
handling.
D. The driver's compartment as well as the food preparation and storage
areas shall be enclosed and protected against the entrance of airborne
contaminants and vermin. However, the licensor may accept a mobile
food-service establishment of different design whenever only
commercially package or canned foods are sold and the contents are
not removed from the original package prior to being sold.
E. The driver's compartment shall be separated from the food service,
storage and preparation areas by a wall. The wall on the side of the food
compartment shall meet the wall requirements of § 87-151 (relating to
floors, walls and ceilings). However, a wall need not be provided if the
doors of the driver's compartment are self-closing and cannot be
propped open when the mobile unit is in motion. Doors used to gain
entrance from one part of the mobile unit to another shall be selfclosing
and constructed from solid material.
F. The hot food storage facilities in a mobile food-service establishment
shall be capable of operating whenever perishable or potentially
hazardous foods are stored therein.
§ 87-121 HEALTH CODE § 87-126
87:139
§ 87-126. (Reserved)
§ 87-127. (Reserved)
§ 87-128. (Reserved)
§ 87-129. (Reserved)
§ 87-130. (Reserved)
§ 87-126 PALMER CODE § 87-130
87:140
ARTICLE XIV
Cleaning and Sanitization of Utensils And Equipment
§ 87-131. General.
§ 87-132. Manual dishwashing.
§ 87-133. Frozen dessert utensils.
The washing of frozen dessert utensils shall be regulated by § 87-65
(relating to utensils for frozen desserts and drink).
§ 87-134. (Reserved)
§ 87-135. (Reserved)
§ 87-136. (Reserved)
§ 87-137. (Reserved)
§ 87-138. (Reserved)
A. Temporary or mobile food-service establishments shall use singleservice
articles to serve food or drink to the public. However, where
adequate dishwashing facilities are available and properly used, eating
or drinking utensils may be utilized for customer service.
B. Eating or drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and
sanitized after each usage in a three-compartment sink.
C. If the only utensils to be washed are limited to spatulas, tongs and
similar devices, and the only equipment to be cleaned is stationary and
does not require disassembly for proper cleaning, a one-compartment
sink may be approved by the licensor for this purpose.
D. At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and used for washing
kitchenware and equipment which does not require sanitization.
E. Each compartment of sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold running
water.
F. Establishments shall comply with § 87-61B and C (relating to general).
A. Establishments shall comply with § 87-62A, D and E (relating to manual
dishwashing).
B. A machine, device or facilities and procedures may be approved by the
Department of Agriculture for cleaning or sanitizing equipment and
utensils if it can be readily established that the machine, device or
facilities and procedure will routinely render equipment and utensils
clean to sight and touch and provide effective bactericidal treatment.
§ 87-131 HEALTH CODE § 87-139
87:141
§ 87-139. (Reserved)
§ 87-140. (Reserved)
§ 87-139 PALMER CODE § 87-140
87:142
ARTICLE XV
Sanitary Facilities and Controls
§ 87-141. General.
Establishments shall comply with §§ 87-71 through 87-74.
§ 87-142. Exceptions to water provisions.
§ 87-143. Additional water requirements.
Mobile food-service establishments shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. Hot and cold running water under pressure need not be piped to
temporary eating and drinking places whenever:
(1) The only utensils are limited to knives, spatulas, tongs and similar
devices or a single container.
(2) Extensive soiling of the establishment from the food operation does
not occur.
(3) The equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does not require
disassembly for proper cleaning.
(4) No health hazard will result.
B. When the conditions of Subsection A are met, the proprietor shall
comply with the following:
(1) Water required for cooking, cleaning and handwashing shall be
obtained in a container which has a tight-fitting lid and is easily
cleaned.
(2) The outlet from which the water is obtained shall be so located and
protected as to preclude contamination of the water outlet as well
as the water being drawn.
(3) An adequate quantity of water shall be provided within the
establishment in containers approved by the Public Health Office
for design, construction and size.
A. The water system shall be closed to contamination from the filling inlet
to the discharge outlets. Vent openings are permitted wherever
necessary, if properly protected to prevent contamination of the water
supply.
B. The water-filling inlet shall be so located and designed that it is
protected from contamination, provided with a hose connection of a
different size and type from the waste retention tank flushing
connections on the mobile unit, and easily accessible.
§ 87-141 HEALTH CODE § 87-143
87:143
§ 87-144. Additional sewage disposal provisions.
C. The water storage tank shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to the
amount needed for one day of operation, but in no case may be less than
5 gallons, unless otherwise approved by the Public Health Officer.
D. Whenever the waste retention tank is cleaned or flushed in place, two
separate hoses shall be provided for the servicing operation, one for use
in filling the water storage tank and one for the use in flushing the
waste retention tank.
E. The water fill hose, unless otherwise protected from contamination,
shall have the end of the hose provided with a permanently attached
disc or molded protection so that the nozzle will not rest on the ground
or floor if dropped. The filler hose shall be kept in the vehicle and shall
be protected from contamination.
F. Hot water generating facilities shall be provided which are able to
function whether the vehicle is mobile or stationary.
A. Mobile food-service establishments shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) A suitable liquid waste system including a waste tank having a
capacity of five gallons greater than the water storage and
distribution system and hot water generating system combined,
shall be provided. The waste tank shall be capable of being
completely drained and flushed.
(2) When wastes are retained in removable soil or waste cans,
provision shall be made to fix the cans in place so as to prevent
excrement or waste from falling or spilling outside of the container.
(3) When the soil can is removed from the mobile unit, the contents
shall be enclosed or covered while being transported to the
facilities for emptying and cleaning the cans.
(4) Hoses used to clean soil cans shall be equipped with acceptable
vacuum breakers installed on the discharge side of the last control
valve.
(5) When wastes are stored in retention tanks which are permanently
installed on the mobile unit, the tanks shall be so designed that the
contents cannot be discharged when the vehicle is in motion. In
addition, discharge control devices on the retention tank outlet
shall be designed to prevent leakage and to prevent spattering of
the servicing area or servicing area personnel.
(6) The disposal of all waste shall be done so as to not to create a
nuisance or health hazard.
§ 87-143 PALMER CODE § 87-144
87:144
§ 87-145. Toilet facilities.
Temporary food-service establishments and mobile food-service
establishments shall have available adequate, conveniently located toilet
facilities for its employees. A mobile food-service establishment shall be
provided with toilet facilities approved by the Public Health Officer on the
vehicle if the operator does not have access to facilities at his designated
stops or base of operation.
§ 87-146. Hand-washing facilities.
§ 87-147. Garbage disposal and rodent control.
Temporary establishments shall comply with §§ 87-77 and 87-78 (relating to
garbage and refuse disposal; and insect and rodent control).
§ 87-148. (Reserved)
§ 87-149. (Reserved)
B. Temporary food-service establishments which do not have water piped
to their facility and which do not have a plumbing system within their
facility that connects to an approved waste disposal system shall:
(1) Provide a waste water container which has a minimum capacity of
five gallons, a tight-fitting lid and design and construction features
that permit ease of cleaning.
(2) Clean and empty the container each day.
(3) Dispose of all waste water so as not to cause a health hazard or
nuisance.
A. Temporary or mobile food-service establishments shall be provided with
adequate, conveniently located hand-washing facilities for its
employees, including lavatory or lavatories equipped with hot and cold
tempered running water under pressure, hand cleansing soap or
detergent and approved sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying
devices.
B. Temporary food-service establishments which do not have water piped
to their facilities may utilize the following:
(1) Auxiliary heating facilities to produce an ample supply of hot water.
(2) A basin or pan in lieu of a sink. The container shall be emptied and
rinsed immediately after each person's use.
(3) An adequate quantity of water shall be provided within the
establishment in containers approved by the licensor for design,
construction and size.
§ 87-144 HEALTH CODE § 87-150
87:145
§ 87-150. (Reserved)
§ 87-150 PALMER CODE § 87-150
87:146
ARTICLE XVI
Care of Other Facilities
§ 87-151. Floors, walls and ceilings.
§ 87-152. Lighting.
Areas in which food is prepared or stored or utensils are washed, handwashing
areas and garbage and refuse storage areas shall be well lighted
and adequate for necessary operations.
§ 87-153. Ventilation.
Adequate ventilation shall be provided when necessary and shall comply
with the ventilation standards of the Department of Agriculture.
§ 87-154. Dressing rooms and lockers.
Adequate facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of clothing and
personal belongings of employees. These facilities shall be kept clean.
§ 87-155. General cleanliness.
Temporary establishments shall comply with § 87.97 (relating to general
cleanliness).
A. Temporary establishments shall comply with §§ 87-91 through 87-93
(relating to floors, walls and ceilings; floor drains; and surface of
exterior areas).
B. Temporary establishments which are not permanently located shall be
eligible for the following exceptions to Subsection A:
(1) Floors may be dirt or gravel covered when graded to prevent the
accumulation of liquids. The floors shall be covered with
removable, cleanable wooden platforms or duckboards which shall
be kept clean. The area underneath the platforms shall also be kept
clean.
(2) The walls enclosing food operation may be of canvas, or other type
material approved by the Public Health Officer, whenever either of
the following conditions exists:
(a) The food service equipment is so located and of a type that the
walls will not become soiled during the food preparation and
serving operations.
(b) Durable, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleaned splash
backs or splash guards are provided which prevent soiling of
the walls. The installation of the protective devices shall be
done so no cleaning, rodent or insect problems can occur.
§ 87-151 HEALTH CODE § 87-156
87:147
§ 87-156. (Reserved)
§ 87-157. (Reserved)
§ 87-158. (Reserved)
§ 87-159. (Reserved)
§ 87-160. (Reserved)
§ 87-156 PALMER CODE § 87-160
87:148
Part 5
Subchapter D. Retail Food Establishments
ARTICLE XVII
General Provisions
§ 87-161. Food supplies.
§ 87-162. (Reserved)
§ 87-163. (Reserved)
§ 87-164. (Reserved)
§ 87-165. (Reserved)
§ 87-166. (Reserved)
§ 87-167. (Reserved)
§ 87-168. (Reserved)
§ 87-169. (Reserved)
§ 87-170. (Reserved)
A. Retail establishments shall comply with § 87-14 (relating to
examination of food).
B. Food in retail food establishments shall be clean, wholesome, free from
spoilage, free from adulteration and safe for human consumption. Food
prepared in a private home or which has been processed in a place
other than a commercial food processing establishment may not be sold
or used in the preparation of foods offered for sale, sold or given away
unless the place is regulated by a health authority or other appropriate
official regulatory agency. Food received from a caterer or commissary
may not be offered for sale unless such caterer or commissary has a
valid license as provided in the act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 926, No. 369)
(35 P.S. §§ 655.1 through 655.13).
§ 87-161 HEALTH CODE § 87-170
87:149

ARTICLE XVIII
Food Protection and Preparation
§ 87-171. General.
A. Retail establishments shall comply with §§ 87-21 through 87-23 and
87-32 (relating to general; poisonous and toxic materials; cold storage
facilities; custards and cream fillings).
B. Establishments shall comply with § 87-23B and C, except that food or
drink may be stored in direct contact with chipped or crushed ice when
the following conditions exist:
(1) Drains are provided which prevent the accumulation of water in the
storage compartment.
(2) The cap, top, crown or pouring lip of food containers are not
submerged in the ice.
(3) Waste water from the storage facility is disposed of so as not to
created a nuisance or any sanitation problems.
(4) The ice and storage facility are kept clean at all times.
(5) Potentially hazardous foods, prior to icing, have an internal
temperature of not more than 45º and are kept properly iced at all
times.
(6) The food or container is of such type that no health hazard may
result.
C. Only persons directly employed in the retail food establishment shall be
permitted to handle unpackaged food intended or sale to the public.
Display cases shall be so designed and arranged to prevent handling of
such food by the public. This subsection does not apply to produce or
another product which is adequately packaged, wrapped or protected
for display and self-service by the customer.
D. No food may be wrapped in newspapers or previously used wrapping
paper.
E. The evisceration, skinning, dressing or other operation (except the
cutting, slicing or grinding or meat or poultry to facilitate its use,
handling or sale) is prohibited in sales rooms.
F. Perishable goods shall be stored at temperatures that protect against
spoilage. Potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe
temperatures.
G. Meat, poultry, fish and other food requiring no further heat treatment
before eating may not be placed directly on a scale unless the food is
placed in a single-service container or on wrapping paper which is only
used one time.
§ 87-171 HEALTH CODE § 87-172
87:151
§ 87-172. Cold storage facilities.
§ 87-173. Frozen food.
§ 87-174. (Reserved)
§ 87-175. (Reserved)
§ 87-176. (Reserved)
§ 87-177. (Reserved)
§ 87-178. (Reserved)
§ 87-179. (Reserved)
§ 87-180. (Reserved)
A. Foods shall be stored in each cold storage facility or refrigerator to
permit the free circulation of cold air and to prevent contamination,
except that food already at or below 45º F. may be placed in display
cases without regard to air circulation, provided that the case is
capable of maintaining this product temperature.
B. To promote rapid cooling, potentially hazardous foods shall be stored in
the refrigerator in shallow containers or by other approved means that
will insure the cooling or the total mass to a temperature of 45º F. or
less within two hours, unless otherwise specified by the Department.
A. Frozen food shall be kept at temperatures to remain frozen.
B. Frozen products shall be moved into frozen storage immediately upon
delivery.
C. Frozen food products may not be loaded above the load limit line on
display cases or block the circulation of cold air.
D. A freezer case found to be overloaded or containing thawed or partially
thawed foods shall subject the food products therein contained to
condemnation and destruction.
E. Food products shall be rotated so produce first in the display case or
storage areas is the first product to be sold.
F. Frozen food products shall have the date of processing stamped or
printed upon each package or container. This requirement may be met
by calendar or code dating.
G. Frozen foods, once thawed, may not be refrozen.
§ 87-172 PALMER CODE § 87-180
87:152
ARTICLE XIX
Health and Disease Control for Employees
§ 87-181. General.
Retail establishments shall comply with §§ 87-41 through 87-43 (relating to
health and disease control for employees).
§ 87-182. (Reserved)
§ 87-183. (Reserved)
§ 87-184. (Reserved)
§ 87-185. (Reserved)
§ 87-186. (Reserved)
§ 87-187. (Reserved)
§ 87-188. (Reserved)
§ 87-189. (Reserved)
§ 87-190. (Reserved)
§ 87-181 HEALTH CODE § 87-190
87:153

ARTICLE XX
Maintenance of Food Equipment and Utensils
§ 87-191. General.
§ 87-192. Equipment design and installation.
Equipment, where applicable, shall be designed, installed and operated
in accordance with the criteria set forth by the National Sanitation
Foundation, Automatic Merchandising Health-Industry Council, Baking
Industry Sanitation Standards Committee, and the Committee for 3-A
Sanitary Standards for Dairy Equipment or other nationally recognized
testing laboratory or agency, with the following exceptions:
§ 87-193. (Reserved)
§ 87-194. (Reserved)
§ 87-195. (Reserved)
§ 87-196. (Reserved)
§ 87-197. (Reserved)
§ 87-198. (Reserved)
§ 87-199. (Reserved)
§ 87-200. (Reserved)
A. Retail establishments shall comply with §§ 87-51 through 87-53
(relating to design and installation of equipment and utensils).
B. Meat blocks and cutting boards shall be free of holes, cracks and
crevices and shall be kept clean by effective methods.
C. Oil cloth or newspaper may not be used on a counter, table or shelf
where food is handled.
A. Equipment which was installed in a retail food establishment prior to
June 27, 1968, and which does not meet fully the design and
construction requirements of this section, shall be deemed acceptable
in that establishment if it is in good repair, capable of being maintained
in a sanitary condition and the food contact surfaces are nontoxic.
B. Equipment described in Subsection A shall be located and installed to
enable reasonable compliance with the requirements of this section
pertaining to equipment installation, and the requirements pertaining
to food protection.
§ 87-191 HEALTH CODE § 87-200
87:155

ARTICLE XXI
Cleaning and Sanitization of Equipment and Utensils
§ 87-201. General.
§ 87-202. Sinks for washing.
§ 87-203. Slop sinks.
Where there is a need for a slop sink or device to discard liquid waste, the
sink or device shall be provided in addition to the equipment and utensil
washing sinks.
A. Utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment, exclusive of cooking
surfaces of equipment, shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
B. Cooking surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least once a day.
C. Utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation, handling or storage or potentially hazardous food shall be
thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and sanitized prior to use. However, food
contact surfaces of equipment or utensils which will be heated in the
baking or cooking process of food preparation to above 140º F. need not
be sanitized prior to usage.
D. Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned to keep them in
a clean and sanitary condition.
E. After cleaning and utensil use, food contact surfaces of equipment and
utensils shall be stored and handled to protect them from
contamination.
A. In those establishments where the only items to be washed are limited
to spatulas, tongs and similar devices, and when the only equipment to
be cleaned is stationary and does not require disassembly for proper
cleaning, a one-compartment sink may be approved by the Public
Health Officer for washing and sanitizing purposes.
B. At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and used for washing
utensils and equipment which does not require sanitization.
C. Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall be of
adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete immersion of
the equipment and utensils, and compartments of the sinks shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water. If the Public Health Officer
deems it impractical to meet this requirement for large utensils or
equipment, a smaller sink may be approved.
§ 87-201 HEALTH CODE § 87-204
87:157
§ 87-204. Machine washing and adequacy of facilities.
Retail establishments shall comply with §§ 87-62 through 87-65 (relating to
machine dishwashing; lack or adequate facilities; and utensils for frozen
desserts and drink).
§ 87-205. (Reserved)
§ 87-206. (Reserved)
§ 87-207. (Reserved)
§ 87-208. (Reserved)
§ 87-209. (Reserved)
§ 87-210. (Reserved)
§ 87-204 PALMER CODE § 87-210
87:158
ARTICLE XXII
Sanitary Facilities and Controls
§ 87-211. General.
Retail food establishments shall comply with §§ 87-71 through 87-78
(relating to sanitary facilities and controls).
§ 87-212. Other facilities and operations.
Care of various facilities in retail establishments shall comply with §§ 87-91
through 87-97 (relating to care of other facilities and operations).
§ 87-213. (Reserved)
§ 87-214. (Reserved)
§ 87-215. (Reserved)
§ 87-216. (Reserved)
§ 87-217. (Reserved)
§ 87-218. (Reserved)
§ 87-219. (Reserved)
§ 87-220. (Reserved)
§ 87-211 HEALTH CODE § 87-220
87:159

ARTICLE XXIII
Plan Review
§ 87-221. General.
Retail establishments shall comply with § 87-101 (relating to review by the
licensor).
§ 87-221 HEALTH CODE § 87-221
87:161

Part 6
Penalties
ARTICLE XXIV
Violations and Penalties
§ 87-222. Violations and penalties; fines.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other organization who
or which violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
upon convictions before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of
the Peace, to pay a fine or penalty to the Township, and for the use of
the Township, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 or be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days as
provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular Part or article applicable shall be
considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties stated
herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines or penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 87-222 HEALTH CODE § 87-222
87:163
Chapter 99
MECHANICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 124.
§ 99-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Basic Mechanical Code."
§ 99-2. Code adopted. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 186; 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The publication entitled the "International Mechanical Code/2000" and its
errata sheets, published by the International Code Council, hereinafter
called the "code," is hereby accepted, adopted and incorporated in its
entirety, except as may be hereinafter otherwise indicated, as the Palmer
Township Basic Mechanical Code. Wherever in said code blanks appear, the
obvious required or indicated insertions are to be considered made; and
wherever in said code the words "municipality" or "name of municipality"
appear, the words "Palmer Township" are to be considered as inserted.
§ 99-3. Insertions in code. [Amended 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The following insertions of words and numbers shall be considered made in
the indicated places in the below-referred-to sections of the code:
Section Title Insertion
106.5.2 Fee Schedule Set by resolution
106.5.3#2 Fee Refunds Fifty percent
106.5.3#3 Fee Refunds Fifty percent
§ 99-4. Permits and fees.
No permit or fee need be issued hereunder for any single- or two-family
residential installation, nor shall any additional fee be charged for a permit
which is issued in conjunction with any building, electrical or plumbing
permit. The fact that no permit or fee and permit is issued or required shall
in no way, however, eliminate or lessen the requirements of the code, and all
installations or things shall comply herewith as though a permit had been
§ 87-222 PALMER CODE § 99-4
99:164
issued and a fee paid. The fee for permits when required shall be $4 unless
otherwise set by the Board of Supervisors by resolution.
§ 99-5. Appeals.
In addition to the Board of Appeals, appeals may also be taken to the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 99-6. Conflicts with other provisions.
These standards are the minimum required for public safety, and any
conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or law shall be resolved
in favor of the most restrictive of the two provisions.
§ 99-7. Severability.
The provisions of this code and ordinance are severable. If any provision of
the code or this ordinance is for any reason invalid, it is hereby declared to
be the intent of the Board of Supervisors to have enacted this ordinance and
code without such invalid provision.
§ 99-8. Repeated violations.
Every day a violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Repeated or dangerous violations shall constitute a nuisance and
may be abated as such, and the costs of so doing charged to the persons
responsible in addition to other penalties.
§ 99-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
Chapter 102
MOVING PERMIT
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity which or who
shall in any way violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or the
code or fail to comply with a lawful order issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding before any District Magistrate,
Justice of the Peace or Alderman, pay a fine and penalty to and for the
use of the township of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 and
costs, or undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 99-4 MOVING PERMIT § 102-1
102:165
§ 102-1. Permit required for transporting household goods in bulk.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved,
from any place within the Township of Palmer to another place therein or
place beyond the limits thereof, any household goods in bulk, without first
securing from the Police Department of the Township of Palmer a permit for
such moving or transportation.
§ 102-2. Application for permit.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring such a permit for
the removal or transportation of household goods in the manner above
described shall make application to the Police Department of the Township
of Palmer, setting forth his, its or their name and address, and also setting
forth the names of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be
moved, the address and location from which the property is to be removed,
and the new address or location of the place to which the property is to be
moved.
§ 102-3. Issuance of permit.
The Police Department of the Township of Palmer shall, upon application
being made as provided for in § 102-2 of this ordinance, issue a permit for
which a charge of $1 will be made, setting forth the name of the permittee
as well as the name or names of the owners of the goods to be moved and
the address from which the goods are to be moved and the address to which
the goods are to be delivered. This permit shall be signed by the police
officer in charge at the time.
§ 102-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 102-5. When effective; inconsistent ordinances repealed.
This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage and due
advertisement in accordance with law, and all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same are hereby repealed.
A. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this ordinance or
furnishing false information to the Police Department or using false
names or addresses shall, upon conviction thereof before the Justice of
the Peace of the Township of Palmer, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $600 or to undergo imprisonment not exceeding 10 days, or
both.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 102-1 PALMER CODE § 102-5
102:166
Chapter 106
NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
§ 102-5 MOVING PERMIT § 102-5
102:167

ARTICLE I
Route 33 Neighborhood Improvement District
[Adopted 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-408]
§ 106-1. Approval of plan.
The Board of Supervisors hereby approves the NID Plan, attached hereto
as Exhibit A, and hereby designates the area or areas identified in the
NID Plan as an NID. The name of the NID is the "Route 33 Neighborhood
Improvement District."21
§ 106-2. Designation of Authority.
The Board of Supervisors hereby designates the Route 33 Business
Improvement District Authority as the NIDMA to administer programs,
improvements, and services within the NID in accordance with the Act,22
with duties and responsibilities to be set forth in a management agreement
containing terms and provisions satisfactory to the Township and the
NIDMA.
§ 106-3. Special assessments.
The Board of Supervisors, pursuant to Section 837 of the Act, hereby
authorizes the imposition of special assessments on real property located
within the NID in accordance with the rate and method of apportionment
of special assessments set forth in the NID Plan, such rate and method
of apportionment of special assessments being in compliance with Section
837 of the Act, and such rate and method of apportionment of special
assessments hereby is approved. The special assessments will provide for
the payment of bonds issued by the Industrial Development Authority to
finance certain public infrastructure improvements and related programs
and services to facilitate the commercial development known as "Cbrin
Commerce Center" which comprises the NID, all as provided for within the
NID Plan.
§ 106-4. Further actions.
The Board of Supervisors hereby is authorized to take such further actions
as are necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and purposes of this
ordinance, including, but not limited to, the execution of an agreement with
the NIDMA as required by the Act and as provided for within the NID Plan;
and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors hereby are
authorized to execute such agreement as well as any other agreements
consistent with the Act and the NID Plan that the Township will need to
enter into in furtherance of this ordinance.
21.Editor's Note: The plan is on file in the Township offices.
22.Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Neighborhood Improvement District Act, 73
Pa.C.S.A. § 831 et seq.
§ 106-1 MOVING PERMIT § 106-4
102:169
Chapter 109
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 50.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Dogs — See Ch. 67.
Peddlers and transient merchants — See Ch.
118.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Refuse disposal — See Ch. 138.
Sewage systems — See Chs. 145 and 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
Weeds, grass and visual obstructions — See
Ch. 186.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 109-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 109-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HUNT — Any act or furtherance of the taking or killing of any game or
wildlife, or any part or product thereof, and includes, but is not limited
to, chasing, tracking, calling, pursuing, lying in wait, trapping, shooting at,
including shooting at a game or wildlife facsimile, or wounding with any
weapon or implement, or using any personal property, including dogs, or the
property of others, of any nature, in furtherance of any of these purposes, or
aiding, abetting or conspiring with another person in that purpose.[Added
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-373]
PERSON — Every natural "person," association, partnership or corporation.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a fine, or penalty
of imprisonment in default thereof, the term, as applied to associations,
shall mean any member thereof; as applied to partnerships, shall mean any
partner thereof; and as applied to corporations, shall mean the president,
vice-president, treasurer or secretary thereof.
TOWNSHIP — Palmer Township, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
§ 109-3. Nuisances enumerated. [Amended 5-3-1971 by Ord. No.
111; 5-1-1972 by Ord. No. 122]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, whether
through action, inaction, negligence or through agents or otherwise, to
§ 106-4 PALMER CODE § 109-3
102:170
do, authorize, aid or abet the violation of any of the following described
regulations or restrictions, intended to promote general safety, health,
comfort and convenience of the township, and any person doing so shall be
deemed guilty of a nuisance.
A. Injure or destroy any property, either owned by the township or by
other persons in or along any public highway or place of the township.
B. Start, or cause or permit to be started, any bonfire or fire for the
purpose of burning paper, debris, garbage, rubbish, straw, shavings or
leaves or any other substances within the limits of the township.23
C. Knowingly make false reports to the township police.
D. Cast, dump, deposit or throw any paper, boxes, cement, waste, earth,
bricks, stone, coal, wood, ashes, lime, shavings, rubbish, sewage or any
substance of any kind, except for the purpose of immediate loading or
removing on a public highway or sidewalk within the township.24
E. Drive any wagon, cart, automobile or other vehicle, to ride any bicycle
or motorcycle, or to coast or sled-ride, upon any sidewalk within the
township, provided that this subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit the use of entrances from the public highway to private
property.25
F. Throw, drop or place, or cause to be thrown, dropped or placed, upon
any of the public highways, sidewalks or public places within the
township, or upon any porch, step or yard of any house or store along
any of the public highways within the township any posters, circulars,
bills, handbills or other advertising matter of any kind or description
whatever.
G. Throw, drop or place, or cause to be thrown, dropped or placed, upon
any of the highways, sidewalks or other public places within the
township, any paper, paper boxes or literature of like kind or nature, or
waste matter of any kind whatsoever.26
H. Nail, tack, hang or otherwise append any sign, notice or advertisement
of any kind whatsoever on any tree, post or pole of any description
within the township, except on private property and then only by
permission of the owner.
I. Drive or cause to be driven any car or wagon or motor vehicle
containing garbage, earth, rubbish or any materials of like character
through any public highway in the township, unless such cart, wagon or
motor vehicle has a good and sufficient tailboard and body sufficiently
23.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Refuse Disposal, § 138-5.
24.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Refuse Disposal, § 138-3C, and Ch. 118, Peddlers and
Transient Merchants, § 118-8.
25.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 180, Vehicles and Traffic.
26.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Refuse Disposal, § 138-3C, and Ch. 118, Peddlers and
Transient Merchants, § 118-8.
§ 109-3 MOVING PERMIT § 109-3
102:171
tight and closed at the sides and bottom to prevent the contents from
dropping off the vehicle and a cover to eliminate odors or prevent
contents from blowing off the vehicle.27
J. Ride horseback upon sidewalks or sidewalk areas, schoolgrounds or
recreation areas, or gallop, canter or trot a horse upon streets in builtup
areas, but may walk a horse only upon streets in the built-up areas.
K. Harbor a dog or dogs which continually bark.28
L. Blow horns of motor vehicles where such hornblowing is unnecessary
and only serves to annoy residents.
M. Use the public streets as a proving ground, amusement thoroughfare or
other objectionable practices by operators of motor vehicles.
N. Permit the growing and accumulation of grass, weeds, plants and
shrubbery in any sidewalk area.29
O. Willfully make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous or unseemly
noise so as to disturb or annoy the peaceful residents of the township
at, near or upon any street, lane, alley, park, common, or in any public
building, public place or business place, or in any means of public
conveyance within the township, or who shall be drunk or disorderly at,
in or upon such places.30
P. Act in such a manner as might tend to cause riot, panic, violence or
general disturbance.
Q. Discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm, fireworks or other explosive
without authority.
R. Obstruct the sidewalk, pavement or highways or to participate in
unlawful gatherings, or to vex, hinder or annoy other persons, whereby
the public peace or comfort is broken or the public annoyed.31
S. Lounge, loiter or loaf upon the street corners, curbs or sidewalks, in
front of or at the doors of any private residence, store, shop or business
place, in or about churches, hallways, alleyways, entrances, exits or
passageways of public buildings or theaters.
T. Indecently expose his or her person, bathe naked in the public view, or
ease himself or herself in the public view.
U. Use indecent, vile or profane language upon the public streets or in
public places.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Refuse Disposal, § 138-4D.
28.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 67, Dogs.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 186, Weeds; Visual Obstructions.
30.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 118, Peddlers and Transient Merchants, § 118-7.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 118, Peddlers and Transient Merchants, § 118-8.
§ 109-3 PALMER CODE § 109-3
102:172
V. Beg from door to door.32
W. Construct, suffer or maintain any cellar, excavation, fence, wall, mound,
pile, sinkhole, ditch, building, structure or part thereof in any unsafe,
unsanitary or overcrowded manner, or to fail to provide the same with
adequate means of ingress, egress, or to fail to sufficiently protect,
remove, abate, ventilate, sewer, drain, clean, light or support the same
either by its own construction or connection, and any person owning a
property in question shall be equally liable with any person occupying
such property for a violation of this subsection.
X. Neglect or refuse to promptly regard and obey the orders of any police
officer in respect to the discharge of his duties and in the enforcement
of the township ordinances.
Y. Congregate or assemble at, near or about a place where a fire is in
progress, or where the fire or police apparatus has been summoned by
an alarm or necessity and thereby hinder, delay or obstruct any such
apparatus, its men and equipment, or render dangerous by such
assembling the management or handling of such apparatus.
Z. Post or distribute posters or literature on properties or school facilities
owned, rented or leased by the Easton Area School District without
authorization from proper school authorities.
AA. Use or occupy properties or school facilities owned, rented or leased by
the Easton Area School District without authorization from proper
school authorities.
BB. Maintain any building, lot or premises in such condition that such
building, lot or premises provides shelter or protection for rodents,
insects or other pest life or in such condition that such building, lot or
premises would be conducive to rodents, insects or pest life.
CC. Allow the accumulation of abandoned motor vehicles, garbage, refuse
or any material or thing which provides shelter, protection or food for
rodents, insects or other pest life or which would be conducive to
providing shelter, protection or food for rodents, insects or other pest
life.
DD. Suffer, maintain or keep any building, lot or premises which is infested
with rodents, insects or other pest life.
EE. Plow, cultivate, fill or maintain any field, ditch, lot or stream in such a
manner that endangers public roads or causes undue erosion or loss of
soil or subsoil through erosion, windstorm or otherwise.
FF. Fill or pollute any stream with soil, chemicals or other matter or to fill
or pollute the air with smoke, dust, fumes or an offensive odor of any
kind.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 118, Peddlers and Transient Merchants.
§ 109-3 MOVING PERMIT § 109-3
102:173
GG. Operate any unlicensed minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile, air-cushion
vehicle or motor vehicle upon any private property, unopened road or
right-of-way without the permission of the owner or one of the owners
or persons entitled to use such property, unopened road or right-of-way,
or to operate any such vehicle upon any public sidewalk or park.
HH. Operate or park any unlicensed minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile, air
cushion vehicle or motor vehicle upon any public road or public place,
or to operate or park any licensed or unlicensed minibike, motorcycle,
snowmobile, air cushion vehicle or motor vehicle without the
permission of the real property owner upon any portion of public real
property or private real property of another which is posted as
prohibiting such operation, or which is grassed, covered with growing
things of value or not otherwise designed to reasonably accommodate
the type of vehicle in question. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
II. Commit any nuisance, common law or otherwise, or to violate any
township ordinance in any way which amounts to a nuisance. [Added
4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
JJ. In the absence of a privilege, to point any deadly weapon at another, or
threaten another with the same. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
KK. In the absence of an emergency or a permit from Township police, to
land, operate or fire any aircraft, helicopter, gas or air balloon,
spacecraft, rocketship or parachute, or to throw or drop any object from
any of the foregoing upon any public property or private property not
expressly designed and approved for said purpose by federal or state
authorities. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
LL. Hold or organize any dance, concert or other public gathering which is
open to the public and which does or which can reasonably be expected
to attract or involve more than 250 persons without first informing the
Township police and obtaining a special permit for the same, which
permit may be conditioned upon the applicant's providing and paying
for the presence of one Township policeman for each 250 persons
present. This section shall not apply to indoor activities of nonprofit
places of religious worship or drive-in movie theaters. [Added
4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
MM.After having been informed in essence at least once that a noise or
sound can be heard within a dwelling house or apartment of another, to
produce or continue to produce between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. any unnecessary noise or to play any musical instrument or
radio, phonograph or television producing a sound during such hours in
such manner that the noise or sound can be heard within the dwelling
house or apartment of another; except with regard to a Townshipsponsored
event, wherein the time for the production of sound, noise or
music is extended to 12:00 midnight. The maximum fine for a violation
of this subsection shall be $25. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151;
amended 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-302]
§ 109-3 PALMER CODE § 109-3
102:174
§ 109-4. Repeal of prior ordinances.
All ordinances, specifically Ordinance No. 4, or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 109-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227; 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-373]
Any person or persons charged with the violation of any of the provisions
of this ordinance, or the commission of any of the acts herein defined to
be nuisances, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, shall pay
a fine not to exceed $600 and, in default thereof, be committed to the
Northampton County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
NN. After having been informed in essence at least once that a noise is
offensive, to produce or continue to produce any unnecessary noise
which is offensive to a normal person. The maximum fine for a violation
of this subsection shall be $25. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
OO. Post or continue to post any sign at or visible from a public place which
violates the Township Zoning or Intersectional Clearance Ordinances,33
or which incorrectly states the zoning classification of any area or tract
or lot of ground. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
PP. After having been informed in essence at least once to leave by the
owner or owner's agents or Township police, either orally or by posted
signs, to remain on or refuse to leave any private property, store or
shopping center. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
QQ. Remain on or refuse to leave any public park during any nighttime
closing hours set and posted by the Board of Supervisors, or to violate
duly posted park rules. The maximum fine for a violation of this
subsection shall be $10. [Added 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 151]
RR. Hunt on property owned by the Township. [Added 11-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-373]
SS. Throw, blow, shovel, plow, push, dump or by any other manner deposit
any snow, ice, slush or other form of frozen precipitation upon any state
highway, Township road, median, roadside shoulder and swale,
intersection sight triangle, inlet, public sidewalk, fire hydrant or
privately owned property without the permission from the property
owner. Exempted from these restrictions are state and municipal
employees and other individuals contracted by said state or municipal
governmental authorities expressly for the purpose of snow and ice
removal and/or plowing. [Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-435]
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning, and Ch. 186, Weeds; Visual Obstructions.
§ 109-3 MOVING PERMIT § 109-6
102:175
§ 109-6. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any part hereof shall
be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court, such
decision shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of the
ordinance. It is declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that
this ordinance would have been adopted even if such invalid provision had
not been included therein.
§ 109-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after enactment hereof.
§ 109-8. Continued violations. [Added 5-1-1972 by Ord. No. 122;
amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
Chapter 112
ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Mechanical Code — See Ch. 99.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 112-1. Adoption of code. [Amended 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 253;
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The publication entitled the "International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings/2000" and its errata sheets, published by the
International Code Council, hereinafter referred to as the "code," is hereby
accepted, adopted and incorporated, in its entirety, except as may be
hereinafter otherwise indicated, as the basic One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Unit Code of the Township of Palmer. Wherever in said code blanks appear,
the obvious required or indicated insertions are to be considered made, and
wherever in said code the words "municipality" or "name of municipality"
appear, the words "Palmer Township" are to be considered as inserted.
A. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
B. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 109-6 PALMER CODE § 112-2
112:176
§ 112-2. Repealer.
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with a provision of another
township ordinance or law, the most restrictive of the two provisions shall
prevail. All ordinances or parts of ordinances or any other township law
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed by virtue hereof.
§ 112-3. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and the aforesaid code are severable. If
any provision of this ordinance or of the aforesaid code is for any reason
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this
ordinance or of the aforesaid code.
§ 112-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect five days from the date of its adoption.
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 112-6. Amended sections. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-293]
The following section of the code, denoting work not requiring permits,
shall require a zoning permit with such fees based upon the adopted
construction valuation and fee schedule and subject to Zoning Ordinance
requirements: IRC Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Building:
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7.
Chapter 118
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 109. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 112-2 ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT § 112-6
112:177

ARTICLE I
Peddlers
[Adopted 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-42634]
§ 118-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddlers' License
Ordinance."
§ 118-2. Definitions.
§ 118-3. License required; regulations. [Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-428]
No person shall engage in peddling in the Township of Palmer without
first having procured a license as herein provided. Each individual person
engaging in peddling or soliciting must have his/her own license. Each
license is valid only for the name of the person on the license. Licenses are
not transferable from one person to another. The time for soliciting shall
be 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST, Monday through Saturday. No peddling on
Sundays or holidays shall be permitted. Peddlers and solicitors shall only
approach residential premises at the entrance closest to the street and/or
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
PEDDLER — Any "person" who shall engage in "peddling" as
hereinbelow defined.
PEDDLING — Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking
of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from house to
house within the Township of Palmer; provided that the word "peddling"
shall not apply to:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
(1) Farmers selling their own produce.
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose.
(2)
Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread, bakery
products, meat, meat products, milk or milk products.
(3)
B. In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. I, Peddlers,
adopted 4-18-1966 by Ord. No. 77, as amended.
§ 118-1 ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT § 118-3
112:179
sidewalk. No side or rear entrances shall be approached unless such an
entrance is the primary established entrance for the premises. This section,
§ 118-3 shall not apply to the following persons or groups:
§ 118-4. Application.
Every person desiring to engage in the business of peddling in the Township
of Palmer shall first make application to the Chief of Police of the Township
for a license. Upon such application, such person shall provide the following
information and meet the requirement set forth:
A. Any farmer engaged in the sale of his own produce in or about the
streets of the Township.
B. Insurance companies or their agents, or insurance brokers, authorized
to transact business under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. Persons soliciting for school-based, charitable, service or religious
organizations.
D. Persons distributing by vehicle on a regular route any meat, ice cream,
milk or bakery products.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. A description (make, model, color, and year), VIN number and license
number of any vehicle which the applicant expects to use while
peddling or soliciting.
C. The kind of goods and/or services which the applicant proposes to
engage in peddling, solicitations, selling or taking orders for.
D. The specified length of time during which the applicant proposes to
engage in peddling or soliciting.
E. A minimum of a current, valid driver's license, government-issued
identification card or other valid identification documentation.
F. A certified criminal history record check from the Pennsylvania State
Police.
G. The name and address of the company or companies peddling or
soliciting for.
H. The application shall be sworn to and notarized before a notary public
or some other officer authorized to take affidavits within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
I. A certified check, cashier's check or cash for the amount of the
applicable fee.
§ 118-3 PALMER CODE § 118-5
112:180
§ 118-5. Fees.
The fees for all permits and licenses shall be set by the Palmer Township
Board of Supervisors by resolution on an annual basis. Fees shall not be
refunded if any license is suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police for
violations or failure to comply with any provision(s) of this ordinance.
§ 118-6. Issuance of license; information; exhibition; conditions.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to every peddler. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given upon the application therefor.
Every peddler shall, at all times when engaged in peddling in the Township,
carry such license and a current and valid form of identification upon his
person and shall exhibit such license and identification, upon request, to all
police officers, Township officials, and citizens. No peddler shall engage in
selling any product not mentioned upon such license, nor shall any person
having a foot peddler's license operate from, with, or in conjunction with
any motor vehicle.
§ 118-7. Crying of wares prohibited.
No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall he use
any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for announcing his presence by
which the public is annoyed.
§ 118-8. Parking of vehicles; deposit of refuse.
No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance shall park any vehicle
upon any of the streets or alleys of the Township of Palmer in order to
sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise, nor may
any such person place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets, or
alleys, nor may any such person maintain or keep a street or curbstone
market by parking any vehicles upon any street or alley in the Township for
longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the
immediate vicinity.
§ 118-9. Fixed location prohibited.
No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Township for the
purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
§ 118-10. Duties of Chief of Police: records, supervision of
activities.
The Chief of Police of the Township shall keep a record of all licenses issued
under this ordinance and shall supervise the activities of all holders of such
licenses.
§ 118-5 ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT § 118-11
112:181
§ 118-11. Suspension of license.
§ 118-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 118-13. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any provision thereof
shall be held to be unconstitutional, invalid or illegal by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of
the remaining provisions of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as the
legislative intent that this ordinance would have been enacted had such
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal provision not been included therein.
§ 118-14. When effective.
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective five days from the
date of adoption.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to suspend any license issued
hereunder when he/she deems such suspension to be necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety, security, morals or from
rudeness, profanities, harassment, intimidation and alarm or for giving
any false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
B. Any person aggrieved by any such suspension may file an appeal
thereof, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors within 10 days of such
suspension, whereupon the Board of Supervisors shall fix a time and
place for the hearing of the appeal, which time shall be not later than 10
days from the receipt of the appeal. The Board of Supervisors shall hear
to the aforesaid appeals, and the decision of the Board shall be final.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction before a District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and the costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 118-11 PALMER CODE § 118-14
112:182
ARTICLE II
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 8-3-1959 by Ord. No. 29]
§ 118-15. License required.
Every person, whether principal or agent, entering into, beginning or
desiring to begin a transient retail business in the Township of Palmer for
the sale of any goods wares or merchandise whatsoever, and who hires,
leases, occupies or uses any room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway
car or other place or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods,
wares or merchandise, shall, before starting such sale, take out a license for
the same from the Supervisors of the said Township of Palmer.
§ 118-16. Fee; monthly renewal. [Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-294]
The fee to be paid for such license shall be set by the Palmer Township
Board of Supervisors by resolution. The fee shall be collected by the
Supervisors before they shall issue any license under the provisions of this
ordinance. Said license shall be renewed monthly by the Supervisors during
the continuance of said sale.
§ 118-17. Nonapplicability.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall apply to:
§ 118-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
A. Farmers selling their own produce;
B. Any sale of goods, wares or merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance by
failing to secure the license required thereby or to renew the said
license, as the case may be, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 118-15 ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT § 118-19
112:183
§ 118-19. Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith shall be and the
same are hereby repealed.
§ 118-19 PALMER CODE § 118-19
112:184
Chapter 124
PLUMBING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing in floodplain areas — See Ch. 55,
§ 55-35.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
145.
§ 124-1. Title; applicability.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Plumbing Code." All plumbing work in Palmer Township shall conform to
this ordinance and the code adopted below.
§ 124-2. Adoption of standards.
The publication entitled the "National Plumbing Code/2000" and its errata
sheets, published by the National Code Council, hereinafter called the
"code," is hereby accepted, adopted and incorporated in its entirety, except
as may be hereinafter otherwise indicated, as the Palmer Township Basic
Plumbing Code. Wherever in said code blanks appear, the obvious required
or indicated insertions are to be considered made; and wherever in said
code the words "municipality" or "name of municipality" appear, the words
"Palmer Township" are to be considered as inserted.
§ 124-3. Floor drains.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, floor drains are prohibited in all uses and
structures unless they are proven necessary to the safe and sanitary
operation of the use to which they service and meet the requirements of
the Plumbing Code. In addition, special separators, traps and filters must
be installed if deemed necessary by the Plumbing Inspector or code official
having jurisdiction.
§ 124-4. Rules and hearings.
In addition to the other penalties contained in this ordinance, the Board,
after giving notice and affording the aggrieved party an opportunity for
a public hearing, may, for cause, revoke or suspend a plumbing license
or permit or recognition of another municipal license and take such other
action as may be proper. In the case of a plumbing license, cause shall
include but is not limited to violation of this ordinance, the code, rules
of the Board or other improper conduct. The Board may also adopt rules
governing plumbing materials and practices, and by applying for a township
plumbing license or permit or for recognition of another municipal license,
a person or entity shall be held to agree to abide by any and all such rules.
No rule shall be adopted without first posting a notice of the text of a rule
§ 118-19 PLUMBING CODE § 124-4
124:185
and the intention of the Board to meet and adopt the same in the Township
Municipal Building for five days. Once adopted, such rule shall be similarly
posted for five days, and a copy shall be mailed to all master plumbers
licensed or recognized by the township.
§ 124-5. Permits and licenses.
Within Palmer Township, no plumbing work shall be commenced until a
permit for such work has been duly obtained and signed for by a Palmer
Township licensed master plumber, and no person or entity shall advertise
as or engage in or carry out or do plumbing work or install or repair
any plumbing fixture, pipe or device, other than digging ditches or selling
supplies, unless such person or entity holds a valid Palmer Township master
plumbing license. The Palmer Township Plumbing Inspector may recognize
a master plumbing license from a first (1st), second (2nd), or third (3rd)
class city and issue a Palmer Township master plumber's license which is
renewable at the beginning of each calendar year. Licenses and permits
are nontransferable, and may not be taken out in the name of another.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a resident of Palmer Township may install
plumbing in the one principal home in which he lives and resides without
being licensed as a plumber so long as a permit is obtained and so long as
such residence is not part of a multifamily dwelling. No license or permit
shall be required to clean out a sewer line or fixture without altering
the same, except that a permit shall be required to pump out a septic
tank, cesspool or holding tank. The Board may institute proceedings to bar
activities by any person or entity which engages in a practice of cleaning
drains or fixtures and which is unethical or fraudulent in its conduct of the
same.
§ 124-6. Fees and applications.
The fees for all permits and licenses and the classifications of permits shall
be set by the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors by resolution. Except
for a homeowner as provided above, only a master plumber may apply for
and hold a plumbing permit.
§ 124-7. Classifications of plumbers.
The following are the classifications of plumbers, the yearly licenses
attributable to them, and the activities in which they may engage:
A. Master plumber: an adult person with at least four years' plumbing
experience as at least a journeyman plumber, who has demonstrated
skill in bidding, superintending, laying out and installing plumbing, who
is familiar with this ordinance, the code and rules of the Plumbing
Review Board and who has passed a test prescribed by the Board and
been duly granted a license as a master plumber. A master plumber
shall take out all permits and have final and overall responsibility for all
work done thereunder. All master plumbers shall post with the Board at
§ 124-4 PALMER CODE § 124-7
124:186
§ 124-8. Conflict with other provisions.
These standards are the minimum required for public safety, and any
conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or law shall be resolved
in favor of the most restrictive of the two provisions.
§ 124-9. Severability.
The provisions of this code and ordinance are severable. If any provision of
the code or this ordinance is for any reason invalid or unconstitutional, it is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors to have enacted
this ordinance and code without such invalid or unconstitutional provision.
§ 124-10. Repeated violations.
Every day a violation of this ordinance or code continues shall constitute
a separate offense. Repeated or dangerous violations shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated as such, and the costs of so doing shall be
charged to the persons responsible, in addition to other penalties.
§ 124-11. Violations and penalties.
least a performance bond of at least $3,000 to guarantee performance
under this ordinance, the code and rules of the Board.
B. Journeyman plumber: an adult person with at least four years' plumbing
experience as at least an apprentice plumber who has demonstrated
ability and knowledge in installing plumbing, who is familiar with this
ordinance, the code and rules of the Plumbing Review Board, and who
has passed a test prescribed by the Board and been duly granted a
license as a journeyman plumber. The senior journeyman plumber shall
be in charge of all plumbing work on a job site in the absence of the
master plumber. A graduate of a full-time course in plumbing at an
accredited technical or vocational school shall automatically receive
credit for three years' experience as an apprentice plumber.
C. Apprentice plumber: an individual at least 16 years of age who is
engaged in learning the plumbing trade either as an employee of a
master plumber or a full-time student at an accredited technical or
vocational school. An apprentice plumber may only do plumbing work
under the direct supervision of a master plumber or journeyman
plumber in the absence of the master plumber.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity which or who
shall in any way violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or the
code or fail to comply with a lawful order issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding before any District Magistrate,
Justice of the Peace or Alderman, pay a fine and penalty to and for the
use of the township of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 and
costs, or undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
§ 124-7 PLUMBING CODE § 124-11
124:187
§ 124-12. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective five days after its adoption.
Chapter 128
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 81.
Foreclosed and abandoned real
property — See Ch. 85.
Nuisances — See Ch. 109.
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Unit
Code — See Ch. 112.
Refuse disposal — See Ch. 138.
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Weeds and visual obstructions — See Ch. 186.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 128-1. Short title. [Amended 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 135;
7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293]
The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Property
Maintenance Code."
§ 128-2. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code; amendments.
[Amended 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 135; 2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 161;
4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 186; 7-28-1987 by Ord. No. 221; 7-27-1993 by
Ord. No. 253; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-293; 12-3-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-416]
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
A. The publication entitled the "International Property Maintenance Code/
2009," Chapters 1 through 8 and its errata sheets, specifically
excluding Sections 303.2, 307, 704.3, and 704.4, authored and
published by the International Code Council in 2009, hereinafter called
the "code," is hereby accepted, adopted and incorporated herein by
reference in its entirety, except as may be hereinafter otherwise
indicated, as the Palmer Township Property Maintenance Code.
§ 124-11 PALMER CODE § 128-2
124:188
§ 128-3. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 128-4. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any sentence, clause
or section of this ordinance, including the code, is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses or sections of this ordinance, including the code. It is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer
Township that this ordinance would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause or section not been
included herein or in the code.
§ 128-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
B. The International Property Maintenance Code/2009 and its errata
sheets and appendixes shall be available for inspection by any citizen at
the Palmer Township Municipal Building.
C. As it relates to its incorporation by reference as the applicable property
maintenance code for Palmer Township, the following information shall
be inserted into the following sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code/2009:
(1) The name of the jurisdiction for Section 101.1 shall be "Palmer
Township."
(2) The fee schedule for Section 103.5 shall be "none."
(3) The dollar amounts for Section 112.4 shall be "not less than $100 or
more than $500."
(4) The maximum height of weeds or plant growth in Section 302.4
shall be "six inches."
(5) The period for insect screens for Section 304.14 shall be from
"April 1 to December 1 of each calendar year."
(6) The period for heat supply for Section 602.3 shall be from "October
1 to April 1 of each calendar year."
(7) The period for heat supply in occupiable work spaces for Section
602.4 shall be from "October 1 to April 1 of each calendar year."
A. Any owner, general agent or building contractor or subcontractor who
violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, and the lessee or tenant
of the entire building or entire premises where such violation has been
committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, building
§ 128-2 PLUMBING CODE § 128-5
124:189
§ 128-6. Minimum exit requirements. [Added 2-19-1973 by Ord. No.
135; amended 12-30-1977 by Ord. No. 170]
There shall be not less than two approved independent outward-opening
exitways serving every story of all commercial, industrial and public
buildings having 1,200 or more square feet of floor area.
§ 128-7. Minimum square footage requirements. [Added 2-19-1973
by Ord. No. 135; amended 4-2-1979 by Ord. No. 178; 7-1-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-320]
The minimum usable floor area of all buildings, dwellings or separate
dwelling units thereof designed for human habitation shall be not less than
1,000 square feet, except for apartments, in which case each individual
apartment dwelling unit may contain a minimum usable floor area of not
less than 600 square feet. This section shall apply to trailers and mobile
homes unless they are in approved mobile home parks.
Chapter 135
REAL ESTATE
contractor or subcontractor or any other person, firm or corporation
who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation,
shall be liable, upon conviction before any Alderman or Justice of the
Peace, to pay a fine or penalty to the Township, and for the use of the
Township, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 or, in default of payment,
to be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 128-5 PALMER CODE § 128-7
135:190
ARTICLE I
Real Estate List
[Adopted 1-19-1987 as Ord. No. 219]
§ 135-1. Certified list to be filed.
Effective as of the effective date of this ordinance, every owner of real
estate in Palmer Township who rents or leases any parcel thereof, in whole
or in part, to any other person or entity shall make one filing with the
Township Secretary at the Township Municipal Building, 3245
Freemansburg Avenue, Palmer Township, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, of a written certified list of all persons or entities who
presently rent or lease real estate from said owner. Said list shall include
the names and addresses of all such persons or entities and shall be filed
with the Township Secretary to be received no later than March 1, 1987. In
addition to the requirement of the aforesaid filing, every such owner of real
estate shall file a separate, certified written list with the Township Secretary
within 30 days of the date of any change in the person or entity so renting
or leasing or within 30 days of the date of any additional person or entity so
renting or leasing the subject premises.
§ 135-2. Amount of rent not to excuse owner.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the fact that an owner of real estate
rents or leases any property for minimal or no rent to another person
or entity shall not excuse said owner from the filing of the certified lists
required in § 135-1 hereof.
§ 135-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
§ 135-4. Repealer.
All prior ordinances or parts thereof, to the extent that the same are
inconsistent herewith, shall be and are expressly repealed.
§ 135-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after its adoption.
A. Every owner of real estate who fails to so comply with the requirements
of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary offense
and be liable for a fine not exceeding $600 and, in default thereof,
imprisonment not exceeding 10 days in the Northampton County
Prison. For the purposes of this ordinance, every day that an owner of
real estate is late in filing said certified written lists, as required above,
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, for which the fines and
penalties stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
B. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 135-1 REAL ESTATE § 135-5
135:191

ARTICLE II
Real Estate Registry
[Adopted 2-21-1966 as Ord. No. 76]
§ 135-6. Registry established.
For the purpose of obtaining accurate information in reference to the
ownership of real estate in the Township of Palmer, a real estate registry is
hereby established.
§ 135-7. Registrar of Deeds.
The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, annually appoint a Registrar
of Deeds, whose duty it shall be, under the direction of the Board of
Supervisors, to cause to be made all necessary books, maps and plans
as will show the location and dimension of each property thereon, which
books, maps or plans shall be so prepared as to show the location and name
of the owner or owners thereof, with blank spaces for the name of the owner
of each lot and with provisions for the names of future owners and the dates
of future transfers of title.
§ 135-8. Title search authorized.
For the purpose of establishing such registry, the Registrar of Deeds shall
cause a search to be made in any public place where such records of deeds
and titles are kept or in any other place for any evidence of title not reported
to him as herein provided and necessary for the completion of such books,
maps or plans.
§ 135-9. Records and maps.
The registry, books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved and shall
be so kept, by additions from time to time, as to show the ownership of every
lot or piece of real estate or subdivision thereof within or partially within
the limits of the Township of Palmer, with the succeeding transmissions of
title from the time of the commencement of such plans.
§ 135-10. Owners to furnish copy of deeds.
It shall be the duty of all owners of real estate located in Palmer Township,
as of the effective date of this ordinance and within 10 days after the date
postmarked on written notice mailed to the same, to present their deed or
deeds at the office of said Registrar of Deeds between the hours as stated
in said notice, for the purpose of having said deed or deeds stamped as
evidence of registry thereof and in order for said Registrar to examine,
abstract, photocopy, duplicate or reproduce the same for purposes thereof.
§ 135-6 REAL ESTATE § 135-11
135:193
§ 135-11. Recording with County Recorder of Deeds required.
All purchasers by deed from and after the effective date hereof shall, within
30 days after acquiring title, record the same in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds in and for the County of Northampton.
§ 135-12. Subsequent owner's responsibility.
From and after the effective date hereof, every subsequent owner by devise
or descent or otherwise than by deed shall, within 90 days of the vesting of
title or within 10 days after the date postmarked on written notice mailed
to the same, whichever occurs first, present the aforesaid evidence of title
to the Registrar of Deeds for the purposes set forth in § 135-10 hereof.
§ 135-13. Written notice sufficient.
Written notice as herein provided shall be sufficient if the same is deposited
in the United States Mail in the ordinary and customary manner, addressed
to the last known address of the owner or reputed owner of said real estate,
with postage prepaid.
§ 135-14. Compensation of Registrar of Deeds.
The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish the compensation
for the Registrar of Deeds and such employees as appointed by the Board,
plus such amounts as required for maintenance and operation of said office.
§ 135-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
§ 135-16. Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who or which
shall neglect or refuse to comply with any provisions of this ordinance
shall be liable to a penalty of $10 plus costs of suit, to be recovered in
the name of the Township of Palmer in a suit brought before any Justice
of the Peace, in the same manner as debts not exceeding $600 are
recoverable.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 135-11 PALMER CODE § 135-16
135:194
Chapter 138
REFUSE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burning — See Ch. 109, § 109-3B.
Littering — See Ch. 109, § 109-3D and G.
Vehicles used to transport garbage — See Ch.
109, § 109-3I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Solid waste — See Ch. 156.
§ 135-16 REAL ESTATE § 135-16
135:195

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-15-1967 by Ord. No. 85]
§ 138-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Palmer Township Refuse Disposal
Ordinance."
§ 138-2. Definitions.
§ 138-3. Storage practices.
A. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible material.
DISPOSAL — The storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body wastes, including "garbage,"
"ashes" and nonputrescible solid wastes, recyclables, and hazardous
waste.[Amended 10-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-41535]
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Preparation of refuse.
(1) All refuse shall be drained free of liquids before disposal.
(2) Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or similar material.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers shall be rinsed free of food
particles and drained before disposal.
(4) Rubbish shall be:
(a) Placed in approved containers; or
(b) Cut and bailed, tied, bundled, stacked or packaged so as not to
exceed 36 inches in length and 75 pounds in weight.
B. Refuse containers.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of the definition of "rubbish,"
which immediately followed this definition.
§ 138-1 REAL ESTATE § 138-3
135:197
§ 138-4. Collection practices.
(1) Refuse containers shall be made of durable, watertight, rustresistant
material, having a close-fitting lid and handles to facilitate
collection.
(2) Refuse containers for residences shall be of not less than 10 gallons
nor more than 32 gallons in capacity.
(3) It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of residue of liquids,
solids or a combination of such material on the bottom or sides of
containers, it being the intention of this provision that the interior
of containers shall be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining
as often as necessary.
C. Storage of refuse.
(1) Each householder, commercial establishment or person having
refuse shall provide himself with approved refuse containers and
shall place and keep all refuse therein, except as provided in
§ 138-3A(4)(b) of this ordinance relating to handling of rubbish.
(2) It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley, stream, body
of water or any other public place, or upon private property,
whether owned or not, unless such refuse is placed in an approved
container, except that rubbish may be stored as provided in
§ 138-3A(4)(b) of this ordinance.
(3) Except for days on which refuse is being collected, all refuse
containers must be kept to the rear of all premises.
A. Place of collection.
(1) Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be placed at
ground level and be made readily accessible to the collector. They
shall be placed in the area from which collection is to be made.
(2) Notwithstanding provisions of § 138-4A(1) of this ordinance,
householders may, by contract with collectors, be permitted to
place containers at agreed places upon their premises.
B. Frequency of collection.
(1) Refuse shall be collected once weekly, except that during the
months of May, June, July, August and September, the Board of
Supervisors of Palmer Township may require collection twice
weekly.
(2) Hotels, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments
may be required to have more frequent collection if determined by
the Board of Supervisors of said Township to be essential to protect
the public health.
§ 138-3 PALMER CODE § 138-4
135:198
§ 138-5. Disposal of refuse. [Amended 10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-415]
It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, bury, destroy, or otherwise dispose
of refuse within the jurisdictional limits of the said Township of Palmer
except at a Township-approved refuse disposal site. It shall be unlawful to
dump, burn, bury, destroy, or otherwise dispose of materials designated for
recycling pursuant to the Act of July 28, 1988 (P.L. 556, No. 101), known as
the "Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act," except
as prescribed by Palmer Township's Municipal Recycling Program.
§ 138-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
C. Licensing of collectors.
(1) No person shall collect, remove, haul or convey any refuse through
or upon any of the streets or alleys of the said Township of Palmer,
or dispose of the same in any manner or place, without obtaining a
license from said Township through the Township Secretary.
(2) The fee for such license shall be $25 per annum, and all licenses
shall be issued for the calendar year.
(3) Every person who shall apply for a license under this section shall
state the type or types of refuse to be collected and the place and
method of disposal.
(4) No license shall be granted if the place and method of disposal shall
not conform to the requirements of this ordinance or to the
ordinance of any municipal or quasi-municipal corporation wherein
disposal of refuse is to be made.
(5) No licensed collector shall make any change in the arrangements
for disposal of refuse collection by him without first receiving
approval from said Township through the Township Secretary.
(6) It shall be unlawful to permit an unlicensed collector to collect or
remove refuse from a household, institution or commercial
enterprise.
D. Collection vehicles.
(1) All vehicles used for collection of garbage shall be equipped with
compacting devices or equivalent types of closed bodies and shall
have enclosed cargo space.
(2) It shall be unlawful to collect, haul, transport or convey garbage in
open, unenclosed vehicles.
A. Any person or persons charged with the violation of any of the
provisions of this ordinance, upon conviction thereof before a Justice of
the Peace of the said Township of Palmer, shall pay a fine not to exceed
§ 138-4 REAL ESTATE § 138-6
135:199
§ 138-7. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any part hereof shall
be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court, such
decision shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of the
ordinance. It is declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that
this ordinance would have been adopted even if such invalid provision had
not been included herein.
§ 138-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective 30 days after enactment hereof.
$600 and, in default thereof, be committed to the Northampton County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 138-6 PALMER CODE § 138-8
135:200
ARTICLE II
Refuse Disposal Site
[Adopted 8-23-1983 as Ord. No. 201]
§ 138-9. Designation of site.
The disposal site is herein identified as that located at the South 25th Street
Quarry, Palmer Township, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
§ 138-10. Use limited to township.
Use of the disposal site is limited to Palmer Township residents and Palmer
Township businesses. Written proof of residency is required in this regard.
§ 138-11. Materials permitted for disposal.
Use of the disposal site is limited to tree branches, leaves, grass and hedge
and bush clippings removed by Palmer Township residents and businesses
from their property. Building supplies, hazardous liquids or materials, white
goods, junk and garbage are not permitted.
§ 138-12. Prohibited uses.
No use of the disposal site is permitted for people engaged in the business
of tree trimming, landscaping, grass cutting or hedge or bush cutting
businesses and/or building contractors.
§ 138-13. Hours of operation; provisions for other times and
purposes.
§ 138-14. Request for use of site.
A. The disposal site will be available for use commencing March 15 of each
year and ending November 15 of each year, Monday through Friday
from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and on Saturday and Sunday from 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
B. The use of the disposal site at any time or for any purpose other than
those set forth above shall be authorized only by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Use of the disposal site shall be requested from the police dispatcher at
the Palmer Township Municipal Building. Individuals requesting use of
the disposal site shall pay a fee of $1 per load to the dispatcher. The
dispatcher will deposit the fee so received in the security filing cabinet
of the Police Department. The Custodian of Records will tabulate the
money, turn the money over to the Township Cashier and receive a
receipt therefor.
B. Entrance to the disposal site will be equipped with a swing gate to be
locked and unlocked by Township police officers, who will accompany
§ 138-9 REAL ESTATE § 138-14
135:201
§ 138-15. Record of use to be kept.
A record of those individuals given permission to use the disposal site will
be maintained by the Police Department.
§ 138-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 138-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after adoption.
§ 138-18. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are inconsistent
herewith, are hereby repealed absolutely.
the Township resident requesting use to the site after being notified
by the police dispatcher. If members of the Police Department are
occupied performing regular police work, residents requesting use of
the disposal site must wait until an officer is available.
A. Any person found guilty of violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be charged with a summary offense and shall be subject to a fine
as follows: for the first offense, $100; for the second offense, $200; and
for the third and each succeeding offense, $300 each.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis. [Added 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 227]
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 138-14 PALMER CODE § 138-18
135:202
Chapter 145
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Sewer Board — See Ch. 11.
Municipal Sewer Authority — See Ch. 17.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 138-18 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 138-18
145:203

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 145-1. Words and phrases defined.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage disposal system,
other than a public or community system, which receives either human
excreta or liquid waste, or both, from one or more premises. Included within
the scope of this definition are septic tank soil absorption systems, privies
and chemical-type toilets, and such other types as may be prescribed in
regulations.
PERMIT — A written "permit" issued by the "Sanitary Officer," permitting
the construction of an "individual sewage disposal system" under this
ordinance.
PERSON — Any institution, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity.
SANITARY OFFICER — The legally designated authority of the Township of
Palmer or his authorized representative.
§ 145-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-1
145:205

ARTICLE II
Requirements
§ 145-2. Scope of Article.
The following standards shall apply in the installation, alteration, repair or
extension of individual sewage disposal systems in the Township of Palmer.
§ 145-3. General.
§ 145-4. Sewer construction.
A. No raw sewage, septic tank effluent or seepage from a soil absorption
system shall be discharged to the surface of the ground or ground
surface water, nor shall it be discharged, except as hereinafter
provided, into any rock formation, the structure of which is not
conducive to purification of water by filtration.
B. No installations of individual sewage disposal systems shall be made in
low areas or areas which may be subject to flooding.
C. In areas with a high groundwater table or where limestone or any
geological formation similarly faulty is covered by less than 50 feet of
earth, the final disposal unit shall be a tile field. The bottom of the
trenches shall be above the water table and at least two feet above the
surface of the faulty rock formation.
D. No bulldozers, trucks or other heavy machinery shall be driven over the
system after installation.
A. No buried or concealed portion of the building sewer or building drain
or branch thereof serving any premises shall be located less than the
following minimum distances:
TABLE I
Sewer and Septic Tank Minimum Distances
Requirement
Distance
(feet)
Property line 10
Occupied buildings 10
Buried water pipe under pressure 10
Domestic water supply 50
Buried water pipe under suction 50
B. The portions of any buried sewer more than 50 feet from a well or
buried suction line shall be of adequate size and constructed of castiron,
vitrified clay, cement-asbestos or bituminized fiber pipe. Any
building drain or building sewer constructed of cast iron or cement and
§ 145-2 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-4
145:207
§ 145-5. Septic tanks.
asbestos shall be not less than four inches in diameter, and any building
sewer constructed of material other than cast iron or cement-asbestos
shall be not less than six inches in diameter.
C. Bell and spigot of vitrified clay pipe shall be prepared to form a
concentric opening uniform in width around the pipe, of which the
opening shall be filled with an acceptable sewer joint compound.
Cement joints shall be painted on the outside and left smooth on the
inside by drawing a swab or scraper through the joint. The line shall
have a grade of not less than 1/8 inch per foot. The 10 feet of sewer
immediately preceding the septic tank shall slope not more than 1/4
inch per foot. No ninety-degree ells shall be permitted, and where the
direction of the sewer is changed in excess of 45º, accessible cleanouts
shall be provided.
A. No septic tank shall be located to provide less than the minimum
distances as stated in Table I.
B. The liquid capacity of a septic tank serving a dwelling shall be based on
the number of bedrooms contemplated in the dwelling, which is listed
in the following Table II.
TABLE II
Minimum Capacities for Septic Tanks
(Provides for use of garbage grinders, automatic washers and
other household appliances)
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Tank Capacity
(gallons)
3 900
4 1,000
Each additional 250
The liquid capacity of a septic tank shall provide a sewage detention
period of not less than 24 hours in the tank. Sewage flow shall be
computed according to types of establishment and water use. With
sewage flows greater than 1,500 gallons per day, the liquid tank
capacity shall equal 1,125 gallons plus 75% of the daily anticipated
sewage flow.
C. The liquid depth of any septic tank or compartment thereof shall be not
less than 30 inches nor greater than six feet.
D. No tank or compartment thereof shall have an inside horizontal
dimension less than 36 inches.
§ 145-4 PALMER CODE § 145-5
145:208
§ 145-6. Subsurface disposal fields.
E. Inlet and outlet connections of the tank and of each compartment
thereof shall be submerged by means of vented tees or baffles.
F. The space in the tank between the liquid surface and the top of the tank
shall be not less than 20% of the total required liquid capacity, except
that in horizontal cylindrical tanks this space shall be not less than 15%
of the total required liquid capacity.
G. The inlet baffle or submerged pipe shall extend below liquid level at
least six inches. In no case shall this penetration be greater than that
allowed for the outlet device. The inlet baffle must extend at least one
inch above the crown of the inlet sewer.
H. The outlet baffles or submerged pipe and the baffles or submerged
pipes between compartments shall extend below the liquid surface not
less than 12 inches or a distance equal to 40% of the liquid depth. The
penetration of the outlet baffles or submerged pipes of a horizontal
cylindrical tank shall be 35% of the total liquid depth.
I. There shall be at least one inch between the underside of the top of the
tank and the highest point of the inlet and outlet devices and partitions,
to provide the required ventilation of the system through the main
building stack.
J. The inlet invert shall be a minimum of three inches above the level of
the outlet invert.
K. The tank shall be watertight, constructed of sound and durable material
and not subject to excessive corrosion or decay.
L. Access to each compartment of the tank for inspection and sludge
removal shall be provided by a manhole of at least twenty-inch
dimension or removable cover. Where the top of the tank is located
more than 18 inches below the finished grade, manholes and inspection
holes shall extend to approximately eight inches below the finished
grade.
M. If the septic tank has more than one compartment, the first
compartment shall have a liquid capacity equal to at least 1/2 of the
total liquid capacity.
A. The disposal field shall be located in an unobstructed and unshaded
area. The distance given below shall be the minimum horizontal
separations between the disposal field and the following:
§ 145-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-6
145:209
TABLE III
Location of Subsurface Disposal Field
Requirement
Distance
(feet)
Any water supply or buried water suction pipe 100
Streams 50
Occupied buildings 10
Large trees 10
Property lines or buried pipe distributing water under
pressure
10
B. When coarse soil formations are encountered, the 100 feet distance
specified in the first item of Table III may be increased by the
Department.
C. Effluent from the septic tank shall be discharged to the absorption field
through a watertight line with a grade of at least 1/4 inch per foot.
Serial distribution of, effluent may be required where the grade of the
ground surface exceeds six inches in any direction within the area
utilized for the absorption field.
D. When a distribution box is used, it shall have a removable cover and
ensure equal distribution of effluent to tile field lateral lines. At least
two lateral lines shall lead from the box.
(1) Each tile field lateral line shall be connected separately to the
distribution box and shall not be subdivided.
(2) The inverts of all outlets shall be at the same elevation, and the
inlet invert shall be at least one inch above the outlet inverts.
(3) The outlet inverts shall be at least four inches above the bottom of
the distribution box for the purpose of securing equal distribution
of the septic tank effluent to each tile lateral.
(4) In the event that septic tank effluent is discharged to the
distribution box by pump or siphon a baffle shall be installed in the
distribution box. The baffle shall be secured to the bottom of the
box and shall extend vertically to a point at level with the crown of
the inlet pipe. The plane surface of the baffle shall be perpendicular
to the inlet floor line.
E. Minimum seepage area of the disposal field shall be determined by a
stabilized percolation rate. The soil shall have an acceptable
percolation rate, without interference from groundwater or impervious
strata below the level of the absorption system. The following
conditions shall be met:
§ 145-6 PALMER CODE § 145-6
145:210
(1) The maximum elevation of the groundwater table shall be at least
four feet below the surface. Rock formations or other impervious
strata shall be at a depth greater than four feet below the bottom of
the trench.
(2) The percolation time shall be within the range of those indicated in
the following table.
TABLE IV
Absorption Area Requirements for Private Residences
(Provides for garbage grinder and automatic-sequence
washing machines)
Required Absorption Percolation
Rate
(time required for water to fall 1
inch)
(in minutes)
Area
(per bedroom; standard
trench and seepage pits)
(in square feet)
1 or less 70
2 85
3 100
4 115
5 125
10 165
15 190
30 250
45 300
60 330
NOTES:
1. In every case, sufficient area shall be provided for at least two
bedrooms.
2. Absorption area for standard trenches is computed as trenchbottom
area.
3. Absorption area for seepage pits is computed as effective
sidewall area beneath the inlet.
4. Soils are unsuitable for seepage pits if the percolation rate
is 30 minutes or more, and are unsuitable for any subsurface
leaching system if the percolation rate is 60 minutes or more.
§ 145-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-6
145:211
TABLE V
Absorption Area Requirements for Other Establishments
Percolation Rate
(Time required for water
to fall 1 inch)
(in minutes)
Maximum Rate of Sewage
Application for Standard
Trenches and Seepage Pits
(gallons per square foot per
day)
1 or less 5.0
2 3.5
3 2.9
4 2.5
5 2.2
10 1.6
15 1.3
30 0.9
45 0.8
60 0.6
NOTES:
1. These figures do not include effluents from septic tanks that
receive wastes from garbage grinders and automatic washing
machines.
2. Absorption area for standard trench is computed as trenchbottom
area.
3. Absorption area for seepage pits is computed as effective
sidewall area beneath the inlet.
4. Soils are unsuitable for seepage pits or leaching systems if
the percolation rate is 30 minutes or more.
F. Construction of disposal trenches.
(1) Trenches in a disposal field shall be constructed in accordance with
the following standards:
(a) Minimum number of lines per field: two.
(b) Maximum length of individual lines: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum bottom width of trench: 12 inches.
(d) Maximum bottom width of trench: 36 inches.
(e) Minimum depth of tile lines (bottom): 18 inches.
(f) Maximum depth of tile lines (bottom): 36 inches.
§ 145-6 PALMER CODE § 145-6
145:212
(g) Uniform grade of tile trench: two to four inches per 100 feet.
(h) Uniform grade of tile lines: two to four inches per 100 feet.
(i) Minimum aggregate material under tile: six inches.
(j) Minimum aggregate material over tile: two inches.
(k) Spacing of trenches:
TABLE VI
Distances Between Trenches
Minimum Distance
Trench Width
(inches)
Between Center Line of
Trenches
(feet)
12 to 18 6
18 to 24 6.5
24 to 30 7.0
30 to 36 7.5
(2) Pipe used for the line between the septic tank and distribution box
and between the distribution box and tile laterals to the point when
the laterals are separated shall have watertight joints. Pipes used
under driveways or other areas subject to heavy loads shall be belland-
spigot cast iron with leaded caulked joints or equal.
(3) Field tile used in the disposal field shall be four-inch agricultural
drain tile 12 inches in length and shall be laid with one-fourth-inch
open joints. Alternate materials may be used if equivalent
performance is indicated.
(a) All open joints shall be protected on top by strips of asphalttreated
building paper or by other acceptable means.
(b) All bends used in the disposal field shall have tight joints at
each end of the bend.
(4) Aggregate materials shall be crushed stone, gravel or similar
insoluble, durable and acceptable material 1/2 to 2 1/2 inches in
size. The filter materials shall completely encase the tile.
(5) The top of the aggregate material shall be covered with untreated
building paper or a two-inch layer of hay or straw to prevent
settling of backfill material into the filter material.
(6) The trench above the aggregate material shall be filled over and
hand-tamped with four to six inches of earth.
G. Seepage pits.
§ 145-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-6
145:213
(1) Seepage pits shall be used for disposal of septic tank effluent only
when the installation of tile disposal trenches is due to unfavorable
soil absorption in topsoil mantle, groundwater level, topography,
and will not reduce the safety of surrounding water supplies. The
pit excavation shall terminate at least four feet above the highest
known or calculated water table.
(2) The location of seepage pits shall be not less than the stated
minimum distances from the following:
(a) Any water supply well or buried water suction pipe: 100 feet.
(b) Occupied buildings: 20 feet.
(c) Property lines and buried pipe distributing water under
pressure: 10 feet.
(d) Other seepage pits: three times the diameter of the largest pit
(edge to edge).
(3) Effective absorption area of a seepage pit is the vertical-wall area
(based on dug diameter) of the impervious strata below the inlet.
(a) Required seepage area shall be determined by the percolation
test made in each vertical stratum penetrated. The weighted
average of the results shall be computed to obtain a design
figure. Soil strata in which the percolation rates are in excess
of 30 minutes per inch shall not be included in computing the
absorption area. No allowance shall be made for impervious
strata or bottom area.
(b) All pits shall have a diameter of at least four feet.
(4) Construction of all seepage pits shall conform to the following
requirements:
(a) To prevent cave-in, the pit shall be lined with brick, stone or
block at least four inches thick, laid in a radial arch to support
the pit walls.
(b) The brick, stone or block shall be laid watertight above the
inlet and with open joints below the inlet to provide adequate
passage of liquids.
(c) A minimum annular space of six inches between the lining and
excavation wall shall be filled with crushed rock or gravel.
(d) The top of the seepage pit shall be constructed to be capable of
supporting the overburden of earth and any reasonable load to
which it is subjected. Access to the pit shall be provided by
means of a manhole or inspection hole equipped with a
watertight cover. The seepage pit may terminate in a
conventional manhole top, frame and cover. The top of the
§ 145-6 PALMER CODE § 145-6
145:214
seepage pit shall be not less than 12 inches below the ground
surface. Where the top is more than 18 inches below the
ground surface, there shall be provided an inspection pipe of
not less than four-inch diameter extending through the cover
to a point above the tank not more than six inches below
finished ground level. The top of the inspection pipe shall be
provided with a removable watertight cap and its location shall
be marked at the ground surface.
§ 145-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-6
145:215

ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 145-7. Construction, alteration, extension.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend individual
sewage disposal systems within the Township of Palmer unless he holds a
valid permit36 issued by the Sanitary Officer in the name of such person for
the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed.
§ 145-8. Application.
All applications for permits shall be made to the Sanitary Officer, who shall
issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this
ordinance and any regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 145-9. Granting of permit subject to availability of public sewer.
The Sanitary Officer may refuse to grant a permit for the construction of
an individual sewage disposal system where public or community sewerage
systems are reasonably available.
§ 145-10. Information required.
Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the applicant
and shall include the following:
§ 145-11. Plan.
A complete plan for the purpose of obtaining a permit to be issued by the
Sanitary Officer shall include:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Lot and block number of property on which construction, alteration or
extension is proposed.
C. Complete plan of the proposed disposal facility, with substantiating
data, if necessary, attesting to its compliance with the minimum
standards of the Sanitary Officer.
D. Such further information as may be required by the Sanitary Officer to
substantiate that the proposed construction, alteration or extension
complies with regulations promulgated by the Sanitary Officer.
A. The number, location and size of all sewage disposal facilities to be
constructed, altered or extended.
36.Editor's Note: This permit issued by the Sanitary Officer is in addition to the building
permit usually required and should be obtained prior to construction, alteration and
extension of the residence or facility to be served.
§ 145-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-11
145:217
§ 145-12. Request for hearing when permit not granted.
Any person whose application for a permit under this ordinance has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Sanitary Officer within 30 days after receipt of the request.
B. The location of water supplies, water supply piping, existing sewage
disposal facilities, buildings or dwellings and adjacent lot lines.
C. Plans of the proposed sewage disposal facilities to be constructed,
altered or extended.
§ 145-11 PALMER CODE § 145-12
145:218
ARTICLE IV
Inspections
§ 145-13. Sanitary Officer: authority and duty.
The Sanitary Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder.
§ 145-14. Right of entry.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the
Sanitary Officer free access to the property at reasonable times for the
purpose of making such inspections as are necessary to determine
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and regulations
promulgated hereunder.
§ 145-13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-14
145:219

ARTICLE V
Penalties; Conflicts; Validity; Effective Date
§ 145-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
§ 145-16. Conflict of ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any Zoning, Building, Fire, Safety or Health Ordinance
or Code of this Township of Palmer existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.37 In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Township of
Palmer existing on the effective date of this ordinance which establishes a
lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people, the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to prevail, and
such other ordinance or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the
extent that they may be found in conflict with this ordinance.
§ 145-17. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance, which
shall remain in full force and effect; and, to this end, the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 145-18. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective on and after the first day of August 1966.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or any
provision of any regulation adopted by the political subdivision
pursuant to authority granted by this ordinance shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than six hundred
dollars ($100) or by imprisonment for not more than five days; and each
day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code; Ch. 81, Fire Prevention; Ch. 147, Sewer Use; Ch.
165, Subdivision and Land Development; and Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 145-15 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 145-18
145:221
Chapter 147
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Sewer Board — See Ch. 11.
Municipal Sewer Authority — See Ch. 17.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Individual sewer systems — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
§ 145-18 PALMER CODE § 145-18
145:222
ARTICLE I
Rents and Fees
[Adopted 12-3-1970 by Ord. No. 108]
§ 147-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Palmer Township Municipal Sewer Authority, as presently or
hereafter constituted, which has been created by the Board of Supervisors
and to which has been referred by the Board of Supervisors the specific
project of sewers.
BOARD — The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of the
Township.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the purposes of carrying on a trade,
business or profession or for social, amusement, religious, educational,
charitable or public use, and which contains plumbing for kitchen, toilet
or washing facilities. Hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses and
institutional dormitories shall be included in this definition.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning,
laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article.
LOW-PRESSURE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Portions of the sewer
system consisting of small-diameter pressure mains used for collecting
wastewater discharges from grinder pumps, the grinder pumps and
appurtenant valves, piping, pump controls and tanks.[Added 2-10-1981 by
Ord. No. 185]
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment now or
hereafter served by the sewer system other than a residential
establishment, and includes reference to the terms "commercial
establishment" and "industrial establishment."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, house
trailer, structure, dwelling or enclosure intended to be occupied as separate
living quarters by a family or other group of persons living together, or by
persons living alone, but excluding institutional dormitories.
SEWER SYSTEM — All temporary and permanent facilities at any time, and
from time to time, owned by the Authority, or leased to and operated by
the Township and used or usable for, or in connection with, the collection of
wastewaters.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
§ 147-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-1
145:223
WASTEWATERS — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from residential and nonresidential establishments, as well as any solid,
liquid or gaseous substance or waterborne wastes or form of energy
rejected or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business
process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural
resources which are suitable for discharge to the sewer system.
WATER SUPPLIER — The Easton Suburban Water Authority, its successors
and assigns.
§ 147-2. Imposition of tapping or connection fees.
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of each property connecting to
the sewer system a tapping or connection fee of $150 for each connection
made to such sewer system, which shall be due and payable upon
application for permit to make connection to the sewer system.
§ 147-3. Sewer rentals.
A. Owners of property connected to and from which wastewaters are
discharged to the sewer system and to which is furnished unmetered
water service by the Township shall pay sewer rentals equal to $35 per
quarter for each residential and/or nonresidential establishment.
B. Metered water service.
(1) Owners of property connected to and from which wastewaters are
discharged to the sewer system, and to which is furnished metered
water service by the water supplier, with exceptions set forth
hereinafter in Subsections C, D, E and F, shall pay sewer rentals
based upon volumes of water consumed at a rate to be set be the
Supervisors of Palmer Township, by resolution, which resolution
shall set a minimum rate. [Amended 2-7-1972 by Ord. No. 118;
5-1-1972 by Ord. No. 123]
(2) The volume of water to be used for billing sewer rentals under this
Subsection B shall include aggregate quarterly volumes of water
purchased from the water supplier, and, in addition, aggregate
quarterly volumes of water obtained from all other sources (wells,
streams, etc.) as determined from meters installed and maintained
by the Township, or from meters installed and maintained by the
property owner as may be required and approved by the Township,
or from estimates or measurements made by the Township.
C. In case of owners of property from which wastewaters are discharged
to the sewer system that originate in more than one residential and/or
nonresidential establishment located on the property, sewer rentals
shall be computed for each individual establishment as set forth in
Subsections A and B, and, as may be applicable, Subsections D, E and F.
Individual sewer rentals thus computed for each establishment shall be
totaled for purposes of determining the aggregate sewer-rental billing
to the property owner.
§ 147-1 PALMER CODE § 147-3
145:224
D. Exclusion from the sewer system of noncontaminated wastewaters may
be required of a nonresidential establishment by the Township, or such
exclusion may be optional with the property owner if not required by
the Township. When such wastewaters are excluded, or when any other
portion of the water consumption of a nonresidential establishment
does not reach the sewer system, sewer rentals shall be based upon
total water consumption, less water excluded, as set forth under
Subsection B, and, as may be applicable, as set forth in Subsection F.
Water excluded shall be determined from meters installed and
maintained by the property owner as required and approved by the
Township, from estimates made by the Township, or the property owner
may elect to measure wastewater volumes actually discharged to the
sewer system, as hereinafter provided. The provisions of this section
shall also apply to residential establishments, except that the option of
the property owner to exclude water shall be subject to approval by the
Township. The Township may by resolution provide for administrative
procedure, fees and forms for implementing this subsection.
[Amended 5-1-1972 by Ord. No. 123]
E. The Township may require the owner of an industrial establishment, or
the owner of an industrial establishment may elect to install, pay for
and maintain a meter approved by the Township for measuring
quarterly wastewater volumes discharged to the sewer system, in
which case sewer rentals shall be based upon the actual volume of
wastewaters so metered and the rates set forth under Subsection B,
and, as may be applicable, as set forth in Subsection F.
F. Owners of industrial establishments desiring to discharge industrial
wastes to the sewer system shall obtain a permit from the Township to
do so upon notification by the Township. Applications for a permit to
discharge industrial wastes shall be accompanied by all information
requested by the Township for the determination of industrial waste
volumes, characteristics and constituents. The cost of obtaining such
information shall be borne by the industrial establishment. The owner
of an industrial establishment discharging wastewaters to the sewer
system having an average five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
greater than 200 parts per million (ppm) and a suspended solids
content greater than 250 ppm shall pay a strength-of-waste surcharge,
in addition to applicable volume charges, equal to five one-hundredths
of one percent (5/100 of 1%) for each ppm by which the BOD exceeds
200 ppm plus five one-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%) for each
ppm by which the suspended solids exceed 250 ppm. Surcharges shall
be applicable to all sewer-rental billings made under Subsections B, C,
D and E hereof. The strength of wastewaters to be used for establishing
the amount of surcharge shall be determined at least once annually
either by suitable sampling and analysis of the wastewaters for three
consecutive days during a period of normal plant operation, or from
estimates made by the Township, or from known relationships of
products produced to strengths established. In establishing wastewater
strengths for surcharge purposes by analysis, analyses shall be made in
§ 147-3 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-3
145:225
§ 147-4. Maintenance of manholes by industrial establishments.
[Amended 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 124]
When directed by the Township, industrial, commercial and other
establishments shall install, pay for and maintain a manhole and other
accordance with procedures outlined in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water" published
by the American Public Health Association, Inc. Owners of industrial
establishments discharging wastewater to the sewer system shall
furnish the Township upon request all information deemed essential
by the Township for the determination of applicable sewer-rental
surcharges for excess-strength wastes. The cost of obtaining such
information shall be borne by the owner of the industrial establishment.
G. Sewer rental charges set forth herein shall be effective with respect to
sewer service rendered on July 1, 1971, and thereafter. All sewer rental
billings shall be rendered in arrears of the service provided for the
calendar quarterly service periods on January 1, April 1, July 1 and
October 1 of each year a property or establishment is connected to the
sewer system. Bills shall be rendered quarterly for the quarterly period
ending on the last days of March, June, September and December of
each year beginning October 1, 1971. Sewer rental billings under
Subsection B and/or Subsections C, D, E and F, as may be applicable,
shall be based upon water consumed and metered during the quarterly
water service period immediately preceding the quarter in which the
sewer billing is rendered. Owners of property connected to the sewer
system for only a portion of a calendar quarter shall pay a pro rata
sewer rental based upon the time period actually connected during the
quarter. All sewer rental billings shall be due and payable upon
presentation, and, if not paid within 30 days from the date of billing, a
penalty of 5% shall be charged quarterly upon all such unpaid billings.
In addition, if the filing of a municipal lien becomes necessary by reason
of such nonpayment, interest to the maximum extent allowable by law,
reasonable counsel fees and all costs associated therewith shall be
added to the penalty provisions set forth in the preceding sentence.
[Amended 2-7-1972 by Ord. No. 118; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
254]
H. Owners of properties connected to and from which wastewaters are
discharged to a low-pressure sanitary sewer system shall pay, in
addition to the sewer rental charge set forth herein, an additional
monthly fee as set by the Board of Supervisors, payable quarterly. Such
additional fee is to pay the cost of eventual replacement of the grinder
pump units by the Township. The additional monthly fee collected from
property owners connected to a low-pressure sanitary sewer system
shall be deposited into an interest-bearing escrow account to be used
exclusively for the purpose of defraying the costs to the Township for
the replacement of grinder-pump units. [Added 2-10-1981 by Ord.
No. 185]
§ 147-3 PALMER CODE § 147-4
145:226
devices, as may be approved by the Township, to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of wastewaters discharged to the sewer system.
The Township or its duly authorized representative shall, at all reasonable
times, be permitted to enter upon any and all properties for the purpose
of inspecting, observing, measuring and sampling wastewaters discharged
to the sewer system. The owner of any such establishment that desires to
connect to the sewer system, or which is connected to the sewer system and
plans to change its operations so as to materially alter the characteristics
and volumes of wastewaters discharged thereto, shall notify the Township,
in writing, at least 10 days before making such connection or changing its
operations.
§ 147-5. Exclusion of harmful wastes.
A. The Township reserves the right to refuse permission to connect to the
sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system, or
to compel pretreatment of wastewaters in order to prevent discharges
deemed harmful or to have a deleterious effect upon any portion of the
sewer system. No wastewaters shall be discharged to the sewer system:
(1) Having a temperature higher than 140º F.
(2) Containing more than 100 ppm by weight of fats, oils and grease.
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other
inflammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases.
(4) Containing any garbage that has not been ground by householdtype
or other suitable garbage grinders.
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any
other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions
or other interferences with proper operation of the sewer system.
(6) Having a pH lower than six point five (6.5) or higher than nine point
zero (9.0) or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel
of the sewer system.
(7) Containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage-treatment process, or
constitute hazards to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in
waters which receive treated effluent from the City of Easton
sewage-treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include, but not by way
of limitation, wastes containing cyanide, chromium, copper and
nickel ions.
(8) Containing noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of
creating a public nuisance.
§ 147-4 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-5
145:227
§ 147-6. Equalizing waste flows.
The Township reserves the right to require industrial establishments having
large variations in rates of wastewater discharge to install suitable
regulating devices for equalizing waste flows to the sewer system.
§ 147-7. Access to meters.
The Township representatives shall have access at all reasonable times to
water and any other meters used for establishing or determining water
consumption, water excluded from the sewer system and/or wastewaters
discharged to the sewer system.
§ 147-8. Penalties, delinquent sewer rentals and liens.
(9) Containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling.
(10) Containing water or substances having characteristics, etc., which
violate provisions of the agreements for sewage transportation and
treatment services with the Forks Township Municipal Sewer
Authority, the Borough of Wilson, the Borough of West Easton, the
City of Easton and the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority.
[Amended 2-10-1981 by Ord. No. 185]
(11) Containing surface drainage or stormwater.
B. Suitable pretreatment facilities shall be installed to meet these
requirements.
A. Quarterly charges for sewer service shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 147-3 if not paid within 90 days after the date of billing. If
not paid within 30 days after becoming due, the Township shall have the
right to cut off sewer service or request that water service be
discontinued, or do both, to the delinquent premises and not restore the
same until all delinquent bills against the delinquent premises,
establishment or owner and the cost of cutting off and restoring service
shall have been paid. [Amended 2-7-1972 by Ord. No. 118]
B. The owners of all properties connected to the sewer system must give
the Township their correct address. Failure to receive bills shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor will it permit an extension of
the period in which bills are payable at face. All property owners shall
be primarily responsible for sewer bills; however, the Township may bill
individual tenants of any property owner at the owner's request. Such
billing shall in no way reduce the primary responsibility of the property
owner for nonpayment and the property owner shall be responsible for
notifying the Township of all changes in occupancy, tenants or address.
[Amended 2-7-1972 by Ord. No. 118]
§ 147-5 PALMER CODE § 147-8
145:228
§ 147-9. Segregation of sewer revenues. [Amended 2-10-1981 by
Ord. No. 185]
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the sewer rentals
and charges and all penalties and interests thereon, as herein provided
for, except revenue from grinder pump surcharges as set forth in § 147-3H
herein which shall be kept in a separate interest-bearing escrow account,
shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all other funds of
the Township and shall be used only for the purpose of defraying the
expenses of the Township in the operation, maintenance, repair, alteration,
inspection, depreciation or other expense in relation to such sewer system
and for such payments as the Township may be required to make under any
lease or agreement it may enter into in connection with, or the financing of,
the sewer system, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
§ 147-10. Rules and regulations.
The Township reserves the right to, and may, from time to time, adopt,
revise, amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary
and proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules
and regulations shall be and become a part of this ordinance.
§ 147-11. When effective.
This ordinance and any rules and regulations hereunder shall become
effective immediately and shall be applicable to all properties as soon as
they, respectively, become connected with and have the right to use the
sewer system. The Township reserves the right to make such changes from
time to time as, in its opinion, may be desirable or beneficial, and to amend
this ordinance or to change the rates or charges in such manner and at such
times as, in its opinion, may be advisable.
C. Payments made, as evidenced by the United States Post Office mark, on
or previous to the end of the period during which the bills are payable
at face, will be deemed to be a payment within such period.
D. All sewer rentals, together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or
before the end of one year from the date of each bill shall be deemed to
be delinquent. All delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon
shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the office of the Prothonotary of Northampton
County and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
filing and collection of such liens.
E. See also § 1-16F and G, regarding imposition of attorneys' fees. [Added
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-402]
§ 147-8 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-12
145:229
§ 147-12. Severability.
If any of the provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this
ordinance or the application of any provision hereof shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remainder of this
ordinance, it being the intention of the Township that such remainder shall
be and remain in full force and effect.
§ 147-13. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent herewith be
and the same are hereby repealed absolutely.
§ 147-12 PALMER CODE § 147-13
145:230
ARTICLE II
Regulations
[Adopted 12-3-1970 by Ord. No. 107]
§ 147-14. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Palmer Township Municipal Sewer Authority as originally
organized and as presently or hereafter constituted, which has been created
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township and to which has been referred
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township the specific project of sewers.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each single dwelling unit, household unit, flat
or apartment unit, store, shop, office, business or industrial unit or family
unit contained within any structure erected within 150 feet from the sewer
system and intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or
use by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage
is, or may be, discharged.
PERSON — An individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Improved property
which adjoins, abuts on, or is adjacent to, the sewer system.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to the public sanitary-sewer collection system,
together with appurtenant facilities about to be acquired and constructed
for a portion of the Township, and any improvements, additions or
extensions that hereafter may be made thereto by the authority or the
Township or to any part or parts of any or all thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania,
or the duly constituted and elected municipal officials thereof.
§ 147-15. Connections to sewer system.
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property in
the Township accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 60 days
after written notice to such persons from the Township.
B. All persons owning any property in the Township accessible to the
sewer system upon which an occupied building is, hereafter erected
shall, at the time of the erection of such building, and at their own
expense, connect the same with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property in the
Township which hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system
§ 147-14 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-15
145:231
§ 147-16. Prohibited receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property in the Township
accessible to the sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain, or
cause to be erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle on such premises for receiving
sanitary sewage after expiration of the particular period specified in
§ 147-15 hereof, or otherwise at any time to erect, construct, use or
maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the discharge of
sanitary sewage into the gutters of the Township, the storm sewers of the
Township or upon public or private property or otherwise, except into the
sewer system.
§ 147-17. Declaration of nuisance.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system,
or otherwise erects, constructs, uses or maintains any pipe, conduit, drain
or other facility for the discharge of sanitary sewage in violation of this
ordinance, shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Township is
hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 147-18. Conformance with connection regulations required.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system, except in compliance
with the ordinances and resolutions, as well as such rules and regulations
as may from time to time be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by
the Township or the authority.
§ 147-19. Notice of compliance.
After the expiration of the particular periods specified in § 147-15 of this
ordinance, if any owner of an occupied building on property in the Township
accessible to the sewer system shall have failed to connect such property
with the sewer system, as required by said § 147-15, the Township shall
cause to be served on the owner of such property so failing to connect
to said sewer system, and also upon the occupants of the building in
question, a copy of this ordinance and a written or printed notice requiring
such connection to be made, and such notice shall further state that its
requirements shall be complied with within 30 days from the date thereof.
shall, at their own expense, connect such building with the sewer
system within 60 days after notice to do so from the Township.
D. Where more than one occupied building, as hereinbefore defined, is
contained in a separate structure, a single common connection to the
lateral of the sewer system may be permitted for accommodating all
units contained in such structure, except that separate connections
shall be required for each semidetached or row-type house or structure.
§ 147-15 PALMER CODE § 147-20
145:232
§ 147-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-6-1973 by Ord. No.
142]
Any person owning any occupied building who shall fail to connect the same
to the sewer system after receipt of notice as set forth above shall be liable
to a penalty as follows:
§ 147-21. Severability.
If any provision, sentence, clause, section or part of this ordinance, or
the application of any provision hereof, is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this ordinance. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Township Supervisors that this ordinance would have
been enacted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision,
sentence, clause, section or part not been included herein.
§ 147-22. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent herewith be
and the same are hereby repealed absolutely.
A. Such person shall, at the expiration of the thirty-day notice and for the
next quarterly sewer billing period and for each such period thereafter,
pay a penalty to the Township and for the use of the Township set by the
volume of water used by such occupied building, times the applicable
sewer rate, or minimum which would be charged such person if the
occupied building was connected to the sewer.
B. In the event that for some reason the penalty set forth in Subsection A
above cannot be determined or charged, the penalty shall be set at $90
for each ninety-day period during which such violation continues, and
each such ninety-day period shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In default of payment for reasons other than indigence, any person may
be sentenced to Northampton County Prison for a period not exceeding
30 days for each offense.
D. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Township from constructing
the sewer and house lateral and connection itself and proceeding to
charge the costs of same against the property served as a municipal
claim.
E. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis. [Added 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 227]
F. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 147-20 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-23
145:233
§ 147-23. When effective.
This ordinance is hereby declared to be urgent for the preservation of the
peace, health and comfort of the people of the Township and shall take
effect and be in force immediately after its passage.
§ 147-24. Notice; enforcement. [Added 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 142]
All notices required herein may be given by certified mail or personal
service. Enforcement may be by summary proceedings.
§ 147-25. Security deposit for lateral construction; unpaid fees and
costs. [Added 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 142]
In addition to the usual tapping fee of $150, the Township may require
additional moneys as a security deposit to cover the cost of lateral
construction. Any unpaid tapping fee or lateral costs shall be the
responsibility of both the property owner and contractor building the home
or sewer line, and such fee or costs may be filed as a municipal claim
against the property served.
§ 147-26. Minimum lot size for on-site disposal system. [Added
7-9-1974 by Ord. No. 154]
The minimum lot size upon which an on-site disposal system may be
constructed shall be one acre (43,560 square feet), and lots of lesser size
may be built upon only when served by both public sewers and water,
or when served by public water with service by planned public sewers
approved by the Board of Supervisors expected within not more than 10
years, in which case it shall be the joint and several obligation of the lot
owner and developer to connect accessible buildings on such lot to the
public sewer when the same is constructed. In securing this connection
obligation, the Township may require bonds and appropriate agreements of
record. In cases of hardship the Board of Supervisors may exempt existing
residential lots of record from the one-acre lot size requirement of this
section if such lots are inaccessible to public sewers, served by public water
and at least 12,000 square feet in size.
§ 147-27. Line and plant expansions. [Added 7-9-1974 by Ord. No.
154]
Whenever, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, proposed development
or subdivision of land will or may necessitate or lead or substantially
contribute to alteration or enlargement of existing or planned sewage
pumping stations, transportation lines or treatment plants, the Township
Board of Supervisors may require that the person or persons developing
or subdividing pay for or secure payment for so much of the cost of such
enlargement or alteration as shall reasonably be attributable to the
development or subdivision. In securing payment of this obligation, the
Township may require bonds and appropriate agreements of record.
§ 147-23 PALMER CODE § 147-27
145:234
ARTICLE III
Sewer User Charge System
[Adopted 11-20-1989 by Ord. No. 23238]
§ 147-28. Rules and regulations. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No.
233]
The Rules and Regulations of the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority,39
adopted on December 19, 1988, and as amended on July 17, 1989, shall
henceforth control and be applicable to all sewerage originating within the
geographical boundaries of the Township of Palmer, provided that the last
sentence of Section 13 thereof relating to indemnification of the Easton
Area Joint Sewer Authority is expressly disapproved and not adopted herein.
§ 147-29. Violations and penalties.
§ 147-30. Repealer.
All previous rules, regulations, motions, resolutions or ordinances or parts
thereof inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
A. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Authority or
Palmer Township or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any
provision of this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder shall, upon summary conviction, be fined not less
than $500. nor more than $1,000. for each offense. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition, the Township may recover reasonable
attorneys fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person found to have
violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder.
B. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification of any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance
or permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under these rules
under this ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $500. nor more than $1,000. In addition, the Township may
recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees
and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the
person found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Sewer User Charge System,
adopted 2-13-1984 as Ord. No. 203.
39.Editor's Note: The Rules and Regulations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 147-28 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-31
145:235
§ 147-31. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word or section of this ordinance is invalidated
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words and sections shall not be affected thereby and shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 147-32. Enforcement. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 233]
The Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority shall have full authority and
responsibility for permitting, monitoring, inspecting, sampling, establishing
industrial waste surcharges and promptly advising the Township of all
violations of any sewer rules, regulations, ordinances and statutes
applicable to the Township.
§ 147-31 PALMER CODE § 147-32
145:236
ARTICLE IV
Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority Wastewater Color Limitations
and Rules
[Adopted 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-333]
§ 147-33. Wastewater color limitations.
The wastewater color limitations rules, regulations, requirements, and
procedures of the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority, approved by the
Authority by Resolution No. 2002-819-F, on August 19, 2002, be, and they
are, hereby approved and adopted. The full text of said wastewater color
limitations policy, rules, regulations, requirements, and procedures is
attached hereto as Exhibit A.40
§ 147-34. Compliance recognition program.
The compliance recognition program reduced monitoring rules, regulations,
requirements, and procedures of the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority,
approved by the Authority by Resolution No. 2002-819-E, on August 19,
2002, be, and is, hereby approved and adopted. The full text of said
compliance recognition program reduced monitoring policy is attached
hereto as Exhibit B.41
40.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, and any subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the
Township offices.
41.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, and any subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 147-33 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-34
145:237

ARTICLE V
Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority Pretreatment Program Policy and
Enforcement Response Plan
[Adopted 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 273A]
§ 147-35. Adoption of Pretreatment Program Policy.
The Pretreatment Program Policy, Rules and Regulations of the Easton
Area Joint Sewer Authority, approved by the Authority by Resolution No.
1998-10-18-A, on October 19, 1998, be, and they are, hereby approved
and adopted. The full text of said Pretreatment Program Policy, Rules and
Regulations is attached hereto as Exhibit A.42
§ 147-36. Adoption of enforcement response plan.
The enforcement response plan of the Easton Area Joint Sewer Authority,
approved by the Authority by Resolution No. 1998-10-18-B, on October
19, 1998, be, and is, hereby approved and adopted. The full text of said
enforcement response plan is attached hereto as Exhibit B.43
42.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, and any subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the
Township offices.
43.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, and any subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 147-35 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 147-36
145:239
Chapter 153
SMOKING
§ 147-36 PALMER CODE § 147-36
153:240
ARTICLE I
School Buildings and School Buses
[Adopted 11-27-1979 by Ord. No. 180]
§ 153-1. Purpose; title.
§ 153-2. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 265]
The following conduct is hereby prohibited by this ordinance:
§ 153-3. Enforcement. [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
This ordinance shall be enforced as follows:
§ 153-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare and to assist in the prevention of fires in all
school buildings and school buses in Palmer Township.
B. The short title of this ordinance shall be the "Palmer Township Schools
No Smoking Ordinance."
A. The use of tobacco in any form is prohibited on any property
administered by the Easton Area School District in Palmer Township
designated with a "no smoking" sign. The use of tobacco set forth
herein includes the smoking or carrying by any person of a cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other smoking device and/or the use of smokeless
tobacco in any form.
B. The obstruction, removal, defacing, mutilation or destruction of posted
"no smoking" signs.
C. The throwing or depositing of any lighted or smoldering smoking
substance on any property administered by the Easton Area School
District in Palmer Township designated with "no smoking" signs.
A. The Palmer Township Fire Commissioner is empowered and authorized
to order the owner or occupant to post "no smoking" signs in each
building, structure, room, place and school bus in which smoking shall
be prohibited. The content, lettering, size, color and location of the
required "no smoking" sign shall be subject to the approval of the
Palmer Township Fire Commissioner.
B. Any violation of this ordinance may be prosecuted by the Palmer
Township Fire Commissioner or any Palmer Township code officer or by
any Palmer Township police officer or by any principal or assistant
principal of the Easton Area School District.
A. Any person violating any section of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be subject to the payment of a fine, upon
§ 153-1 SMOKING § 153-4
153:241
§ 153-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a determination shall not affect
the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof.
§ 153-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after adoption.
conviction before a District Justice, in an amount which shall not be less
than $25 nor more than $600, as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 153-4 PALMER CODE § 153-6
153:242
Chapter 156
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Refuse disposal — See Ch. 138.
§ 153-6 SMOKING § 153-6
153:243

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 6-16-1986 by Ord. No. 216-A]
§ 156-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Palmer Township Municipal Solid
Waste Ordinance."
§ 156-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being authorized as a collector.
COLLECTOR — A person authorized to collect, transport and dispose of
municipal waste from Palmer Township.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the waste or a constituent of the waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storing, preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries and the like.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of municipal
waste by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
§ 156-1 SMOKING § 156-2
153:245
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility (Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act 97, Section 103). 44
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of a
"person."
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include
but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators,
recycling facilities and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — The collective term applying to all garbage, rubbish, ashes,
leaves and grass trimmings from residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional premises.
REGULAR — At least three or more times per month.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97, Section 103). 45
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste, and it shall
be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one
year constitutes disposal.
TOWNSHIP — Palmer Township, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste
generated or present at any time from the Township of Palmer.
§ 156-3. Storage of waste.
A. Storage of municipal waste. It shall be the duty of every owner of
property and every person occupying any dwelling unit, premises or
place of business within the Township where municipal waste is
produced an is accumulated, by his own expense and cost, to provide
and keep at all times a sufficient number of containers to hold all
municipal waste which may accumulate during the intervals between
collection of such municipal waste by an authorized collector.
B. Storage on residential properties.
(1) Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of each
residential property and/or the occupants of residential properties
shall be placed in containers for collection by an authorized
collector. The containers shall be durable, watertight and made of
44.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
45.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 156-2 PALMER CODE § 156-3
153:246
§ 156-4. Authorization of collector.
metal or plastic. Securely tied plastic bags may be used in cases
where such bags can be used without being torn open by domestic
or wild animals. The size of each such container shall not exceed
a thirty-gallon capacity. However, large containers designed for
use with special hoisting equipment may be used if the collector
serving the residence uses collection vehicles with such special
hoisting equipment.
(2) Location of containers. Each municipal waste container shall be
located so as to be accessible to the collector at ground level and at
a point of the curbline of the street or within no less than 10 feet of
the public street or alley right-of-way from which collection from a
vehicle can be made. Failure to place containers at such locations
may result in discontinuance of service.
(3) Time of collection. All such containers shall be placed for collection
by the person no earlier than 24 hours before the regular collection
day.
C. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial properties.
(1) Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be done in the same
type of containers as are required for residential properties, except
that containers larger than 30 gallons may be used, where needed,
to accommodate larger volumes of municipal wastes. Such
containers shall be kept in good working order.
(2) Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be located on such
premises at a place which shall not interfere with public or private
sidewalks, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and
exits of public or private buildings.
A. Unauthorized collection and transportation. It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than such persons as are duly, authorized by the
Township, to collect and transport solid waste of any nature as a regular
hauling business within or from the Township. Authorization shall be
given only as set forth below.
B. Licensing procedure. Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of
municipal waste for persons other than oneself may be given only by
the Township through the issuance of a license. Any collector licensed
by the Township for the collection of municipal waste shall provide
curbside recycling services to its residential customers (if any) within
the Township. All licensed collectors shall report recycling information
to the Township as required by the Recycling Ordinance (Ordinance No.
236, as amended46). Failure to comply with the requirements of the
Recycling Ordinance (above) or its regulations may result in the
§ 156-3 SMOKING § 156-4
153:247
§ 156-5. Transportation of waste.
Any person transporting solid waste within the Township shall prevent or
remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the transport of
such solid waste.
§ 156-6. Disposal of waste.
§ 156-7. Exclusions.
revocation or disapproval of a license or a license application. Decisions
in this regard shall be made at the sole discretion of the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation made by the
Township Recycling Coordinator. All applications for licensing shall be
approved in accordance with the existing conditions as set forth in this
chapter. [Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 25147]
A. Designated facilities. All municipal waste produced, collected and
transported from within the jurisdictional limits of the Township shall
be, to the extent permitted by law, disposed of at disposal facilities
designated by the Township and in accordance with any currently
effective solid waste management plan of the Township. In the absence
of such designated facilities and/or such currently effective solid waste
management plan, municipal waste from the Township must be
disposed of at a state-permitted facility.
B. Notice to collectors. If the Township designates the disposal facilities as
provided for above, all authorized collectors and other interested
persons shall be informed of the location and other information
pertaining to the designated disposal facilities to be used for the
disposal of municipal waste collected, transported, removed and
disposed.
A. Individuals not engaged in collection. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to prohibit any residential property occupant not regularly
engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from hauling his
own municipal waste, on an irregular and unscheduled basis, to a statepermitted
disposal facility.
B. Farming activities. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer
from carrying out the normal activities of his farming operation,
including composting and the spreading of manure or other farmproduced
agricultural waste, subject to the existing rules and
regulations of the Township.
46.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance also provided as follows: "It shall be the duty, as
prescribed by this ordinance, of each commercial, professional, industrial and residential
landlord to notify each of their tenants of the provisions of this ordinance, of the abovereferenced
Ordinance No. 216-A, of the above-referenced Ordinance No. 236 and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended, and to oversee and assure compliance
by such tenants with such provisions."
§ 156-4 PALMER CODE § 156-7
153:248
§ 156-8. Violations and penalties; abatement.
C. Hazardous and residual waste. The provisions of this ordinance do not
apply to anything but the storage, collection, transportation and
disposal of municipal waste and do not apply, therefore, to hazardous or
residual waste as defined by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act.48
A. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be prosecuted in the manner provided by law before a District
Magistrate and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be subject to a
fine not in excess of the sum of $300, together with the cost of
prosecution. Each day on which such a violation or violations occurs
and each day on which such violation or violations continue to occur
shall be considered as a separate offense for each and every day of such
violation. Upon failure of the person so convicted to pay the fines so
imposed, confinement shall be ordered in the Northampton County
Prison for a period of not less than three days nor not in excess of 30
days. All portions of the fines to the Township for violation of the Palmer
Township Solid Waste Management Ordinance or the Palmer Township
Recycling Ordinance49 and/or regulations applicable shall be paid to the
Township of Palmer and shall be earmarked to be spent on the
administrative costs of the Palmer Township Solid Waste Management
Program and the Palmer Township Recycling Program. [Amended
4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 25150]
B. Additional remedies. In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township
may require the owner or occupant of a property to remove any
accumulation of solid waste, and, should said person fail to remove such
solid waste after 10 days following written notice, the Township may
cause the solid waste to be collected and disposed of, with the costs for
such actions to be charged to the owner or occupant of the property in a
manner provided by law.
C. Abatement. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Township from instituting appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent the violation of this ordinance, to restrain,
correct or abate any such violation or to prevent any act, conduct,
business or activity constituting a violation.
D. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance also provided as follows: "It shall be the duty, as
prescribed by this ordinance, of each commercial, professional, industrial and residential
landlord to notify each of their tenants of the provisions of this ordinance, of the abovereferenced
Ordinance No. 216-A, of the above-referenced Ordinance No. 236 and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended, and to oversee and assure compliance
by such tenants with such provisions."
§ 156-7 SMOKING § 156-9
153:249
§ 156-9. Severability; additional regulations; effective date.
A. Severability. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
B. Effect of additional regulations. This ordinance shall be subject to all
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including the rules and regulations as set forth by the
Department of Environmental Resources, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective on the 16th day of
June 1986.
§ 156-9 PALMER CODE § 156-9
153:250
ARTICLE II
Recycling Program
[Adopted 8-20-1990 by Ord. No. 236]
§ 156-10. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Palmer Township Recycling
Ordinance."
§ 156-11. Intent; purpose.
A. According to the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act ("Act 101"), 53 P.S. § 4000.101 through 4000.1904 (1988)
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), waste reduction and recycling are
preferable to the processing or disposal of municipal waste. A recycling
program is required to promote and protect the public interest so that
reusable materials may be returned to the economic mainstream in the
form of raw materials or products rather than being disposed of or
processed at the commonwealth's overburdened municipal waste
processing or disposal facilities. The Act requires certain
municipalities, including Palmer Township, to:
(1) Establish and implement a source-separation and collection
program for recyclable materials.
(2) Reach the goal that at least 25% of all municipal waste be recycled
by and continuing after January 1, 1997.
(3) Ensure that two years after the effective date (of the Act) no
municipal waste landfill may accept for disposal and no resource
recovery facility may accept for processing, other than composting,
truck loads composed primarily of leaf waste.
(4) Establish and maintain a comprehensive and sustained public
information and education program concerning recycling program
features and requirements. The intent of such a program is to
notify persons of recycling requirements and encourage, through a
variety of means, participation in such activities.
B. Palmer Township is aware that the success of a recycling program is
dependent upon the availability and use of standardized collection
practices and uniform containers to facilitate separation and pick up.
C. Palmer Township is aware that the recycling program will be more
effective if the household containers provided are protected from theft
and destruction, and if persons are forbidden to scavenge recyclables
from containers once they are placed curbside.
D. Palmer Township is aware that the recycling program will be impaired
without the cooperation and participation of those persons required to
recycle by the Act and this ordinance and the regulations.
§ 156-10 SMOKING § 156-12
153:251
§ 156-12. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person authorized by the municipality to
collect, transport, and dispose of municipal waste or recyclable materials.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are organized by public or private
establishments or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs,
bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 50 or
more individuals per day.
CURBSIDE — A location readily accessible to the authorized collector
adjacent to the curb or to the roadway if there is no curb.
DROPOFF CENTER — An area where an individual may deposit recyclable
materials and where recyclables may be sorted.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers, and nursing
homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residue, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — Any properties having more than one dwelling
unit per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — A public facility operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office
waste, and other materials including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from an operation or residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments or from community activities
and which are not classified as residual waste or hazardous waste. The term
does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSONS — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. This includes non-person legal entities.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf wastes, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS — Those containers provided by the
municipality (Palmer Township) and other properly labeled containers used
for the sole purpose of storing recyclables.
§ 156-12 PALMER CODE § 156-12
153:252
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person responsible to coordinate the
activities of the recycling program of Palmer Township and from time to
time recommend revisions of the Recycling Regulations to the Board of
Supervisors.
RECYCLING REGULATIONS — Those regulations issued and from time to
time revised by resolution of the Board of Supervisors setting forth specific
requirements for the collection program for recyclables. 51
SOURCE SEPARATION — To separate recyclable materials from the
municipal waste stream at the point of waste generation.
§ 156-13. Establishment of collection program for recyclables.
A. Persons living in homes, multifamily housing, rental housing properties
with three or less units, and other residential establishments not
otherwise classified by this ordinance, must separate at least three
materials from their municipal waste and recycle such materials. The
materials to be recycled shall be chosen by the municipality from the
following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic
cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper and plastic.
These persons shall also be required to separate leaf waste until
collection unless these persons have provided for the composting or
other use of leaf waste. The municipality shall specify the materials to
be recycled in the regulations for this ordinance. The frequency of
collection of these recyclables and leaf waste will be specified by the
regulations to this ordinance.52 These materials must be separated by
persons until they are collected, taken to a dropoff center or otherwise
distributed for recycling.
B. Responsibilities of owner or landlord.
(1) The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units shall establish a
collection system for recyclable materials at each property. The
materials to be recycled shall be chosen by the municipality from
the following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper and plastic. The collection system must include suitable
containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible
locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection
system. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of
multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units, must
also make arrangements for the materials to be collected or
transported for recycling. Owners, landlords and agents of owners
or landlords who comply with the Act shall not be liable for the
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
51.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter.
§ 156-12 SMOKING § 156-13
153:253
§ 156-14. Preparation of recyclables.
All recyclables for curbside collection or for any public dropoff center
shall be prepared for curbside collection or delivery to a dropoff center in
accordance with the specifications established in the Recycling Regulations.
§ 156-15. Recycling regulations.
(2) The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units must also arrange
for the separation of leaf waste generated on the grounds of the
multifamily rental housing properties for composting or other use.
(3) The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units shall annually
provide written documentation to the municipality's recycling
coordinator of the total number of tons recycled.
C. Commercial, municipal or institutional establishments.
(1) Persons shall recycle high-grade office paper, aluminum,
corrugated paper and may recycle other additional materials,
generated at commercial, municipal or institutional establishments
and from community activities. Leaf waste shall be separated and
used in any way permitted by law. Leaf waste is not to be included
with municipal waste. Commercial and institutional establishments
shall provide annually written documentation to the municipality's
recycling coordinator of the total number of tons recycled.
(2) Schools, colleges, universities and other educational institutions
shall comply with the Palmer Township guidelines for institutional
establishments. The following exceptions shall apply.
(a) Those establishments subject to the provisions of § 4000.1509
of Act 10153 shall be exempt from the provisions of the Palmer
Recycling Ordinance after they have received DER guidelines
distributed by the State Board of Education.
(b) Educational institutions which are Commonwealth Agencies
shall follow the guidelines for Commonwealth Agencies as
specified in Act 101.
D. An information and education program shall be established in
conjunction with the recycling efforts.
E. The specific regulations governing the above described program are
provided in a document separate from this ordinance. Subsequent
changes in the program regulations may be made by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors utilizing the appropriate procedures and should
not necessitate a change in the ordinance itself. (See § 156-15.)
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1509.
§ 156-13 PALMER CODE § 156-15
153:254
§ 156-16. Ownership of recyclables.
§ 156-17. Ownership of recycling containers.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township is hereby authorized to
issue and from time to time revise regulations which set forth specific
requirements for the recycling program. These rules and regulations
shall be formally known as the "Recycling Regulations" and shall be
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.54
See § 156-13E of this ordinance.
B. In addition, the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township shall appoint
a recycling coordinator who is authorized to coordinate the recycling
program. The recycling coordinator may also from time to time issue
and revise recycling regulations which set forth specific requirements
for the curbside collection of leaves and use of the Township
composting site for leaf waste. These specific requirements must be
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors before they become
part of the regulations. The recycling coordinator shall also receive the
reports showing the quantity of materials recycled as required by this
ordinance and the regulations.
A. Once the recyclable items are placed at the curbside by persons living
in homes, multifamily housing, rental housing properties with three or
less units, and other residential establishments not otherwise classified
by this ordinance, they shall become the property of the person
authorized by the municipality to collect the recyclable materials. The
regulations to this ordinance shall specify who is authorized to collect
the recyclables under the current program.
B. Nothing in this section or this ordinance or the regulations shall impair
the ownership of recyclables by the persons who generate them nor
interfere with any other existing recycling program, unless and until
the recyclables are placed at the curbside or similar location as
specified in the regulations to this ordinance. However, the original
owner of the recyclables may retrieve all or part of the recyclables from
his/her own curbside before the time of collection. There shall be no
penalty applied under the enforcement provisions of this ordinance if
he/she chooses to do so.
C. Nothing in this ordinance or the regulations shall prohibit any person
from donating or selling any recyclable. Nothing in this ordinance or
the regulations shall prevent any person from utilizing leaf waste for
compost, mulch, or other agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural,
gardening, landscaping purposes or other purpose not otherwise
prohibited by law.
A. The recycling containers provided by the municipality to the residents
of the Township shall remain the property of the municipality.
54.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter.
§ 156-15 SMOKING § 156-17
153:255
§ 156-18. Method of collection.
§ 156-19. Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or to cause or to assist in
the violation of any provision of this ordinance or any provision of the
regulations. No person shall scavenge, remove, take, scatter or disturb
recyclable materials which have been placed by persons at the curbside for
their collection by authorized collectors pursuant to the curbside collection
program, or deposited at a dropoff center.
§ 156-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-19-1993 by Ord. No.
25155]
B. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person(s) to damage,
misappropriate or use for any purpose other than for recycling, the
containers owned by the municipality. Each such action in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
A. The municipality shall advertise to persons required to recycle by the
Act and this ordinance any requirements in regard to the frequency and
manner of collection required under the current program. The
municipality may also require authorized collectors to advertise
information concerning their collection program to applicable persons
in Palmer Township. The authorized collectors are required to report
information concerning the materials collected to the Township
recycling coordinator. The authorized collectors shall be notified by the
Township authorities of the information which they are required to
report. The municipality may require persons to arrange for the
collection of their own recyclables with authorized collectors. The
regulations shall outline the current requirements.
B. If the municipality so chooses, it may enter into an agreement(s) with
public or private agencies or firms to authorize them to operate or
administer all or any part of the recycling program mandated by this
ordinance.
A. Any person violating a provision of this ordinance or a regulation
pursuant thereto shall be given a written notice thereof from the
Township Secretary, upon recommendation by the Township Recycling
Coordinator. The said notice shall give the person a period of 30 days to
comply with the provisions of the said ordinance or the said regulations.
If, after receipt of such notice, the person continues to violate the
55.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance also provided as follows: "It shall be the duty, as
prescribed by this ordinance, of each commercial, professional, industrial and residential
landlord to notify each of their tenants of the provisions of this ordinance, of the abovereferenced
Ordinance No. 216-A, of the above-referenced Ordinance No. 236 and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended, and to oversee and assure compliance
by such tenants with such provisions."
§ 156-17 PALMER CODE § 156-20
153:256
§ 156-21. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance
or its regulations be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason,
the remainder of this ordinance and its regulations shall not be affected
thereby.
§ 156-22. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 156-23. Noninterference with existing contracts.
Nothing contained in this ordinance or its regulations shall be construed to
interfere with or in any way modify the provisions of any existing contracts
which are in force in the Township on the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 156-24. Effective date.
This ordinance and its regulations shall go into effect on September 24,
1990. No enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance or its regulations
shall be made until two months from the effective date of September 24,
1990.
provisions of the said ordinance or the said regulations, the said person
shall be prosecuted as provided below.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
prosecuted in the manner provided by law before a District Magistrate
and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be subject to a fine not in
excess of the sum of $300 together with the cost of prosecution. Each
day on which such a violation or violations occurs and each day on
which such violation or violations continue to occur shall be considered
as a separate offense for each and every day of such violation. Upon
failure of the person so convicted to pay the fines so imposed,
confinement shall be ordered in the Northampton County Prison for a
period of not less than three days nor not in excess of 30 days. All
portions of the fines to the Township for violation of the Palmer
Township Solid Waste Management Ordinance or the Palmer Township
Recycling Ordinance and/or regulations applicable shall be paid to the
Township of Palmer and shall be earmarked to be spent on the
administrative costs of the Palmer Township Solid Waste Management
Program and the Palmer Township Recycling Program.
§ 156-20 SMOKING § 156-24
153:257

ARTICLE III
Recycling Regulations
[Adopted 4-21-1997 by Ord. No. 268]
§ 156-25. Short title.
These regulations, to be effective on May 2, 1997, shall be known as the
"Palmer Township Recycling Regulations," and may be referred to as the
"recycling regulations."
§ 156-26. Definitions.56
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BROWN PAPER — Single or multilayered brown kraft bags/paper free of
objectionable liners and content; grocery bags free of food contaminates,
waxes, laminates or other non-bag waste such as plastic handles, stitching,
hot melt glues, twine, metal, or plastic liners.
GREY PAPER — Boxboard/chipboard of single-walled construction. Boxes
include cereal boxes, cracker boxes, pizza boxes, egg cartons, etc.
THIRD CLASS MAIL — Paper products only, including envelopes (with
or without windows), flyers, brochures, advertisements, folders, and
postcards.
YARD WASTE — Materials such as brush, branches, and tree and shrub
trimmings.
§ 156-27. Homes, multifamily dwellings with three or fewer units,
etc.
This section establishes a recycling program for persons living in homes,
multifamily housing, rental housing properties with three or fewer units,
and other residential establishments in Palmer Township not otherwise
classified by the Palmer Township Recycling Ordinance.57
A. Outline of program.
(1) Act 101, The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988, required that municipalities select at least
three items from a list that includes the following: clear glass,
colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade
office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper and plastic. Ordinance
236, The Palmer Township Recycling Ordinance, specifies that the
Township will name the items to be recycled in the regulations
accompanying the ordinance. The items to be recycled must
include at least three items from the list in Section 4A of Ordinance
23658 and may include additional items.
56.Editor's Note: See also § 156-12.
57.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 156-25 SMOKING § 156-27
153:259
(2) In order to procure the greatest benefit for the community, Palmer
has established a comprehensive recycling list. The recycling
program benefits the community by conserving landfill space and
conserving our natural resources through the reutilization of
recyclable materials. Therefore, as of the effective date of these
regulations, the persons listed under this section shall be required
to exclude the following items from their municipal waste:
aluminum, clear glass, colored glass, corrugated cardboard, thirdclass
mail, magazines, telephone books, brown paper, grey paper,
high-grade office and mixed paper, bimetallic cans consisting of
aluminum and steel, plastics Nos. 1 through 7 excluding styrofoam,
newsprint, leaf waste, and other yard waste. Yard waste and leaf
waste shall be collected by the hauling contractor hired by Palmer
Township and/or Palmer Township employees periodically
throughout the year and be deposited at Palmer Township's
composting facility. Yard waste and leaf waste shall otherwise only
be deposited at Palmer Township's compost facility. [Amended
10-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-414]
(3) The persons listed under this section must separate leaf waste from
other municipal waste. However, the Township recognizes that
residents may occasionally include a small amount of leaf waste in
with their municipal waste. Palmer Township may provide leaf
collection at limited times as authorized by the Board of
Supervisors. At other times, persons shall provide their own
transportation of such waste to the composting site provided by
Palmer Township or use the leaf waste for any purpose not
prohibited by law. Specific instructions in regard to the collection
times and preparation of leaf waste for collection shall be set by the
recycling coordinator.
(4) Each licensed hauler collecting municipal solid waste in Palmer
Township shall furnish to the Township each quarter of the
calendar year (unless otherwise instructed by the recycling
coordinator) a recycling report specifying the materials recycled
and the weight of the materials recycled which were collected in
Palmer Township. Haulers shall furnish weight receipts for all
residential recyclables collected with the quarterly recycling report
to the recycling coordinator. The recycling coordinator may require
other information, as needed, to enhance recycling performance
and to comply with DEP requests for information as well as
information needed by the Township to obtain grants for the
recycling program.
(5) Persons participating in a curbside collection program under this
section shall recycle in conjunction with the program of a licensed
hauler of Palmer Township. Once the recyclables are placed
curbside, they become the property of the licensed hauler
58.Editor's Note: See § 156-13A.
§ 156-27 PALMER CODE § 156-27
153:260
authorized to collect them. (See Section 7 of Ordinance 236, the
Palmer Township Recycling Ordinance59). Any licensed hauler
authorized to collect municipal waste for residents in Palmer
Township shall provide a curbside recycling service to its
residential customers within the Township. The licensed hauler
shall collect and market for recycling the recyclable materials
it collects from its residential curbside recycling service to
residential customers. Each licensed hauler shall market for
recycling all of the materials required to be recycled under this
section of these regulations. The licensed hauler shall not pick and
choose among the materials to be recycled. No licensed hauler
shall landfill any recyclables unless they are received at the point
of collection in a contaminated condition which makes them
unmarketable. Failure to comply with any of these provisions is a
separate violation of the regulations and may be construed as a
separate violation for each time the violation occurs or every day
upon which the violation occurs.
(6) Each licensed hauler in the municipality collecting recyclables
curbside shall give notice to his customers of the collection dates,
the recyclables to be collected, and the method of curbside
preparation.
B. Preparation of recyclables.
(1) The recyclables which are to be collected by a licensed Palmer
Township hauler shall be placed in a container marked in such a
way that it will he plainly evident that the contents of the container
are recyclable materials. All recyclables shall be commingled in the
recycling container with the exception of newsprint, grey paper,
brown paper, magazines, telephone books, third-class mail, and
corrugated paper, grass clippings, brush and leaf waste.
(a) Newsprint should be bundled with twine and tied in neat, flat
bundles not exceeding 12 inches in height.
(b) Bundle and bag third-class mail separately. Label the brown
bag "third-class mail."
(c) Magazines may be bundled with twine in neat, flat bundles not
exceeding 12 inches in height or they may be bundled and
placed in brown bags.
(d) Grey paper should be flattened and bundled with twine.
(e) Brown paper and corrugated boxes should be flattened and
bundled together. The bundles must not be larger than three
feet by three feet.
59.Editor's Note: See § 156-17.
§ 156-27 SMOKING § 156-27
153:261
§ 156-28. Multifamily rental housing with four or more units.
This section establishes a recycling program by the owner, landlord or agent
of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing properties in Palmer
Township with four or more units.
(f) Grass clippings should be placed unbagged in a trash
receptacle.
(g) Brush shall be tied in bundles not to exceed three feet in length
or 50 pounds in weight.
(2) The Township recycling coordinator shall establish policies for the
preparation of leaf waste and its collection in Palmer Township.
(3) Paper items should not be placed outside unprotected if rain is
expected at the time of collection. In the event of rain, any paper
should be bundled and stored in a covered container labeled in
such a way that it will be plainly evident that the contents of the
container are recyclable materials.
(4) The recyclable materials are to be prepared as follows: rinse out all
bottles, jars, pie tins, and cans and remove all lids and caps. The
glass to be collected shall include clear, green and brown. (Broken
glass, lightbulbs, window glass, plate glass, drinking glass, heatresistant
ovenwear, crystal, ceramic, porcelain, laminated glass,
wired glass, blue glass, milk glass, automobile glass, and mirrors
are not be considered recyclable glass for the purposes of the
Palmer Township recycling program.)
C. Frequency of collection. The frequency of collection for these materials,
other than grass clippings, leaf waste, and other yard waste, by licensed
haulers of Palmer Township shall not be less than biweekly, except that
one- or two-day differences are allowed to accommodate holidays.
Grass clippings, leaf waste and other yard waste will be collected as
needed on a seasonal basis.
D. When recyclables are placed out for collection. The recyclables shall be
placed out at the curbside no earlier than 24 hours before the
scheduled time of collection.
E. Containers. Palmer Township shall make available one recycling
container to each household participating in the program (i.e., persons
living in homes, multifamily housing, rental housing properties with
three or less units, and other residential establishments not otherwise
classified). Additional containers may be available from the Township.
In the event that containers are not available from the Township, the
persons participating in this program shall supply their own containers.
Such containers shall have no greater than a twenty-gallon capacity.
The container shall be labeled plainly in lettering no smaller than two
inches indicating that the container contains recyclable materials. If
available, labels will be supplied from the municipality.
§ 156-27 PALMER CODE § 156-28
153:262
§ 156-29. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments;
community activities.
This section establishes a recycling program by commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments and at community activities in Palmer
Township.
A. Outline of program.
(1) Act 101 requires that at least three items he chosen from the
following list to be recycled at multifamily rental housing
properties: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper and plastics (Nos. 1 and 2). This list is restated in Section 4B
of Ordinance 236, the Palmer Township Recycling Ordinance.60 The
Township hereby requires that all of these items (except for highgrade
office paper) be recycled. In addition, brown paper, grey
paper, telephone books, magazines, third-class mail, grass
clippings, leaf waste and other yard waste are hereby added to the
items required to be recycled. The owner, landlord or agent of an
owner or landlord shall set into operation a collection system for
these recyclables.The program for recycling grass clippings, leaf
waste and other yard waste may be conducted on a seasonal basis.
[For an example of a program conducted on a seasonal basis, see
§ 156-27A(2) of this ordinance.]
(2) The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing properties with four or more units shall provide for the
Palmer Township recycling coordinator an accounting showing the
number of pounds or tons of recyclable materials marketed during
the calendar year. The weight for each recyclable item shall be kept
separately. Weight receipts should be collected and saved as
documentation for the tonnage recycled. The owner, landlord, or
agent of an owner or landlord shall be required to report this
information concerning the recyclables listed in § 156-28A(1) above
to the Township recycling coordinator.
(3) If the owner, landlord or agent of any owner or landlord hires a
hauler licensed in Palmer Township to perform all or part of his
recycling, the licensed hauler shall report information concerning
the material recycled to the Palmer Township recycling
coordinator, in the same manner as required for residential
collection. The owner, landlord, or agent for an owner or landlord
shall report information concerning material recycled other than
that collected by a licensed Palmer Township hauler.
B. Frequency of collection. The owner, landlord, or agent for an owner or
landlord shall provide for recyclables, other than seasonal items, to be
collected and transported to recycling facilities at least once per month.
60.Editor's Note: See § 156-13B.
§ 156-28 SMOKING § 156-29
153:263
A. Outline of program.
(1) Act 101 of 1988 requires that commercial businesses must
separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, cardboard and leaf
waste for recycling and other materials deemed appropriate by the
municipality.
(2) The following items shall be recycled by commercial, municipal, or
institutional establishments and at community activities organized
by these institutions: high-grade office paper, aluminum, clear
glass, colored glass, cardboard, third-class mail, magazines,
telephone books, brown paper, grey paper, bimetallic cans
consisting of aluminum and steel, plastics Nos. 1 and 2, newspaper,
grass clippings, leaf waste and other yard waste. The program for
recycling grass clippings, leaf waste and other yard waste may be
conducted on a seasonal basis. [For an example of a program
conducted on a seasonal basis, see § 156-27A(2).]
(3) If the recycling for a commercial, municipal, or institutional
establishment is done by a hauler licensed in the Township, the
business shall report to the Palmer Township Recycling
Coordinator the name of the hauler doing the recycling. In the
event that the commercial, municipal or institutional establishment
arranges to have an individual or a company other than a licensed
hauler of Palmer Township transport its recyclables to a processing
center or a market, the commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment shall report this information to the recycling
coordinator in a quarterly recycling report on a calendar-year
basis. A summary annual report may also be required at the end of
the year. The establishment should also maintain weight receipts to
document the weight of recyclables marketed or instruct its hauler
to maintain these records. The recycling coordinator may request
copies of these receipts in order to document that the recyclable
materials have been marketed.
B. Frequency of collection. Commercial, institutional, and municipal
establishments shall provide for recyclables, other than seasonal items,
to be collected and transported to recycling facilities at least once a
month.
C. Reporting. Any hauler licensed by Palmer Township that collects
recyclables at commercial, municipal or institutional establishments
located in Palmer Township shall be required to furnish a quarterly
recycling report to the Township unless otherwise instructed by the
Palmer Township recycling coordinator. The report shall contain the
approximate weights and types of recyclables collected at these
facilities. The licensed hauler shall provide weight receipts to the
recycling coordinator on a quarterly basis to document the materials
recycled. If for any reason the licensed hauler fails to report for his
recycling customer, it shall become the responsibility of the
commercial, municipal or institutional establishment to provide a
§ 156-29 PALMER CODE § 156-29
153:264
§ 156-30. Community activities. [Amended 10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-414]
All individuals and entities conducting community activities held within
Palmer Township's boundaries, regardless of who is hosting the activity,
shall recycle their recyclable materials in accordance with Palmer
Township's Recycling Program.
§ 156-31. Education program.
Palmer Township shall establish a comprehensive public information and
education program concerning the recycling program. At least once every
six months, Palmer Township shall advertise the requirements of the
ordinance to all persons occupying residential, commercial, institutional
and municipal premises within the Township. Such advertisement may be
completed through any combination of mailings, public postings,
community information programs and newspaper articles or
advertisements.
§ 156-32. Reporting general requirements.
report concerning the weight and types of the materials recycled to the
Palmer Township recycling coordinator for its recycling performance
which occurs after such notification is given.
A. Haulers licensed to collect municipal waste in Palmer Township shall
provide information as requested by the Palmer Township recycling
coordinator which is reasonably designed to show that the recyclables
collected in Palmer Township have been marketed for reuse rather than
landfilled with municipal waste. The Township shall receive a recycling
report quarterly from each licensed hauler signed by an authorized
representative to certify its accuracy unless the recycling coordinator
directs the hauler to furnish the reports less frequently. Weight receipts
are to be furnished with the quarterly report, along with a summary
showing the weight on each receipt and a total weight of all the
materials recycled during the quarter. The recycling coordinator may
also require a summary annual report on a calendar-year basis.
B. Upon the request of the recycling coordinator, any hauler licensed in
the Township shall disclose to the Township the names and addresses of
its recycling customers within Palmer Township.
C. The hauler shall provide written documentation of the tonnage of
recyclables marketed to the recycling coordinator in sufficient detail so
that the Township may meet the standards of the Department of
Environmental Protection for its annual reports required of the
Township as well as for completing DEP recycling grant applications.
§ 156-29 SMOKING § 156-33
153:265
§ 156-33. Recycling requirements - general.
All licensed haulers in Palmer Township shall market the recyclable
materials which they have collected from residences, multifamily housing,
rental housing properties with four or more units and at commercial,
municipal or institutional establishments within the Township. No licensed
hauler shall landfill any of these recyclable materials unless they are
received at the point of collection in a contaminated condition which makes
them unmarketable.
§ 156-33 PALMER CODE § 156-33
153:266
Chapter 158
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 156-33 SMOKING § 156-33
153:267

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 158-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study Area Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance," for portions of the Bushkill Creek Watershed and
Fry's Run Study Area located in Palmer Township.
§ 158-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 158-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Bushkill Creek Watershed and the Fry's Run Study
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, changes the
natural hydrologic patterns, destroys aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream communities,
reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to
the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the people of
the municipality and all of the people of the commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
F. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
§ 158-1 SMOKING § 158-3
153:269
Area by minimizing the damages and maximizing the benefits described in
§ 158-2 of this ordinance by provisions designed to:
§ 158-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority
of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as
amended, the Stormwater Management Act, and by its authority to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 158-5. Applicability.
A. Manage stormwater runoff at its source by regulating activities which
cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and ground
water quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in
the municipality and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management BMPs that are implemented in the municipality.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning, design and management.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which requires a
minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
A. This ordinance shall only apply to those areas of the municipality which
are located within the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study
Area as delineated on an official map available for inspection at the
municipal office. A map of the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run
Study Area at a reduced scale are included in Appendix A61 for general
reference.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-3 PALMER CODE § 158-5
153:270
§ 158-6. Exemptions.
B. This ordinance shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the activities listed in this
section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction involved with any of these activities are
specifically not required by this ordinance, but shall continue to be
regulated under existing laws and ordinances.
C. This ordinance contains only those stormwater runoff control criteria
and standards which are necessary or desirable from a total watershed
perspective. Additional stormwater management design criteria (i.e.,
inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system details, etc.) which represent
sound engineering practice may be regulated either by separate
stormwater ordinance provisions or as part of the general
responsibilities of the Municipal Engineer.
D. The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
governed by this ordinance:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(7) Regulated earth disturbance activities.
A. Impervious cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined
in § 158-5D(5) and (6), which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover is exempt from the drainage plan
preparation provisions of this ordinance. The date of the municipal
ordinance adoption of the original Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's
Run Study Area Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinances (1992
and 1999, respectively) shall be the starting point from which to
consider tracts as parent tracts in which future subdivisions and
respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively
considered. For development taking place in stages, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with these
criteria. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
additional indoor living spaces, decks, patios, garages, driveways,
storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for
the proposed regulated activity. Any additional areas proposed initially
to be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed to
§ 158-5 SMOKING § 158-6
153:271
§ 158-7. Inconsistent ordinances and laws.
In the event that any other ordinance of the municipality is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this ordinance, this ordinance shall prevail. In the
event that any valid state or federal law or regulation is inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this ordinance, such provisions of this ordinance
shall be preempted by the applicable state or federal law.
be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the exemption criteria.
Any existing gravel, crushed stone or hard-packed soil areas on a site
shall be considered as pervious cover for the purpose of exemption
evaluation. All of the impervious cover added incrementally to a site
above the initial 10,000 square feet shall be subject to the provisions
of this ordinance. If a site has previously received an exemption and is
proposing additional development such that the total impervious cover
on the site exceeds 10,000 square feet, the total impervious cover
on the site proposed since the original ordinance date must meet the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
municipality prior to the effective date of this ordinance is exempt from
the drainage plan preparation provisions of this ordinance, except as
cited in § 158-6C, provided that the approved drainage plan included
design of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently
proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions
in effect at the time of approval and the approval has not lapsed under
the Municipalities Planning Code.62 If significant revisions are made to
the drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of this ordinance, preparation of a new drainage plan,
subject to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be required. Significant
revisions would include a change in control methods or techniques,
relocation or redesign of control measures or changes necessary
because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the original
drainage plan.
C. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, property, and
state water quality requirements. These measures include adequate
and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the site.
These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
D. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§ 158-5D(5) and (6).
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 158-6 PALMER CODE § 158-8
153:272
§ 158-8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.
§ 158-9. Compliance with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance do not relieve the applicant
of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 158-10. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this ordinance, including exemption and
waiver provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration
or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such
actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality
of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
§ 158-8 SMOKING § 158-10
153:273

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 158-10.1. Word usage; terms defined.
A. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and natural processes,
at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and
quality impacts from the regulated activities listed in § 158-5, to meet
state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this ordinance.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN — Documentation, included as part of a drainage plan, detailing
the proposed BMPs, how they will be operated and maintained and who
will be responsible.
BIORETENTION — Densely vegetated, depressed features that store
stormwater and filter it through vegetation, mulch, planting soil, etc.
Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated, or discharged.
Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of
species diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
BUFFER —
STREAMSIDE BUFFER — A zone of variable width located along
a stream that is vegetated and is designed to filter pollutants from
runoff.
(1)
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER — A required isolation
distance from a special geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed
to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to stormwater
management activities.
(2)
§ 158-10.1 SMOKING § 158-10.1
153:275
BUSHKILL CREEK WATERSHED — The area comprised of the area
tributary to the Bushkill Creek. See map in Appendix A.63
CAPTURE/REUSE — Stormwater management techniques such as
cisterns and rain barrels which direct runoff into storage devices,
surface or subsurface, for later reuse, such as for irrigation of gardens
and other planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no
pollutant discharge results, water quality performance is superior to
other noninfiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate
minerals, such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a sedimentary
rock composed of more than 50% by weight of carbonate minerals that
underlies soil or other unconsolidated, superficial material.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the
land surface. It is characterized by internal drainage, varying
magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Northampton County Conservation
District.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS — Constructed wetlands are similar to
wet ponds (See below.) and consist of a basin which provides for
necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water
level, planted with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed
wetlands must have adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs
as well as soils and water table which allow for maintenance of a
permanent pool of water). In these cases, the permanent pool must be
designed carefully, usually with shallow edge benches, so that water
levels are appropriate to support carefully selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(formerly the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources).
DESIGN STORM — The depth and time distribution of precipitation
from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fiftyyear
storm) and duration (e.g. twenty-four hour), and used in
computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
63.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-10.1 PALMER CODE § 158-10.1
153:276
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE — See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
quantity and quality management controls to be used for a given
development site, including a BMP operations and maintenance plan,
the contents of which are established in § 158-21.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES — Those uses actually attained in the water body on
or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the
water quality standards (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1).
FILL — Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste
materials.
FILTER STRIP — See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff event.
FRY'S RUN STUDY AREA — The area comprised of the Delaware
River Subbasin (including the Fry's Run Watershed) and Lehigh River
Subbasin 5. See map in Appendix A.64
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST — A written request for a waiver
alleging that the provisions of this ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. Waivers from the water quality provisions
of this ordinance shall not be granted.
HOT SPOT LAND USES — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic substances
than typically found in stormwater runoff. These land uses are listed in
§ 158-14P.
64.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-10.1 SMOKING § 158-10.1
153:277
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Soils are classified into four
HSGs (A, B, C and D) to indicate the minimum infiltration rates, which
are obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the US Department of
Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the
area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report
that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district
offices. Soils become less permeable as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER) — A surface which
prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE — A practice designed to direct runoff into
the ground, e.g., French drain, seepage pit, seepage trench or
bioretention area.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by
depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills,
underground drainage and caves. Karst is usually formed on carbonate
rocks, such as limestones or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a
group of two or more buildings or the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features; a subdivision of land;
development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.65
LOADING RATE — The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as
modified by the weighting factors in § 158-17B, compared to the base
area of the infiltration system.
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting
runoff from the site to the mainstem.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A development approach that
promotes practices that will minimize postdevelopment runoff rates and
volumes thereby minimizing needs for artificial conveyance and storage
facilities. Site design practices include preserving natural drainage
features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic
connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression
storage.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other
conveyance in a Dual Release Rate or Conditional No Detention I
Subarea used as a reach in the Fry's Run Study Area hydrologic model.
In Conditional No Detention II Subareas, the main channel is the
Delaware River or Lehigh River, as applicable. In the Bushkill Creek
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 158-10.1 PALMER CODE § 158-10.1
153:278
Watershed, any stream or segment or other conveyance used as a reach
in the Bushkill Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MARYLAND STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — A stormwater design
manual written by the Maryland Department of the Environment and
the Center for Watershed Protection. As of January 2004, the Manual
can be obtained through the following Web site: www.mde.state.md.us.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES
(MD/MM) — A site design practice in which careful limits are placed
on site clearance prior to development, allowing for maximum retention
of existing vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum disturbance
and compaction of existing soil mantle and minimum site application
of chemicals postdevelopment. Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance
setback criteria from buildings as well as related site improvements
such as walkways, driveways, roadways, and any other improvements.
These criteria may vary by community context as well as by type of
development being proposed. Additionally, MD/MM also shall include
provisions (e.g., deed restrictions, conservation easements) to protect
these areas from future disturbance and from application of fertilizers,
pesticides, and herbicides.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
NO-HARM OPTION — The option of using a less restrictive runoff
quantity control if it can be shown that adequate and safe runoff
conveyance exists and that the less restrictive control would not
adversely affect health, safety and property.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture (formerly the Soil Conservation Service).
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A structural mechanism designed to
remove free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from stormwater
runoff.
OUTFALL — Point source, as described in 40 CFR § 122.2, at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
OWNER — One with an interest in and often dominion over a property.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff
at a given location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling adapted to the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's
§ 158-10.1 SMOKING § 158-10.1
153:279
Run Study Area for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been calibrated to
reflect actual flow values by adjusting key model input parameters.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association
or corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or other for- or
not-for-profit statutory entity or other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION — The determination of the
depth to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high water table and the
soil permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site through the
use of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas,
the location of special geologic features must also be determined along
with the associated buffer distance to the possible infiltration area. See
Appendix G.66
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service
connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals
daily at least 60 days out of the year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109.)
QUALIFIED GEO-PROFESSIONAL — A licensed professional geologist
or a licensed professional engineer who has a background or expertise
in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using
a standardized runoff coefficient (rational "c"), acreage of tract and
rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time
necessary for the entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method
formula is stated as follows:
Q = ciA
Where
Q = The calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second;
c = The dimensionless runoff coefficient (See Appendix C.67);
i = The rainfall intensity in inches per hour; and
A = The area of the tract in acres.
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for watershed runoff modeling purposes to connect the subareas
and transport flows downstream.
66.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Township offices.
67.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-10.1 PALMER CODE § 158-10.1
153:280
RECHARGE VOLUME (REv) — The portion of the water quality volume
(WQv) used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development
sites (as further defined in § 158-14J).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed
by this ordinance as specified in § 158-5.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Earth disturbance
activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one acre or more
with a point source discharge to surface waters or to the municipality's
storm sewer system or earth disturbance activity of five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part of or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate
of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases throughout
the watershed.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twentyfive-
year return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to
recur on the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting roadbanks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS — A chamber which
provides storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect sediment,
debris and associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic clean out.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the
ground surface.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve number."
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features,
including, but not limited to, closed depressions, existing sinkholes,
fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles, which
§ 158-10.1 SMOKING § 158-10.1
153:281
may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater
management BMPs are being considered.
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM — A program that
identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning up
potential spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary
equipment available to appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa.
Code Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A method of routing or moving
an inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention structure. The
method solves the mass conservation equation to determine an outflow
hydrograph as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present
a hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented
in Appendix B68 of this ordinance or identified by the municipality or
Municipal Engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters, or
drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as "cold water fishes" or "potable water supply," which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated
earth disturbance activities must be designed to protect and
maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality
necessary to protect those uses in all streams and to protect and
maintain water quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
68.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-10.1 PALMER CODE § 158-10.1
153:282
STORMWATER FILTERS — Any number of structural mechanisms, such
as multichamber catch basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters, and so
forth, which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and remove
pollutants prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic
maintenance and clean out.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by Northampton County for the Bushkill
Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study Area as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
"Stormwater Management Act."
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff. See also "vegetated swale."
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL AND
INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002 — The report
written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration
in carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The
report is available at the LVPC offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS — Racks, screens or other similar
devices installed in a storm drainage system to capture coarse
pollutants (trash, leaves, etc.).
VEGETATED BUFFERS — Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater
as sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated earthen area, possibly
coupled with the use of level spreading devices. Vegetated buffers
should be situated on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities
and extended residence times.
§ 158-10.1 SMOKING § 158-10.1
153:283
VEGETATED ROOFS — Vegetated systems installed on roofs that
generally consist of a waterproof layer, a root-barrier, drainage layer
(optional), growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated roofs store
and eventually evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall;
overflows may be provided for larger storms.
VEGETATED SWALES —
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS — Any number of commercially available
devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture sediment, oil,
grease, metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual rainfall volume (as further defined in
§ 158-14B).
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS — A basin that provides for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool of water. To be
successful, wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology (both
runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water) and must be able to support
a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid creation of mosquito and
other health and nuisance problems.
Vegetated earthen channels designed to convey stormwater. These
swales are not considered to be water quality BMPs.
(1)
Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen channels designed to
treat stormwater while slowly infiltrating, evapotranspirating, and
conveying it. Swales should be gently sloping with low flow
velocities to prevent erosion. Check dams may be added to enhance
performance.
(2)
§ 158-10.1 PALMER CODE § 158-10.1
153:284
ARTICLE III
Requirements and Standards
§ 158-11. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the municipality shall be subject to the
stormwater management requirements of this ordinance.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded flow in
natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities, recharge facilities, water quality facilities, pipe systems or
open channels consistent with this ordinance.
C. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the
affected property owner(s).
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this ordinance. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property {including flows
from detention basin emergency spillways), the developer's engineer
must document and certify that there are adequate downstream
conveyance facilities to safely transport the concentrated discharge to
the point of predevelopment flow concentration, to the stream reach, or
otherwise prove that no harm will result from the concentrated
discharge. It is recommended that the developer obtain written
permission from the downstream property owner(s) for the proposed
discharges. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be
subject to any applicable release rate criteria in the general direction of
existing discharge whether they are proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas.
E. Where a site is traversed by watercourses, swales, ditches, etc, there
shall be provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourses swales, ditches, etc. The width of any
easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of
postdevelopment storm runoff based either on calculations completed
by the developer in conformance with § 158-17 for the one-hundredyear
return period runoff, Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run
Study Area Act 167 one-hundred-year return period flows, or Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) one-hundred-year frequency
flood flows and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the
design water surface level. In all areas, the flow rate to be utilized shall
be the maximum rate identified through either developer's calculations,
the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study Area Act 167 or (if
applicable) FEMA study flows. In areas where the Act 167 flow rate is
the maximum rate, this rate shall be used unless a reduced flow rate is
determined by the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission to take
precedence over the Act 167 flow rate. This maximum flow rate shall be
§ 158-11 SMOKING § 158-11
153:285
used to determine the one-hundred-year flood elevations with HEC-RAS
modeling (or other modeling method as approved by the municipality).
The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of
fill or structures, and any alterations which may adversely affect the
flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement in the
postdevelopment condition. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement
to ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses
for which the one-hundred-year floodplain is formally defined by FEMA
studies are also subject to the applicable municipal floodplain
regulations. All proposed buildings within or adjacent to a floodplain
as defined by FEMA studies shall have first floor elevations at least
1.5 feet above the one-hundred-year frequency flood elevation. The
one-hundred-year flood elevation to be used to establish the first floor
elevation shall be determined using the maximum flow rate between
FEMA study flows, Act 167 flows or calculated flows as identified above.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning Equation.
G. Postconstruction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and
maintained to meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law69 and
implementing regulations, including the established practices in 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 and the specifications of this ordinance, so as to
prevent accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of
discharge.
H. No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities
shall commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
I. Techniques described in Appendix F (Low-Impact Development) of this
ordinance70 are encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this ordinance and the State Water Quality
Requirements.
J. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and
geology permit, consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and,
where appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration
Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D.71
K. Within areas containing soils identified by the Soil Conservation Service
to be sinkhole prone, permanent detention basins shall be lined with a
material, which after installation, attains a maximum permeability rate
as determined by the Township Geotechnical Engineer.
69.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Township offices.
71.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-11 PALMER CODE § 158-11
153:286
§ 158-12. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
§ 158-13. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
L. Groundwater recharge methods shall not be permitted without written
approval of the Township Geotechnical Engineer.
M. Parking lot ponding depth shall not exceed two inches in areas of
anticipated pedestrian traffic, and six inches in all other areas for a
twenty-five-year frequency storm.
A. All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by the DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.14.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by the DEP under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by the DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by the DEP under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities. Written approval by
the DEP or a delegated County Conservation District shall satisfy this
requirement.
B. An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for
any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. A DEP NPDES stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities
under Pa. Code Chapter 92.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
§ 158-11 SMOKING § 158-13
153:287
§ 158-14. Postconstruction water quality criteria.
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with this ordinance. DEP has determined that
this ordinance meets state water quality requirements. Therefore, any
approvals under this ordinance would satisfy the postconstruction
stormwater management requirements associated with an NPDES
permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities.
B. The water quality volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The
WQv shall be calculated two ways.
(1) First, WQv shall be calculated using the following formula:
Where
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet.
c = Rational Method postdevelopment runoff coefficient
for the two-year storm.
P = 1.25 inches.
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity.
(2) Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff
volume from predevelopment to postdevelopment for the two-year
return period storm. The effect of closed depressions on the site
shall be considered in this calculation. The larger of these two
calculated volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and
treated, except that in no case shall the WQv be required to exceed
1.25 inches of runoff over the site area. This standard does not limit
the volume of infiltration an applicant may propose for purposes of
water quantity/peak rate control.
C. The WQv shall be calculated for each postdevelopment drainage
direction on a site for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious
cover and no proposed disturbance during development may be
excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
D. If an applicant is proposing to use a wet pond, constructed wetland or
other BMP that ponds water on the land surface and may receive direct
§ 158-13 PALMER CODE § 158-14
153:288
sunlight, the discharge from that BMP must be treated by infiltration,
a vegetated buffer, filter strip, bioretention, vegetated swale or other
BMP that provides a thermal benefit to protect the high quality waters
of the Bushkill Creek and/or Fry's Run Study Area from thermal
impacts.
E. The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be
treated with infiltration or two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in
§ 158-14O except for minor areas on the periphery of the site that
cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
F. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant
demonstrates that the fill is stable and otherwise meets the infiltration
BMP standards of this ordinance.
G. The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site
from published sources. Any apparent boundaries between carbonate
and noncarbonate bedrock shall be verified through more detailed site
evaluations by a qualified geo-professional.
H. For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed, the applicant
shall conduct a preliminary site investigation on the portion of the site
that is judged to be the best candidate hydrogeologically for possible
infiltration, including gathering data from published sources, a field
inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a minimum of two
percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G.72 This investigation will
determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal high water table, soil
permeability and location of special geologic features, if applicable. The
location(s) of special geologic features shall be verified by a qualified
geo-professional. Additionally, the Township Geotechnical Engineer or
its authorized representative shall be notified of the soil testing in order
to observe any such testing as determined to be necessary.
I. Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMPs must meet the
following criteria:
(1) Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal
to two feet.
(2) Depth to seasonal high water table below the invert of the BMP
greater than or equal to three feet; except for infiltration of
residential roof runoff where the seasonal high water table must be
below the invert of the BMP(If the depth to bedrock is between two
and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal high water table is
not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the depth to
seasonal high water table is required.)
(3) Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G) greater than or equal to 0.5 inch
per hour and less than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-14 SMOKING § 158-14
153:289
(4) Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Fifteen feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations, except for residential development where that
required setback is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet upgradient
from building foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields, except for residential
development where the required setback is 25 feet from septic
system drainfields and should be located downstream from the
septic system where practical.
(d) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(e) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from existing or potential
future wells, foundations and drainfields on neighboring
properties will be met, except for one- and two-family
residential dwellings where the required setback is 40 feet
unless documentation is provided to show that all setbacks
from existing or potential future wells, foundations and
drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
J. For entirely noncarbonate sites, the recharge volume (REv) shall be
infiltrated unless the applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to
infiltrate the REv for reasons of seasonal high water table, permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances; or except as provided in
§ 158-14U.
(1) The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25) * (I)/12
Where
REv = Recharge volume in acre-feet.
I = Impervious area in acres.
(2) The preliminary site investigation described in § 158-14H is
required and shall continue on different areas of the site until a
potentially suitable infiltration location is found or the entire site is
determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For infiltration areas
that appear to be feasible based on the preliminary site
investigation, the additional site investigation and testing as
outlined in Appendix G73 shall be completed.
73.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-14 PALMER CODE § 158-14
153:290
(3) If an applicant proposes infiltration, the municipality may
determine infiltration to be infeasible if there are known existing
conditions or problems that may be worsened by the use of
infiltration.
(4) The site must meet the conditions listed in § 158-14I.
(5) If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall
infiltrate that portion of the REv that is feasible based on the site
characteristics. If none of the REv can be infiltrated, REv shall be
considered as part of the WQv and shall be captured and treated as
described in § 158-14O.
(6) If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to
be captured and treated.
K. Entirely carbonate areas.
(1) In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to use
infiltration BMPs, the preliminary site investigation described in
§ 158-14H shall be conducted. For infiltration areas that appear
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the applicant
shall conduct the additional site investigation and testing as
outlined in Appendix G. The soil depth, percolation rate and
proposed loading rate, each weighted as described in Section 307,
along with the buffer from special geologic features shall be
compared to the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration
Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix
D74 to determine if the site is recommended for infiltration. In
addition to the recommendation from Appendix D, the conditions
listed in § 158-14I are required for infiltration in carbonate areas.
(2) Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as calculated in
§ 158-14J but are not required to use infiltration BMPs on a
carbonate site even if the site falls in the recommended range on
the chart in Appendix D. Any amount of volume infiltrated can be
subtracted from the WQv to be treated by noninfiltration BMPs. If
infiltration is not proposed, the full WQv shall be treated by two
acceptable BMPs, as specified in § 158-14O.
L. If a site has both carbonate and noncarbonate areas, the applicant shall
investigate the ability of the noncarbonate portion of the site to fully
meet this ordinance to meet the requirements for REv for the whole site
through infiltration. If that proves infeasible, infiltration in the
carbonate area as described in § 158-14K or two other noninfiltration
BMPs as described in § 158-140 must be used. No infiltration structure
in the noncarbonate area shall be located within 50 feet of a boundary
with carbonate bedrock, except when a preliminary site investigation
has been done showing the absence of special geologic features within
50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
74.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-14 SMOKING § 158-14
153:291
M. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the
postdevelopment two-year runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80%
or more of the predevelopment runoff volume for the carbonate portion
of the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the
predevelopment infiltration volume.
N. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance
and compaction except as necessary for construction of infiltration
BMPs.
O. If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the
WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in series for each
discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and
concentrated flow shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an
impervious area is to be drained across a pervious area as one BMP, the
length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the length
of impervious area. In no case, may the same BMP be employed
consecutively to meet this requirement. Acceptable BMPs are listed
below along with the recommended reference for design.
Best Management Practice
Design
Reference3
Bioretention1 4, 5, 11, 16
Capture/reuse2 4, 14
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Dry extended detention ponds 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Minimum disturbance/minimum maintenance
practices
1, 9
Impervious cover N/A
Stormwater filters1 (sand, peat, compost, etc.) 4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated buffers/filter strips 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Vegetated roofs 4, 13
Vegetated swales 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water quality inlets4 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
Wet detention ponds 4, 5, 6, 8
NOTES:
1 This BMP could be designed with or without an infiltration
component. If infiltration is proposed, the site and BMP will be
subject to the testing and other infiltration requirements in this
ordinance.
2 If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv then it is the only BMP
required because of this BMP's superior water quality performance.
§ 158-14 PALMER CODE § 158-14
153:292
3 See table below.
4 Water quality inlets include such BMPs as oil/water separators,
sediment traps/catch basin sumps, and trash/debris collectors in
catch basins.
Design References
Number Design Reference Title
1 "Conservation Design For Stormwater Management — A
Design Approach to Reduce Stormwater Impacts From
Land Development and Achieve Multiple Objectives
Related to Land Use," Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control, The
Environmental Management Center of the Brandywine
Conservancy, September 1997
2 "A Current Assessment of Urban Best Management
Practices: Techniques for Reducing Nonpoint Source
Pollution in the Coastal Zone," Schueler, T. R., Kumble,
P. and Heraty, M., Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments, 1992.
3 "Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings,"
Federal Highway Administration, Chen, Y. H. and Cotton,
G. K., Hydraulic Engineering Circular 15, FHWA-IP-87-7,
McLean Virginia, 1988.
4 "Draft Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,"
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
January 2005.
5 "Evaluation and Management of Highway Runoff Water
Quality," Federal Highway Administration, FHWAPD-
96-032, Washington, D.C., 1996.
6 "Evaporation Maps of the United States," U.S. Weather
Bureau (now NOAA/National Weather Service) Technical
Paper 37, Published by Department of Commerce,
Washington D.C., 1959.
7 "Georgia Stormwater Manual," AMEC Earth and
Environmental, Center for Watershed Protection, Debo
and Associates, Jordan Jones and Goulding, Atlanta
Regional Commission, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001.
8 "Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts," Federal
Highway Administration, FHWA HDS 5, Washington, D.C.,
1985 (revised May 2005).
9 "Low Impact Development Design Strategies An
Integrated Design Approach, Prince Georges County,
Maryland Department of Environmental Resources, June
1999.
§ 158-14 SMOKING § 158-14
153:293
Design References
Number Design Reference Title
10 "Maryland Stormwater Design Manual," Maryland
Department of the Environment, Baltimore, Maryland,
2000.
11 "Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices
for Developing Areas," Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, 1998.
12 "Recommended Procedures for Act 167 Drainage Plan
Design," LVPC, Revised 1997.
13 "Roof Gardens History, Design, and Construction,"
Osmundson, Theodore. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company, 1999.
14 "The Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting," Texas
Water Development Board, Austin, Texas, Third Edition,
2005.
15 "VDOT Manual of Practice for Stormwater Management,"
Virginia Transportation Research Council, Charlottesville,
Virginia, 2004.
16 "Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook," Virginia
Department of Conservation and Recreation, Richmond,
Virginia, 1999.
17 "Water Resources Engineering," Mays, L. W., John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 2005.
18 "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical
Report 55, US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, 1986.
19 US EPA, Region 1 New England web site (as of August
2005) http://www.epa.gov/NE/assistance/ceitts/
stormwater/techs/html.
P. Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In no
case, may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in § 158-14O.
(1) Acceptable methods of pretreatment are listed below.
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Vehicle maintenance and repair
facilities including auto parts
stores
Oil/water separators
Use of drip pans and/or dry
sweep material under vehicles/
equipment
§ 158-14 PALMER CODE § 158-14
153:294
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Use of absorbent devices to
reduce liquid releases
Spill prevention and response
program
Vehicle fueling stations Oil/water separators
Water quality inserts for inlets
Spill prevention and response
program
Storage areas for public works Oil/water separators
Sediment traps/catch basin
sumps
Water quality inserts for inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry
sweep material under vehicles/
equipment
Use of absorbent devices to
reduce liquid releases
Spill prevention and response
program
Diversion of stormwater away
from potential contamination
areas
Outdoor storage of liquids Spill prevention and response
program
Commercial nursery operations Vegetated swales/filter strips
Constructed wetlands
Stormwater collection and reuse
Salvage yards and recycling
facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a
stormwater pollution prevention
plan under an NPDES permit.
Fleet storage yards and vehicle
cleaning facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a
stormwater pollution prevention
plan under an NPDES permit
Facilities that store or generate
regulated substances
BMPs that are a part of a
stormwater pollution prevention
plan under an NPDES permit
Marinas* BMPs that are a part of a
stormwater pollution prevention
plan under an NPDES permit
§ 158-14 SMOKING § 158-14
153:295
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Certain industrial uses (listed
under NPDES)*
BMPs that are a part of a
stormwater pollution prevention
plan under an NPDES permit
NOTES:
*Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program.
(2) Design references for the pretreatment methods, as necessary, are
listed below. If the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the municipality that the proposed land use is not a hot spot, then
the pretreatment required would not apply.
Pretreatment Method Design Reference1
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
4, 11
Stormwater collection and reuse (especially
for irrigation)
Stormwater filters (sand, peat, compost,
etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated swales 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water quality inlets 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
NOTES:
1These numbers refer to the Design Reference Title Chart in
§ 158-14O above.
Q. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use areas.
R. Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be placed in or on a special
geologic feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be
discharged into existing on-site sinkholes.
S. Applicants shall request, in writing, public water suppliers to provide
the Zone I wellhead protection radius, as calculated by the method
outlined in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Wellhead Protection Regulations, for any public water supply well
within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback distances specified
in §§ 158-14I infiltration is prohibited in the Zone I radius as defined
and substantiated by the public water supplier in writing. If the
applicant does not receive a response from the public water supplier,
the Zone I radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
T. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the
regulated activities must be managed to prevent the physical
degradation of receiving waters from such effects as scour and
§ 158-14 PALMER CODE § 158-14
153:296
§ 158-15. Stormwater management districts.
streambank destabilization, to satisfy state water quality requirements
by controlling the two-year postdevelopment runoff to a release rate of
30%.
U. The municipality may, after consultation with the DEP, approve
alternative methods for meeting the state water quality requirements
other than those in this section, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law.75
A. Mapping of stormwater management districts. To implement the
provisions of the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study Area
Stormwater Management Plans, the municipality is hereby divided into
stormwater management districts consistent with the Bushkill Creek
and Fry's Run Study Area Release Rate Maps presented in the plans.
The boundaries of the stormwater management districts are shown on
an official map which is available for inspection at the municipal office.
A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A76
for general reference.
B. Description of stormwater management districts. Four types of
stormwater management districts may be applicable to the
municipality, namely Conditional No Detention I Districts, Conditional
No Detention II Districts, Provisional No Detention Areas and Dual
Release Rate Districts, as described below.
(1) Conditional No Detention I Districts, Fry's Run Study Area. Within
these districts, the capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities
(as defined in Article II) must be calculated to determine if
adequate capacity exists. For this determination, the developer
must calculate peak flows assuming that the site is developed as
proposed and that the remainder of the local watershed is in the
existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this ordinance. The larger of the two peak flows
calculated will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists.
If adequate capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site
to the main channel (as defined in Article II), these watershed areas
may discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without detention
facilities. The Township reserves the right to require one-hundredpercent
release rate controls irrespective of the adequacy of the
downstream capacity where the uncontrolled release could
adversely impact downstream properties. If the capacity
calculations show that the local runoff conveyance facilities lack
adequate capacity, the developer shall either use a one-hundred-
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
76.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-14 SMOKING § 158-15
153:297
percent release rate control or provide increased capacity of
downstream elements to convey increased peak flows consistent
with § 158-16Q. Any capacity improvements must be designed to
convey runoff from development of all areas tributary to the
improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified in
§ 158-16D. By definition, a storm drainage problem area associated
with the local runoff conveyance facilities indicates that adequate
capacity does not exist.
(2) Conditional No Detention II Districts, Fry's Run Study Area. Within
these districts, the capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities
must be calculated in the same manner as the Conditional No
Detention I Districts. In this case, however, adequate capacity must
be demonstrated from the site to the Delaware River or Lehigh
River, as applicable. After determining if adequate capacity exists,
the developer shall use either no detention, a one-hundred-percent
release rate or provide capacity improvements as one-hundredpercent-
release-rate controls irrespective of the adequacy of the
downstream capacity where the uncontrolled release could
adversely impact downstream properties.
(3) Provisional No Detention Districts, Bushkill Creek. These
watershed areas may discharge postdevelopment peak runoff
without detention facilities without adversely affecting the
watershed peak flow. In certain instances however, the local runoff
conveyance facilities, which transport runoff from the site to the
main channel, may not have adequate capacity to safely transport
increased peak flows associated with not providing detention for a
proposed development. In these instances, the developer shall
either use a one-hundred-percent release control or provide
increased capacity of downstream drainage elements to convey
increased peak flows consistent with § 158-16Q. The Township
reserves the right to require one-hundred-percent release-rate
controls irrespective of the adequacy of the downstream capacity
where the uncontrolled release could adversely impact
downstream properties. In determining if adequate capacity exists
in the local watershed drainage network, the developer must
assume that the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this ordinance. Similarly, any capacity improvement
must be designed to convey runoff from development of all areas
tributary to the improvement consistent with the capacity criteria
specified in § 158-16D.
(4) Dual Release Rate Districts, Bushkill Creek and Fry's Run Study
Area. Within this district, the two-year postdevelopment peak
runoff must be controlled to 30% of the predevelopment two-year
runoff peak. Further, the ten-year, twenty-five-year and onehundred-
year postdevelopment peak runoff must be controlled to
the stated percentage of the predevelopment peak. Release rates
§ 158-15 PALMER CODE § 158-15
153:298
§ 158-16. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
associated with the ten- through one-hundred-year events vary
from 50% to 100% depending upon location in the watershed.
A. Applicants shall provide a comparative pre- and postconstruction
stormwater management hydrograph analysis for each direction of
discharge and for the site overall to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. Any stormwater management controls required by this ordinance and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release
rate criteria for each of the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundredyear
return period runoff events consistent with the calculation
methodology specified in § 158-17.
C. The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature, such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (e.g. road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical
feature is the downstream limit of the subarea and the subarea,
boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic divide
along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
D. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
ordinance shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
E. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
§ 158-15 SMOKING § 158-16
153:299
designed for up to a one-hundred-percent release rate so long as the
total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
F. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a one-hundred-percent release rate,
provided that the overall site discharge meets the weighted average
release rate.
G. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a conditional no detention
subarea, a significant portion of the site area subject to the release rate
control may not be drained to the discharge point(s) located in the no
detention subarea except as part of a no harm or hardship waiver
procedure.
H. No portion of a site may be regraded to redirect runoff onto adjacent
property, except as part of a no harm or hardship waiver procedure:or
unless runoff peak flow rate and volume controls are proposed which
limit postdevelopment peak flow rate and volume discharges to
predevelopment levels.
I. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site
which has areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the design
release from the site will be the lesser of: a) the applicable release rate
flow assuming no closed depression(s); or b) the existing peak flow
actually leaving the site. In cases where b) would result in an
unreasonably small design release, the design discharge of less than or
equal to the release rate will be determined by the available
downstream conveyance capacity to the main channel calculated using
§ 158-16D and the minimum orifice criteria.
J. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity
criteria in § 158-16D and the detention criteria in § 158-17.
K. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention
ponds shall be designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied
to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond discharge direction. All
site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of
whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that
time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series
where only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated
release rate.
§ 158-16 PALMER CODE § 158-16
153:300
L. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The impact area
includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
M. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged
from the site compared to predevelopment are not subject to the
release rate provisions of this ordinance.
N. In any stormwater management district, the Township reserves the
right to require a more stringent design release rate and/or volume
control for a development site or other amendments to a drainage plan
to address problems in the local runoff conveyance system downstream
of the site. Such problems include existing flooding problems,
inadequate conveyance capacity, poorly defined or poorly stabilized
downstream conveyance systems or other factors,
O. No harm water quantity option. For any proposed development site not
located in a conditional no detention district, the developer has the
option of using a less restrictive runoff control (including no detention)
if the developer can prove that special circumstances exist for the
proposed development site and that no harm would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan.
"Special circumstances" are defined as any hydrologic or hydraulic
aspects of the development itself not specifically considered in the
development of the plan runoff control strategy. Proof of no harm would
have to be shown from the development site through the remainder of
the downstream drainage network to the confluence of the creek with
the Delaware River or Lehigh River, as applicable. Proof of no harm
must be shown using the capacity criteria specified in § 158-16D if
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the no harm justification.
(1) Attempts to prove no harm based upon downstream peak flow
versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the following
provisions:
(a) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five- and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated Penn
State Runoff Models for the Bushkill Creek or the Fry's Run
Study Area or as calculated by an applicant using an alternate
method acceptable to the municipality. These flow values
would be supplied to the developer by the Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission upon request.
(b) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system
as documented by a developer may be used by the developer
only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified
capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped
§ 158-16 SMOKING § 158-16
153:301
acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(c) Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
§ 158-16Q.
(2) Any no harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV. Developers
submitting no harm justifications must still meet all of the water
quality requirements in § 158-14.
P. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis
using the hydrologic model of watershed consistent with protection of
the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the
calibrated version of the Penn State Runoff Model as developed for the
stormwater management plan.
Q. Capacity improvements. In certain instances, primarily within the
conditional no detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate
more stringent levels of runoff control than those based upon protection
of the entire watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove
that it would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve
the capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu of runoff
controls on the development site. Peak flow calculations shall be done
assuming that the local watershed is in the existing condition and then
assuming that the local watershed is developed per current zoning and
using the specified runoff controls. Any capacity improvements would
be designed using the larger of the above peak flows and the capacity
criteria specified in § 158-16D. All new development in the entire
subarea(s) within which the proposed development site is located shall
be assumed to implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if
any. Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement a
modified no harm option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control would
not create any harm downstream.
R. Compatibility with NPDES requirements. Any proposed regulated
activity for which a permanent stormwater quality control detention
§ 158-16 PALMER CODE § 158-16
153:302
§ 158-17. Calculation methodology.
basin is required under the NPDES regulations shall use the more
stringent runoff control criteria between this ordinance and the NPDES
requirements.
S. In any stormwater management district, storm sewer piping, swales
and inlet systems shall be designed for a twenty-five-year return period
storm, or a one-hundred-year return period storm where the system is
designed to convey one-hundred-year storm flows to a detention facility.
Bridges and culverts along roadways shall be designed to convey the
one-hundred-year return period storm. Flows from off-site upstream
areas shall be determined in accordance with the procedure identified
in § 158-11E.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the Soil-Cover-Complex Methodology.
The following requirements apply unless otherwise approved by the
municipality:
(1) For drainage areas of less than 100 acres, the Rational Method
shall be used.
(2) For drainage areas of 100 acres or more, the Soil Conservation
Service Method shall be used.
B. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages.
(1) Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D77 shall be calculated as follows:
(2) The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
(a) All disturbed areas to be made impervious: weight at 100%.
(b) All disturbed areas to be made pervious: weight at 50%.
(c) All undisturbed pervious areas: weight at 0%.
(d) All existing impervious areas: weight at 100%.
C. Soil thickness.
(1) Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration system. The effective soil thickness in the
77.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-16 SMOKING § 158-17
153:303
Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management
BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D is the measured soil
thickness multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil
permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G78), as follows:
Permeability Range*
(inches/hour) Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 1.0
NOTE:
*If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code
§ 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G) falls on a break between
two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be used.
(2) Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 inches per hour or
less than 0.5 inch per hour, as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code
§ 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G, are not recommended for
infiltration.
D. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this ordinance shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin using the Storage Indication Method or
other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph
for routing shall be the Universal Rational Hydrograph or as otherwise
reviewed by the municipality.
E. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall be routed using the Storage Indication Method.
F. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below
the lowest outlet invert.
G. Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv
shall assume that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet
is full at the beginning of design event routing for the purposes of
evaluating peak outflows. All wet detention ponds shall be subject to
review by the Township Geotechnical Engineer.
H. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum freeboard
of 1.0 foot above the maximum pool elevation associated with the two-
78.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-17 PALMER CODE § 158-17
153:304
through twenty-five-year runoff events. A freeboard of 0.5 foot shall be
provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool
elevation to the invert of the emergency spillway. The two- through onehundred-
year storm events shall be controlled by the primary outlet
structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be designed to
pass the one-hundred-year return frequency storm peak basin inflow
rate with a minimum freeboard of 0.5 foot measured to the top of
basin. The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any off-site areas
tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design
of the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and
may be required to pass a storm greater than the one-hundred-year
event.
I. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches. Designs where a lesser
size orifice would be required to fully meet release rates shall be
acceptable, provided that as much of the site runoff as practical is
directed to the detention facilities. The minimum three-inch diameter
does not apply to the control of the WQv.
J. Runoff calculations using Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
(1) Runoff calculations using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall use
the Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-fourhour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for
the various return periods to be used consistent with this ordinance
may be taken from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2.1, 2004 or the
PennDOT Intensity - Duration Frequency Field Manual ("PDT-IDF")
(May 1986) for Region 4. The following values are taken from the
PDT-IDF Field Manual:
Return Period
(years)
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1 2.40
2 3.00
5 3.60
10 4.56
25 5.52
50 6.48
100 7.44
(2) A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix C.79
79.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-17 SMOKING § 158-17
153:305
K. Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2.1, 2004 or the Intensity-
Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C.
L. Runoff curve numbers (CN's) to be used in the Soil-Cover-Complex
Method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C.
M. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix C.
N. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach
which may include one or all of the flow types below:
(1) Sheet flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS
average velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or
the modified kinematic wave travel time equation (Equation 3-3,
NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave
travel time equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50
feet for designs using the Rational Method and limited to 150 feet
for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
(2) Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from
the watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure
3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
(3) Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning Equation. Bankfull flows shall be used
for determining velocities. Manning 'n' values shall be based on the
table presented in Appendix C.
(4) Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated using the Manning Equation assuming full flow and the
Manning 'n' values from Appendix C.
O. If using the Rational Method, all predevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
If using the Rational Method, all postdevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
P. The Manning Equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C or other appropriate
standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities shall be
determined by methods acceptable to the municipality.
Q. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of
§ 158-17 PALMER CODE § 158-17
153:306
§ 158-18. (Reserved)
stormwater management facilities according to this ordinance may not
be the same criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the
Dam Safety Program.
§ 158-17 SMOKING § 158-18
153:307

ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 158-19. Submission of plan and approval required.
For any of the regulated activities of this ordinance, prior to the final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance
of any permit, or the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance
activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a
Drainage Plan and receive municipal approval of the Plan.
§ 158-20. Exemptions.
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in
§ 158-6.
§ 158-21. Contents of plan.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
(3) The name and address of the project site, the name and address of
the owner of the property and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the drainage plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site
drainage areas impacting the project including topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
area.
(4) Other physical features, including existing drainage swales,
wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines. The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the
Northampton County Soil Survey, as applicable, latest edition. Any
hydric soils present on the site should be identified as such.
§ 158-19 SMOKING § 158-21
153:309
(7) An overlay showing geologic types and boundaries and any special
geologic features present on the site.
(8) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(11) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
(12) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(13) An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that
would provide municipal ingress to and egress from a public rightof-
way.
(14) A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site
and all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary
that would be affected by the project.
(15) The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the
project and all private water supply wells within 100 feet of the
project.
C. Stormwater management controls and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on
a map and described, including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods, such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches. When these structures are used, the locations of
septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods, such as roof-top storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
BMPs shall be shown.
(3) All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration
on a site.
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or removed
without approval by the municipality.
(5) All details and specifications for the construction of the stormwater
management controls and BMPs.
§ 158-21 PALMER CODE § 158-21
153:310
§ 158-22. Plan submission.
D. The BMP operations and management plan (as required in Article VII)
describing how each permanent stormwater BMP will be operated and
maintained and the identity of the person(s) responsible for operations
and maintenance.
E. Environmental resources site design assessment.
(1) An environmental resources site design assessment that describes
the following:
(a) The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious
cover avoid disturbance of significant environmental resources
and preserve existing site hydrology.
(b) An assessment of whether practical alternative grading and
impervious cover site design revisions could lessen the
disturbance of significant environmental resources and/or
make better use of the site hydrologic resources.
(c) A description of how the proposed stormwater management
controls and BMPs serve to mitigate any adverse impacts on
environmental resources on the site.
(2) Significant environmental resources considered in the site design
assessment include, but are not limited to, steep slopes, ponds,
lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, floodplains, riparian
vegetation, native vegetation and special geologic features.
A. For regulated activities specified in § 158-5D(1) and (2):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Municipal Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(2) Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(3) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) One copy to the municipal governing body.
(b) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(c) Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except
for drainage plans involving less than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover.
(4) Drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover shall be submitted by the developer to
the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission as part of the preliminary
plan submission for an advisory review of the drainage plan for
consistency with the Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study
§ 158-21 SMOKING § 158-22
153:311
§ 158-23. Plan review.
Area Stormwater Management Plan. The LVPC will not review
details of the erosion and sedimentation plan or the BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(a) Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(b) The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and
the municipality, within a time frame consistent with
established procedures under the Municipalities Planning
Code, as to whether the drainage plan has been found to be
consistent with the stormwater management plan.
B. For regulated activities specified in § 158-50(3) and (4), the drainage
plan shall be submitted by the developer to the municipal building
permit officer as part of the building permit application.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 158-5D(5), (6) and (7):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of
DEP's Rules and Regulations and the NPDES regulations.
(2) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
D. Earthmoving for all regulated activities under § 158-5 shall be
conducted in accordance with the current federal and state regulations
relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan, including the
BMP operations and maintenance plan, for consistency with the
adopted Bushkill Creek Watershed and Fry's Run Study Area
Stormwater Management Plans as embodied by this ordinance and with
any permits issued by DEP. The municipality shall also review the
drainage plan against any additional storm drainage provisions
contained in the Municipal Subdivision and Land Development or
Zoning Ordinance, as applicable.80
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
drainage plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, is
approved.
C. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
[regulated activities § 158-5D(1) and (2)] or building permit application
[regulated activities § 158-5D(3) and (4)] if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 158-22 PALMER CODE § 158-23
153:312
§ 158-24. Modification of plan.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the Municipal Engineer) shall require a
resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent with § 158-22,
subject to review per § 158-23 of this ordinance.
§ 158-25. Hardship waiver procedure.
D. The municipality may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
A. The Board of Supervisors may hear requests for waivers where it is
alleged that the provisions of this ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and
accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by
the municipality. A copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each
of the following: municipality, Municipal Engineer, Municipal Solicitor
and Lehigh Valley Planning Commission. The request shall fully
document the nature of the alleged hardship.
B. The municipality may grant a waiver, provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this ordinance in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located;
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, including the no
harm provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is,
therefore, necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(4) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue; and
(5) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship
waiver.
§ 158-23 SMOKING § 158-25
153:313
C. In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
ordinance. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still
manage the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm
runoff as is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other
property.
D. For regulated activities described in § 158-5D(1) and (2), the Board of
Supervisors shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the municipality.
E. For regulated activities in § 158-5D(3), (4), (5), and (6), the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the municipality.
F. The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of this
ordinance.
§ 158-25 PALMER CODE § 158-25
153:314
ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 158-26. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater control facilities and the
completed installation. For each phase of development, the developer
shall provide notification to the Municipal Engineer and Township a
minimum of three days prior to the installation of the permanent
stormwater control facilities so that general observation of the work by
the Township can be scheduled. The developer shall furnish to the
Township record drawings of the subject facilities which are certified by
a registered land surveyor. Full acceptance and approval of the
stormwater management facilities will not occur until the installation is
observed to be acceptable and record plans are approved.
B. DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation District) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
C. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this ordinance, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals issued by the
municipality until the deficiencies are corrected.
§ 158-26 SMOKING § 158-26
153:315

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 158-27. Authorization to charge fees; payment required.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP Operations
and Maintenance Plans to defray review costs incurred by the municipality.
The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 158-28. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this ordinance shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the municipality.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements
required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit
provisions, regulated by this ordinance, correct violations, and assure
the completion of stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs. Unless otherwise required to
provided an escrow account as part of a subdivision or land
development application, the developer shall initially deposit $500 into
an escrow account with the Township to cover the costs connected with
drainage plan review and inspection. Further increases in the amount
to be deposited into escrow shall be adopted by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 158-27 SMOKING § 158-28
153:317

ARTICLE VII
BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 158-29. Approval of plan required.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
§ 158-30. Responsibilities for operation and maintenance of BMPs.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
C. The maintenance responsibilities for permanent stormwater BMPs shall
be determined based upon the type of ownership of the property which
is controlled by the BMPs.
(1) In all cases where the permanent stormwater BMPs are designed to
manage runoff from property in a single entity ownership, as
defined below, the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater
BMPs shall be with the single entity owner. The single entity owner
shall enter into an agreement with the Township which specifies
that the owner will properly maintain the facilities consistent with
accepted practice as determined by the Township Engineer. The
agreement shall provide for regular inspections by the Township,
shall contain such provisions as are necessary to ensure timely
correction of any maintenance deficiencies by the single entity
owner, and shall be recorded in the Miscellaneous Docket in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County,
Pennsylvania. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "single
entity" shall be defined as an individual, association, public or
§ 158-29 SMOKING § 158-30
153:319
§ 158-31. Adherence to approved plan required.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is
granted in writing by the municipality.
§ 158-32. Agreement for privately owned BMPs.
§ 158-33. Easements.
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention areas and
private corporation, partnership, firm, trust, estate or any other
legal entity empowered to own real estate.
(2) In cases where the property to be encumbered by the permanent
stormwater BMP is in multiple ownership (many individual owners
of various portions of the property), the developer shall dedicate
the permanent stormwater BMPs to the Township for maintenance
unless, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, another
ownership and maintenance alternative will better serve the public
interest. The developer shall pay a fee to the Township
corresponding to the present worth of maintenance of the facilities
for a twenty-five-year period. The estimated annual maintenance
cost for the facilities shall be based on a fee schedule provided by
the Township Engineer and adopted by the Township Board of
Supervisors. The fee schedule must be reasonable.
(3) In certain multiple ownership situations, the public may benefit
should the Township require that maintenance responsibilities be
borne by the individual or other legal entity. In these instances, the
Township and the responsible individual or entity shall, at the
Township's option, enter into a formal agreement regarding such
maintenance obligation.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall include the terms of the
format agreement referenced in Appendix E81 of this ordinance.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the
municipality to be reasonable or necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the
municipality.
81.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Township offices.
§ 158-30 PALMER CODE § 158-33
153:320
other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 158-32.
§ 158-34. Recording of approved plan and related agreements.
§ 158-35. Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds Northampton County within 90 days of approval
of the BMP operations plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof.
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 158-32.
(3) Easements under § 158-33.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation
and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operation and
maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 158-33 SMOKING § 158-35
153:321

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 158-36. Prohibited discharges; exceptions.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater except as provided in
Subsection B below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on the municipality finding that
the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute pollution to surface
waters of the commonwealth are listed below.
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents
or other compounds.
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 158-36B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 158-36C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 158-36 SMOKING § 158-36
153:323
§ 158-37. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 158-36B
above:
§ 158-38. Roof drains.
§ 158-39. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 158-38B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or storm sewers may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP without the written approval of the municipality
unless it is part of an approved maintenance program. A note which
indicates these requirements shall be included on the plan(s) to be
recorded.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 158-36 PALMER CODE § 158-39
153:324
ARTICLE IX
Right of Entry; Notification; Enforcement
§ 158-40. Right of entry.
§ 158-41. Notification.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may, with the consent of owners and
operators subject to a BMP plan, enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs or to
investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard
to any aspect regulated by this ordinance.
B. In accordance with Subsection A above, owners and operators subject
to a BMP plan shall allow persons working on behalf of the municipality
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this ordinance.
C. In accordance with Subsection A above, persons working on behalf of
the municipality shall have the right to temporarily locate on any BMP
site subject of a BMP plan in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMPs.
D. In accordance with Subsection A above, owners and operators subject
to a BMP plan shall not cause unreasonable delays in allowing the
municipality access to a BMP.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that should the violator fail to take the required action
§ 158-40 SMOKING § 158-41
153:325
§ 158-42. Violations.
§ 158-43. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 158-44. Penalties.
within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
municipality or designee, and the expense thereof, together with all
related lien and enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this ordinance. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. The violation of any provision of this ordinance is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
B. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may, in accordance with appropriate law, be suspended
or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this ordinance.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipality or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) Payment of all municipal fees, costs and expenses related to or
arising from the violation has been made.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this ordinance.
§ 158-41 PALMER CODE § 158-44
153:326
§ 158-45. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this ordinance may appeal using the appeal
procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Any person found by the municipality to have violated any provision of
this ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement provisions in Article
V of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and/or Section 15 of
the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act 167).
B. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this ordinance. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 158-44 SMOKING § 158-45
153:327
Chapter 160
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 32.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 160-1. General requirements; construction specifications.
[Amended 3-17-1969 by Ord. No. 96; 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 126;
7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 234]
A. All pavements constructed and all curbs and sidewalks placed on any
street in the Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania,
shall meet the requirements of this ordinance and shall be subject to
approval by the Township Engineer.
(1) The following terms shall apply:
CONSTRUCTION OBSERVER — A representative of the Township
or Engineer authorized to observe any and all construction
operations governed by this ordinance.
DEVELOPER — The individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity undertaking the improvement of land within the Township
pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. 82
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or his authorized
representative.
(2) Safety. The Engineer, acting on behalf of the Township, assumes no
responsibility for or control over the developer's or his contractor's
safety programs, nor any responsibility for the developer's or his
contractor's work procedures, methods, sequences, techniques of
construction, equipment, etc. Representatives of the Engineer are
at the site only on behalf of the Township to determine compliance
with the applicable documents, and to determine the acceptability
of the final product.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or his contractors
to post the notice to workers (available at the Township Office) on
the project site at a location accessible to all workers.
(4) The developer and his contractors shall be responsible for
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
ordinances such as Department of Labor and Industry regulations,
state and local blasting permit requirements, Occupational Safety
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 158-45 PALMER CODE § 160-1
160:328
and Health Administration (OSHA) and other applicable safety
codes, etc. The construction observer does not have the authority
to stop the work because of a safety violation.
(5) Construction observers do not have the authority to approve, in the
field, all changes from the approved plans or specifications. Any
and all requests for deviation from the approved plans or
specifications shall be submitted in writing by the developer to the
Engineer and must be accompanied by supporting engineering
data.
(6) Mix design information for all materials used in constructing
streets, curbs and sidewalks shall be submitted to and approved by
the Engineer prior to the delivery of the materials to the project
site. Escrow release certifications will not be processed until such
mix design information has been submitted and approved.
(7) No connections shall be made to existing Township streets without
prior approval and without three business days advance notice to
the Township to allow for scheduling of Township observation
personnel.
B. Street construction specifications.
(1) General.
(a) All Township roads shall consist of the following courses,
unless a particular course is hereinafter excluded:
[1] Wearing course.
[2] Base course.
[3] Subbase course.
(b) All new Township roads shall be curbed. [Amended
11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-342]
(c) The following cross-slopes shall be maintained:
[1] Cartway: 1/4 inch per foot sloped toward the edge of road.
[2] Sidewalk area: 3/8 inch per foot sloped toward the edge of
road.
(2) Materials.
(a) Construction of all Township roads designated on the Township
Zoning Map83 as being either arterial, collector or local streets
shall meet the following thickness requirements:
[1] Arterial streets:
83.Editor's Note: The Township Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 160-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 160-1
160:329
[a] ID-2 bituminous wearing course: 1 1/2 inches.
[b] Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC): 5 1/2
inches.
[c] Subbase: three inches.
[2] Collector streets:
[a] ID-2 bituminous wearing course: 1 1/2 inches.
[b] Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC): 4 1/2
inches.
[c] Subbase: three inches.
[3] Local streets:
[a] ID-2 bituminous wearing course: one and one-half
(1 1/2) inches.
[b] Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC): three and
one-half (3 1/2) inches.
[c] Subbase: three inches.
(b) All materials and construction methods used in the
construction of streets shall meet the following requirements
as set forth in PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408,
current edition.
Material Section
Subgrade 210
Subbase 350
Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC) 305
Bituminous wearing course ID-2 420
Plain cement concrete curb 630
Cement concrete sidewalks 676
(3) Construction methods.
(a) Trenches.
[1] All utility trenches (such as for sanitary and storm sewers,
waterlines, gas mains, and electrical facilities) within
cartways shall be backfilled in thin layers (not thicker than
eight inches) and mechanically tamped. All trenches shall
be allowed to settle for at least 90 days before permanent
subbase course, bituminous concrete base course, or
bituminous wearing course ID-2 pavement may be
constructed.
§ 160-1 PALMER CODE § 160-1
160:330
[2] When a special case arises where a utility trench would
have less than 90 days of settlement time, all trench
backfill shall be 2A modified or 2RC stone, tamped and
capped with eight inches of clay at subgrade elevation.
This shall apply whenever a permanent subbase course or
bituminous concrete base course and bituminous wearing
course ID-2 pavement is to be constructed.
(b) Prior to commencing construction of the subbase, the
subgrade shall be inspected and approved by the Engineer.
After acceptance by the Engineer, the subgrade shall not be
excavated for any purposes without the express permission of
the Engineer. The placement of subbase material, as well as
subsequent pavement courses, may proceed only after the
Engineer has accepted the underlying course.
(c) Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC) shall not be placed
on surfaces that are wet or at a temperature of 35º F. or lower,
or when the air temperature is 35º F. or lower. When work is
halted because of weather conditions, limited tonnage en route
to the project may be placed, if permitted by the Engineer. A
bituminous prime coat of the subbase course is not required
before placement of the BCBC.
(d) Placement of bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall be
permitted during the period April 1 to October 15 annually,
provided that temperature conditions as listed in Subsection
B(3)(e)[3] below are met; and provided, further, that no paving
will be permitted during inclement weather. When the
bituminous wearing course ID-2 is placed adjacent to curbs to
form a bituminous gutter, it shall be sealed with AC-20. Excess
bituminous material shall be removed to the satisfaction of the
Engineer.
(e) Placement of bituminous wearing course ID-2 may be
permitted during the period October 16 to November 15 under
the following conditions:
[1] Bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall be hauled in
properly covered and insulated trucks.
[2] Bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall not be placed on
damp or wet surfaces.
[3] Bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall not be placed when
the air temperature is 40º F. or lower, nor when the
temperature of the base or binder on which it is to be
placed is 40º F. or lower.
[4] Extra precautions shall be taken in drying the aggregate to
be used in the mix, controlling the temperature of the
delivered material and compacting the mixture.
§ 160-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 160-1
160:331
[5] Bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall not be placed if, on
the date preceding placement, it rained or snowed and the
temperature fell below freezing during the previous
evening.
[6] Bituminous wearing course ID-2 shall not be placed after
November 15 without a written request from the
developer and the subsequent express written consent of
the Township Supervisors and Township Engineer.
C. Concrete curb specifications.
(1) General.
(a) The concrete curb shall be six inches in width at the top, eight
inches in width at the base and 21 inches in depth on all
streets.
(b) Construction of plain cement concrete curb shall meet the
requirements of Section 630 - Plain Cement Concrete Curb,
PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, current edition. This
shall include the placement of concrete curb with an
acceptable, self-propelled machine (slip-form machine).
(2) Materials. All materials used in the construction of curbs shall meet
the requirements of Section 630.2 of PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408, current edition.
(3) General construction methods.
(a) Excavation; fill. The excavation or fill for curb shall be carried
to the proper depth and grade as directed by the Engineer. The
subgrade shall then be thoroughly compacted and so shaped
that the surface of the same shall be at the required depth
below the grade for the finished curb.
(b) Placing concrete. After the subgrade and foundation have been
prepared, the concrete, conforming to these specifications
shall be laid or placed in the forms and thoroughly tamped and
spaded to ensure the filling of all voids and to secure a
concrete of maximum density with all corners full and square.
All concrete must be finished with a wooden float and true to
the lines and grades given.
(c) The forms shall not be removed until satisfactory curing has
taken place. After removing the forms the exposed surface
should be rubbed down or floated to a smooth, even surface, as
necessary. If any holes or defects develop, they shall be filled
with mortar composed of one part cement and two parts sand
and then floated with a wooden float to a smooth, even surface.
D. Concrete sidewalk specifications.
§ 160-1 PALMER CODE § 160-1
160:332
§ 160-2. Permit required to lay or relay curbs and sidewalks.
[Amended 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 150]
All persons desiring to lay or relay curb or sidewalk shall apply for a permit
to the Building Inspector.
(1) General.
(a) A crushed stone base course of No. 2A Modified shall be
provided to form a compacted base four inches deep.
(b) In general and unless otherwise stated herein, construction of
cement concrete sidewalks shall meet the requirements of
Section 676 - Cement Concrete Sidewalks, PennDOT
Specifications, Publication 408, current edition.
(2) Materials. All materials used in the construction of sidewalks shall
meet requirements of Section 676.2 of PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408, current edition.
(3) Construction. The concrete shall be not less than four inches in
depth and shall have a transverse grade of 3/8 inch per foot upward
from the curbing. In driveway areas, the sidewalk and the apron
shall be constructed of concrete six inches in depth on a four-inch
base of thoroughly compacted crushed stone (2A Modified)
according to the Palmer Township Standard Construction Details.
E. Record plans.
(1) Records plans shall be prepared by the developer's Engineer from
information recorded by the developer's contractors during
construction. Such record plans shall be submitted to the Engineer
upon the completion of the street construction. The following
information is required on the street grade and profile record
plans:
(a) Any construction changes that were made shall be noted and
documented on the record plans by drawing a line through the
proposed design data and noting the record data.
(b) The record plans shall include, but not be limited to, the "asconstructed"
curb and/or pavement grades for intersections
and all other areas that were changed from the design plan.
The record profile grades should be shown where they differ
from the original design.
(2) After the record plans are reviewed and approved, three prints and
a Mylar tracing of each shall be provided to the Engineer for a
permanent record.
§ 160-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 160-3
160:333
§ 160-3. Fee. [Amended 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 146]
The fee to be paid to the Township for permits shall be set by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution.
§ 160-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1973 by Ord. No.
146; 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 160-5. Widths and grades. [Added 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 146]
The widths and grades of streets and sidewalks shall be as set by the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.84
§ 160-6. Driveways. [Added 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 146; 7-16-1990
by Ord. No. 234]
In areas of sidewalk, driveway aprons shall be constructed of concrete six
inches in depth on a four-inch base of thoroughly compacted crushed stone
(2A Modified) according to the Palmer Township Standard Construction
Details.
§ 160-7. Short title. [Added 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 146]
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Township Ordinance
No. 36."
§ 160-8. Conflict with other ordinances. [Added 9-17-1973 by Ord.
No. 146]
If the provisions of this ordinance conflict with those of any other ordinance
or law, the most restrictive of the two shall prevail.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity which or who
shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall
fraudulently do work for the Township which does not conform to these
standards shall be liable, upon conviction in a summary proceeding
before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, to pay
a fine or penalty to the Township, and for the use of the Township, of not
less than $10 nor more than $600 or to be sentenced to imprisonment in
the county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by
law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 160-3 PALMER CODE § 160-9
160:334
§ 160-9. Repealer. [Amended 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 14685]
Township Ordinance No. 26 of October 6, 1958,86 and all ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 160-10. Street openings, alterations and encroachments. [Added
5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 152]
No railroad or street railway shall hereafter be constructed upon any
Township right-of-way or road, nor shall any railroad or street railway
crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits or other piping
be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph or electric light or
power poles, or any coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected upon
or in any portion of a Township road or right-of-way except under such
conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the installation, safety,
maintenance and restoration thereof, as may be prescribed herein and in
permits granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 160-11. Application for street opening permit. [Added 5-20-1974
by Ord. No. 152]
The application for a permit required by § 160-10 shall be on a form
prescribed by the Township and submitted to the Township in triplicate.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the
schedule of fees set forth by the Department of Transportation for highway
occupancy permits and restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall
submit three copies of a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of
the intended facility, existing utilities, width of the traveled roadway, rightof-
way lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
§ 160-12. Issuance of permit; conformance with regulations. [Added
5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 152]
A permit shall be issued to the applicant so long as all the aforementioned
requirements of §§ 160-10 and 160-11 and permit conditions are complied
with. All restoration shall conform to this ordinance.
§ 160-13. Written notice to Township. [Added 5-20-1974 by Ord. No.
152]
Upon completion of the work and restoration and at such other times as the
Township may require, the applicant shall give written notice thereof to the
Township.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 160-5 as
§ 160-9.
86.Editor's Note: Formerly Art. II of this chapter, entitled "Private Driveways or Alleyways."
§ 160-9 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 160-14
160:335
§ 160-14. Inspection; correction of defective work. [Added
5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 152]
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit described in
§§ 160-10 to 160-13, the Township shall inspect the work and, when
necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and
regulations prescribed herein and by the permit. Where any settlement or
defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to rectify any such
settlement or other defect within 60 days after written notice from the
Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall impose upon the
applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20% of such cost.
§ 160-15. Removal of obstacles. [Added 5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 152]
Anything installed pursuant to §§ 160-10 through 160-14 of this ordinance
which interferes with use or access to roads shall be removed at once upon
notice from Palmer Township to so remove.
§ 160-16. Revocation of permits. [Added 7-9-1974 by Ord. No. 155]
§ 160-17. Safety standards. [Added 7-9-1974 by Ord. No. 155;
amended 7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 234]
In addition to the safety requirements of the Building Code,87 all unattended
open trenches in public streets or rights-of-way or front yards shall be
covered or barricaded and flasher lights provided to clearly mark the trench
at night. Barricading shall also be required in the daytime for such trenches,
when unattended, if they are left open more than 24 hours. Filled trenches
in public roads which present soft support or sharp elevations or
depressions of more than 2 1/2 inches shall be marked with barricades and
signs and, in addition, at night with flasher lights, lanterns or smudge pots.
Filled trenches in shoulders which present soft support shall be marked at
reasonable intervals with a sign saying "soft shoulder." Utility work areas
in public streets or rights-of-way and open manholes shall be barricaded
and marked at night in the same manner as open trenches. The Police
A. Plumbing or building permits or permits for street, driveway, curb,
drainage or sidewalk construction or for work contemplated by
§ 160-10 hereof may be revoked for failure to carry on operations in a
reasonably safe manner or for carrying on work in such a manner as
violates Township ordinances or injures Township roads or deposits
undue amounts of earth or mud upon the same.
B. The Township may also revoke or withhold issuance of building or
zoning permits in any subdivision in which road, drainage or utility
construction does not conform to this ordinance, Township standards or
a subdivision plan or in which construction of roads, drainage or
utilities is not proceeding contemporaneously with construction of
buildings.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code.
§ 160-14 PALMER CODE § 160-17
160:336
Department shall have the right to require permittees or contractors to
provide flagmen or policemen at construction or maintenance sites if
activities will reduce the traffic lanes available for travel or present unusual
traffic hazards. Construction or maintenance vehicles on public roads shall
have warning lights.
§ 160-18. Outrigger protection. [Added 7-9-1974 by Ord. No. 155]
Except for emergency vehicles, all backhoes, cranes, elevating platforms
and other vehicles operating on public roads with outrigger or jack-type
supports shall have boards or other materials inserted between such
supports and the pavement of any public road to prevent injury to the
pavement. Failure to take such protective measures is hereby declared to
be a nuisance, and the Township may, in addition to fines imposed by this
ordinance, collect the cost of restoring injured roads from the persons or
organizations responsible.
§ 160-19. Restoration. [Added 7-9-1974 by Ord. No. 155; amended
7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 234]
After new curbing or sidewalks have been installed or after alteration of
existing curbing or sidewalks, the trench in which the curbing or sidewalks
are located shall be backfilled to appropriate street and property grade.
Except for curbing and sidewalk trenches, refilling of trenches in the
existing cartway of public streets shall be entirely with modified crushed
stone or with other similar approved materials to a level eight inches below
the existing adjacent subgrade with such degree of compaction as the
Engineer shall require. The crushed stone backfill shall be capped with
eight inches of well-compacted clay to reform subgrade. The pavement shall
be restored by constructing courses of the same materials and thickness
as represented by the adjacent existing pavement. Joints between existing
paving and any patches, which may be permitted, shall be sealed with
appropriate sealing materials. Open trenches in public roads or rights-ofway
shall be filled in as soon as possible, and boring shall be carried out in
lieu of open trenching whenever practical.
§ 160-20. Removal of snow, dirt and debris. [Added 10-28-1986 by
Ord. No. 216-B]
A. It shall be the duty of every owner and occupant of any dwelling,
tenement, store, shop, place of business, church, school or any other
building, be it public or private, fronting on any sidewalk in or upon any
street in the Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, to
remove or cause to be removed all snow, ice or sleet from said
sidewalks in front of and around their respective premises within 12
hours after the same has ceased to fall or accumulate thereon.
Similarly, sidewalks fronting vacant lots or vacant buildings shall be
cleaned as aforesaid by the owner or owners of such vacant lots or
vacant buildings. Wherever and whenever it may be impossible to
remove all snow, sleet or ice, as aforesaid, which may have become
§ 160-17 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 160-20
160:337
Chapter 165
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 22.
Recreation Board — See Ch. 27.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Health Code — See Ch. 87.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Street and sidewalk construction — See Ch.
160.
Weeds; visual obstructions — See Ch. 186.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
compacted by travel or formed on sidewalks so as to present a slippery
surface, it shall be the duty of every owner and occupant of the
premises abutting the same to cover such snow, sleet or ice with ashes,
cinders, sand or any other suitable substance in such a manner as
to facilitate safe walking upon the aforesaid sidewalks. No owner or
occupant shall allow snow, sleet or ice to remain on or accumulate in
any drain located on or near any sidewalk so as to impede the flow of
water therein in case of thaw or rain.
B. No person, whether an owner, occupant or otherwise, shall place or
cause the placement of any dirt or debris on or in the sidewalks fronting
his respective premises.
C. No person, whether owner, occupant or otherwise, shall place or cause
the placement of any materials or merchandise of any kind or
description whatsoever, whether for sale, display, storage, construction
or otherwise, in or on any sidewalk or gutter fronting his respective
premises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the temporary
placing of necessary building material in or upon such sidewalks or
gutters permitted under other Township rules and regulations.
§ 160-20 PALMER CODE § 160-20
160:338
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 165-1. Title.
The long title of this ordinance shall be "An Ordinance of Palmer Township
Providing for the Regulation and Control of the Subdivision of Lots and the
Development of Land; the Approval of Plans, Plots or Replots of Land Laid
Out in Building Lots; Standards for the Design of Streets, Lots, Easements,
Blocks and Other Improvements; Certain Minimum Improvements and
Construction Standards on All Streets and Required Dedications; the
Administration of This Ordinance by the Township Planning Commission
and Board of Supervisors; and Penalties for the Violation of This
Ordinance."
§ 165-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance." This chapter shall serve as
Chapter 165 of the codified ordinances of Palmer Township.
§ 165-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to create conditions favorable to the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens by:
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions within
the Township.
B. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with the public
improvements plans of the Township.
C. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
D. Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic and avoiding traffic
hazards and congestion.
E. Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards.
F. Improving land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plans.
G. Safeguarding the interests of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider
and all municipalities.
H. Preserving natural and historic features.
I. Carrying out other objectives specified in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code88 and the Township Comprehensive Plan.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-4
160:339
§ 165-4. Applicability.
§ 165-5. Exceptions.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made and no street, sanitary sewer, water main, gas, oil or
electric transmission line or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, except in accordance with this ordinance.
B. No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold and
no final permit to erect any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued unless and until:
(1) A final plan has been approved and recorded; and
(2) Either:
(a) The Township has been assured by means of a development
agreement acceptable to the Board of Supervisors that the
improvements will subsequently be installed; or
(b) The required improvements in connection therewith have been
entirely completed.
C. The regulations of this ordinance shall apply to any subdivision or land
development.
D. Landowner. No subdivision or land development shall be submitted to
the Township for review except by the landowner of such land or his/her
specifically authorized agent. (See definition of "landowner" in Article
II.)
E. Work on improvements prior to final plan approval. See § 165-44.
A. Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land for only agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or residential dwelling shall be exempted
from the regulations of this ordinance.
B. Approved subdivisions; changes in ordinances.
(1) From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved or approved subject to
conditions acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or
amendment in the Zoning Ordinance,89 Subdivision Ordinance or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely
affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any
aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 165-4 PALMER CODE § 165-5
160:340
§ 165-6. Interpretation.
§ 165-7. Modifications and exceptions.
(2) If final plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan approval, the
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
plan approval.
A. Standards.
(1) The provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted and applied as
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
(2) Where any provision, standard or specification of this ordinance
differs with those of any federal, state or Township law, ordinance
or regulation, the greater restriction upon the applicant shall apply
regardless of its source, unless specified to the contrary.
B. Illustrations. The illustrations in this ordinance are for general
illustrative purposes and are not a part of the regulations of this
ordinance.
A. An applicant seeking a modification of or an exception to a provision of
this ordinance shall submit to the Plans Administrator a request in
writing that states:
(1) The specific chapter section(s) involved.
(2) The reasons for the request.
B. The Planning Commission shall be given an opportunity to make a
recommendation on the matter at a legally advertised meeting. The
Board of Supervisors may, by written resolution, grant a waiver or
modification concerning a specific provision(s) of this ordinance if the
applicant proves that the request meets one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) Will avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that
results from the peculiar and uncommon characteristics of the
property.
(2) Will avoid a clearly unreasonable requirement that would not serve
any valid public purpose in this situation.
(3) Will allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the
applicant to provide equal or better results.
(4) Will allow a layout of improvements that would clearly be more in
the public interest than what would occur if the modification would
not be granted.
§ 165-5 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-7
160:341
§ 165-8. Fees.
§ 165-9. Alternate plans, resubdivisions.
(5) Will remove a requirement that is not applicable, especially
because of the small size of the proposed project.
A. The Board of Supervisors has established, by resolution and which may
be amended by future resolution, a schedule of fees90 and a collection
procedure for all applications and other matters pertaining to this
ordinance. These fees are intended to compensate the Township for its
expenses, including but not limited to application review, engineering
review, inspection, preparation of agreements and legal matters.
B. The applicant is also required to submit any required fee to the Joint
Planning Commission and the County Conservation District.
C. Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and the
applications are properly signed as required.
D. The applicant shall have 14 days from receipt of a bill from Palmer
Township to dispute the amount of review fees. If Palmer Township and
the applicant cannot agree on this amount, then the parties shall use
the alternative dispute resolution method outlined in the Municipalities
Planning Code91 to resolve the dispute. The professional resolving the
dispute shall be in the same profession as the consultant's whose fees
are being disputed. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
A. Multiple plans. Only one plan concerning any single specific area of
land shall be actively before the Township for review and approval at
any one time, unless the Planning Commission specifically determines
that the consideration of two or more alternative plans by the same
applicant would be in the public interest.
B. Resubdivisions.
(1) A revision or resubdivision of a recorded plan or a final plan
approved by the Board of Supervisors shall be considered as a new
subdivision and shall come under the jurisdiction of this ordinance,
except:
(a) If the Planning Commission determines that a revision of an
approved plan is only to correct erroneous data or minor
omissions, it shall not be considered a resubdivision but may
instead be simply reapproved by the Board of Supervisors at a
legally advertised meeting.
90.Editor's Note: The schedule of fees is on file in the Township offices and may be examined
there during regular business hours.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-7 PALMER CODE § 165-9
160:342
§ 165-10. Township records.
The staff and/or Secretary of the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors shall keep a record of the findings, decisions, recommendations
and actions relative to all subdivision or land development plans that are
duly submitted. Such records shall be open to the public for review.
§ 165-11. Amendments to this ordinance.
(2) If lot lines are changed from a previously recorded plan, the
following standards shall be met in addition to other requirements
of this ordinance:
(a) No new lot shall be created that does not conform to the
Township Zoning Ordinance,92 unless a zoning variance is
granted. This specifically shall include, but not be limited to,
zoning requirements for access onto a public street.
(b) If an existing lot is nonconforming according to the Township
Zoning Ordinance, it shall not be made more nonconforming.
(c) Drainage and utility easements shall not be removed or
changed unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that alternative easements will be
provided.
(d) The applicant shall seek to orient any buildings and lot lines to
maximize compatibility with any existing adjacent single-family
detached dwellings.
A. The regulations set forth in this ordinance may, from time to time, be
amended by the Board of Supervisors.
B. A public hearing (held pursuant to public notice) on the proposed
amendment shall be held by the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall submit each proposed amendment
(other than an amendment prepared by the Planning Commission) to
the Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date
set for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall submit any proposed amendment to the
Joint Planning Commission. The proposed action shall not be taken until
the Joint Planning Commission recommendation is made or until the
time limit specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code93
has passed.
E. Any changes to the Preliminary Plan for Major Subdivision or Land
Development Requirements, Final Plan for Major Subdivision or Land
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-9 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-11
160:343
§ 165-12. Appeals.
Decisions of the Board of Supervisors may be appealed in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.94
§ 165-13. Administration.
§ 165-14. Violations and penalties.
Development Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements, Lot Line
Adjustments, Annexations and Minor Revisions of Approved Plans
Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements shall be made by way of
Resolution. [Added 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-319]
A. Enforcement. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one or more
persons to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and the
accompanying design standards and improvement specifications.
B. Inspection. Any action under this ordinance shall be subject to on-site
inspection by the Township or its authorized representatives to ensure
that there is compliance with this ordinance, other Township
ordinances and the approved plans.
C. Remedies. Any action inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to a cease and desist order and other appropriate
measures by the Board of Supervisors or its authorized representatives.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provision(s) of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Board of Supervisors
or its authorized representatives, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred
by the municipality as a result thereof, unless a higher penalty is
established under state law. This shall include, but not be limited to, any
person, partnership or corporation that accomplishes any act listed
under § 165-4, Applicability, without following the applicable
procedures of this ordinance.
B. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
C. See Section 515.3, Enforcement remedies, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code95 regarding each day of violation being
considered a separate violation. See also the remedies provisions of
§ 165-13C of this ordinance. All fines collected for such violations shall
be paid over to the Township.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
95.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.3.
§ 165-11 PALMER CODE § 165-15
160:344
§ 165-15. Liability.
Neither the approval nor the granting of any building permit, floodplain
permit, site plan review, subdivision approval, land development approval,
zoning permit, erosion review, wetland review, stormwater runoff review,
steep slope review or any other review or permit of this ordinance, involving
any land governed by the provisions of this ordinance, by an officer,
employee or agency of the Township, shall constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township or its employees, officials
or agencies of the practicality or safety of any structure, use or subdivision
and shall create no liability upon nor a cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 165-16. Professional certification.
All plans shall comply with applicable state professional certification laws,
including the State Professional Engineers Registration Law.96 All
preliminary and final plans for a subdivision or land development and
all stormwater calculations shall be certified, signed and stamped by a
registered professional engineer. All subdivisions of land shall be certified,
signed and stamped by a registered surveyor.
§ 165-17. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
§ 165-18. Repealer.
All other Township ordinances or parts thereof that were adopted prior to
this ordinance and are in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed,
including the preexisting Palmer Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.
§ 165-19. Municipalities Planning Code amendments.
Any provisions of this ordinance that only repeat or reference provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code97 shall be deemed to be
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly
stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other
provisions of this ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully
effective.
B. The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed this
ordinance and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof are declared invalid.
96.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-15 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-19
160:345
automatically superseded and replaced by any applicable amendment of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 165-20. Requirements for land developments.
See § 165-32 which specifies the requirements for different types of land
developments (other than subdivisions). Unless otherwise stated, a land
development shall meet all of the same improvement and design
requirements as a subdivision.
§ 165-21. Differing requirements.
Wherever two or more Township requirements or definitions, within this
ordinance or within this ordinance and another Township ordinance, apply
to the same situation or regulate the same matter, the regulation or
definition that would be more restrictive and more limiting upon the
applicant shall apply, unless specifically stated otherwise.
§ 165-22. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after adoption by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 165-19 PALMER CODE § 165-22
160:346
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 165-23. General interpretation.
§ 165-24. Definitions.
When used in this ordinance, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for a subdivision or land development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
BIKEWAY — A paved lane specifically established primarily to provide for
travel by nonmotorized bicycles.
BLOCK — Property bounded on one side by a street and on the other three
sides by a street, railroad right-of-way, public park, waterway, Township
line, tract of land held in separate ownership or any combination thereof.
BLOCK FRONTAGE — That part of a block which fronts on a single street.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.
CENTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES — The governing center
for local government services located within the Department of Community
and Economic Development.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a watercourse, which confine and
convey the normal flow of the water, either continuously or intermittently.
CISTERN — A receptacle for collecting and holding rainwater for reuse for
irrigation or drinking water.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Palmer Township.
CONSISTENCY — In agreement or correspondence between matters being
compared which denotes a reasonable rational similar connection or
relationship.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
A. For the purposes of this ordinance, words and terms used herein shall
be interpreted based upon the rules of interpretation listed in § 190-12
of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. If a word is not defined by this ordinance, but is defined by the Zoning
Ordinance as amended, the Zoning Ordinance definition shall apply.
C. The word "includes" shall mean to specifically include an item but not
necessarily limited to such item.
D. Any word or term not defined in this Article or the Zoning Ordinance
shall be used with a meaning of standard usage, within the context of
the provision, as determined by the Plan Administrator of this
ordinance.
§ 165-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-24
160:347
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A land use and growth management
plan prepared by the County Planning Commission and adopted by the
County Commissioners which establishes the broad goals and criteria for
municipalities to use in preparation of their comprehensive plans and land
use regulation.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
DER — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
DETENTION BASIN OR POND — A natural or man-made area in which
stormwater is temporarily detained and from which said water is slowly
released at a rate compatible with sound stormwater and soil management
practices as approved by the Township.
DEVELOPER (SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or
tenant with permission from a landowner, who makes or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement (in a form and manner
acceptable to Township) requiring a developer to install the improvements
required by this ordinance and any improvements or amenities which
appear on the plan in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, excavation, storing,
grading, filling or transporting of soil or any other activity which causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed to intercept and divert surface runoff.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention/
alleviation of flooding.
DWELLING TYPES — See the definitions in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
98
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
a person or group of persons or another tract of land of a use of land for
specified purposes.
EMBANKMENT — A man-made deposit of soil, rock or other material.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed to practice as a
professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — The registered professional engineer
designated by the Board of Supervisors to perform duties required of such
position within the provisions of this ordinance. Such person may be an
appointed consulting engineer, his/her firm or a Township employee.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 165-24 PALMER CODE § 165-24
160:348
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule for the
timing of their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with the Northampton
County Soil Conservation Service reviews.
EXCAVATION or CUT — An act by which soil or soils are cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to cutting or filling.
FINISHED GRADE — The final elevation of the ground surface conforming
to the proposed design.
FREEBOARD — A margin of safety, expressed in feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
GENERAL CONSISTENCY — Generally consistent that which exhibits
consistency.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
GRADE — The elevation of finished ground or paving.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination
thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a building other than a cellar or
basement.
GROUND RECHARGE — The process of stormwater entering into the
ground to replenish the underground water table.
IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Township, requiring a developer to install the
improvements required by this ordinance or which appear on the official
approved plans.
IMPROVEMENT(S) — The infrastructure amenities associated with a
subdivision or land development as may be required by this ordinance,
including, but not limited to, streets, walkways, curbs, storm sewers and
stormwater management facilities, street and parking lot lights,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, buffer or screening
plantings, landscaping, etc.[Added 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-378]
JPC — Joint Planning Commission, Lehigh-Northampton Counties, or its
successor agency.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.99 (As of 1993, this definition included the following: "The
improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels
of land for any purpose involving either or both of the following: a
group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on
A.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-24 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-24
160:349
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee (if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner) or other
person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — The revision or deletion of one or more lot lines
in such a way that all of the following are true:
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts a public street on one side of
the lot, but has vehicular access only from a public street on the opposite
side of the lot.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the enclosed area, including basement.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — An agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, requiring the developer of
improvements which have been dedicated to make any repairs or
reconstructions and to maintain such improvements for a certain period.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Township to secure the promise made by a developer in the
maintenance agreement that dedicated improvements shall be maintained
by the developer. (NOTE: These guaranties typically include acceptable
a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the
division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, lease holds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.")
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall specifically not
be considered a "land development":
The construction of only one accessory agricultural building that
is not intended for the storage of animal wastes or the storage or
feeding of animals; or
(1)
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or a
single-family semidetached dwelling (half of a twin home) into a
maximum of three dwelling units.
(2)
A subdivision of land that does not meet the above definition of a
"land development."
(3)
B.
A. No new lots will be created beyond what was previously approved;
No additional street segments or changes in alignment are proposed
other than what was previously approved;
B.
No additional nonconformities will be created under the Township
Zoning Ordinance; and
C.
No new land development will occur other than a land development that
was previously approved or buildings to support crop farming.
D.
§ 165-24 PALMER CODE § 165-24
160:350
letters of credit, performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.)
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major."
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME SPACE — A parcel of land in a mobile
home park, improved with the necessary utility connection and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home,
which is leased or rented by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile
home erected on the lot.
MULCHING — The application of plant or other suitable materials on the
soil's surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in establishing
plant cover.
MULTI-MUNICIPAL PLANNING AGENCY — A planning agency comprised
of representatives of more than one municipality and constituted as a
Joint Municipal Planning Commission in accordance with Article 9 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, or otherwise by resolution of
the participating municipalities, to address, on behalf of the participating
municipalities, multi-municipal issues, including, but not limited to,
agricultural and open space preservation, natural and historic resources,
transportation, housing and economic development.[Added 2-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-298]
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE or ACT
247 — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. 100
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any grading, excavation or filling.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, materials, fill or activity that would
impede, retard or change natural or approved stormwater flows.
OPEN SPACE — The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways or parking areas but may include areas
occupied by walkways, patios and porches without roofs, playgrounds and
other areas occupied by outdoor recreation or play apparatus, gardens and
trees.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — The definition in the Township Zoning
Ordinance101 shall apply.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Common open space owned by a government
agency or the Township for public recreation.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — Open space of a lot or tract used for residential
purposes, exclusive of required front and side yard areas, which is suitable
for specified use(s) or as outdoor recreation for the residents. (See
§ 165-62.)
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 165-24 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-24
160:351
ORDINANCE, THIS — The Palmer Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and any provisions or amendments thereof,
enacted by the Board of Supervisors.
PARCEL — A tract, lot or area of land.
PARKING — Outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or garages used
for the storage of vehicles; unless otherwise stated, shall mean off-street
"parking."
PATHWAY — A pedestrian accessway which may or may not be adjacent to
a street or access drive and which conforms with this ordinance.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors to secure the promise made by a developer in
the development agreement that certain improvements shall be made by
the developer. (NOTE: This typically includes acceptable letters of credit,
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.)
PLAN or (PLAT) — A map of a land development or subdivision of land.
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "Commission."
PLANS ADMINISTRATOR — One or more Township officials authorized by
the Board of Supervisors to have the primary responsibility to administer
this ordinance. This typically is a member of the Township Code
enforcement staff, such as the Zoning Officer.
PRESERVATIONAL PROTECTION — When used in connection with natural
historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these
resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to
authorize unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses
of natural resources.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY — A planning agency that is compromised
of representatives of more than one county. Regional planning
responsibilities shall include providing technical assistance to counties and
municipalities, mediating conflicts across county lines and reviewing county
comprehensive plans for consistency with one another.[Added 2-19-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-298]
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, identified as such with the title
"Sketch Plan" on the map, indicating existing features of a tract and its
surroundings and the general layout of the proposed subdivision.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A complete plan, identified as such with the
title "Preliminary Plan," accurately showing proposed streets and lot
layout and such other information as required by this ordinance.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan, identified as such with the
title "Final Plan," prepared for official recording as required by this
ordinance to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
C.
§ 165-24 PALMER CODE § 165-24
160:352
RETENTION BASIN OR POND — A natural or man-made area in which
stormwater is retained on a long-term basis.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of solid material, both mineral and
organic, that was in suspension and that has been transported from its site
of origin by any means of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at
other suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other materials,
to prevent these materials from entering a creek, river, stream or lake.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system designed to collect, treat and dispose of
sewage from users in compliance with regulations of the appropriate state
agency and of the Township.
SEWER CONNECTION — The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings
and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a dwelling or building to the
inlet of the street or main collector sewer pipe of the sewerage system
serving the subdivision or land development.
SIDEWALK — A pedestrian accessway which is adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms to the regulations of this ordinance.
SITE ALTERATION — Includes regrading the existing topography, filling
lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains, clearing vegetation or altering
watercourses.
SITE PLAN — Unless otherwise stated, a development plan that may be
required by § 190-201 of the Zoning Ordinance.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Soil and Water Conservation
District for Northampton County.
SOIL SURVEY — A scientific survey of soil conditions and characteristics
prepared by an engineer or soil scientist and approved, certified or
completed by the United States Soil Conservation Service.
SOLAR ACCESS — The capability of receiving direct sunlight between 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. (solar time) on any area of a lot not within required yard
areas.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvements was within
180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement
CENTRAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which collects, treats,
and disposes sewage from more than two dwellings, principal uses or
lots.
A.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM — A central sewage system owned and
operated by a public authority or the Township.
B.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage system which collects, treats
and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one or two dwellings,
principal uses or lots.
C.
§ 165-24 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-24
160:353
of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a
site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage
of excavation.
STATE — The government of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its
relevant subparts.
STATE LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT REPORT — A
comprehensive land use and growth management report to be prepared
by the Center for Local Government Services and which shall contain
information, data and conclusions regarding growth and development
patterns in this commonwealth and which will offer recommendations to
commonwealth agencies for coordination of executive action, regulation
and programs.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
STORMWATER DETENTION — The holding or slowing down of stormwater
runoff to avoid increased rates of runoff during peak periods.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property or that is an expressway, but not
including an alley or a driveway.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — See the Official Street Classification Map,102
which was adopted as part of the Township Zoning Ordinance.103 This map
classifies streets as "expressway" (or "major arterial"), "arterial" (or "minor
arterial"), "collector" or "local" streets. As a general guide for designating
proposed new streets, a local street is intended to average less than 500
trips per day, a collector street is intended to average 501 to 3,000 trips per
day, and an arterial street is intended to average more than 3,000 trips per
day.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A type of local street which is permanently
terminated at one end by a vehicular turnaround and intersects another
street at the other end.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A type of local street which is parallel
and adjacent to collector or arterial streets and provides access to abutting
properties.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION —
As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.104 (As of 1993, this definition was as follows: the division or
redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development. The subdivision by lease of
land for clearly only agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10
A.
102. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-24 PALMER CODE § 165-24
160:354
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land which does not qualify as
a minor subdivision. This includes the subdivision of land which results in
two or more industrial, commercial or institutional lots.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR —
SUBDIVISION, NATURAL — Any tract or parcel of land divided into two or
more separate areas by one or more public streets. See definition of "lot"
in the Zoning Ordinance,105 which generally would treat each area on each
side of a public street as a separate lot, with the remaining area being
considered residual land for the purposes of submittal requirements.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The Palmer Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — As defined by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.106 [As of 1993, this definition was as follows:
"In the judgment of the Township Engineer at least 90% (based upon the
cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted)
of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use."]
TEMPORARY PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive sediment-producing
materials.
acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or residential
dwellings is exempted from the requirements of this ordinance.)
A division of a development into condominiums shall be considered
a land development, but such division by itself shall not be a
"subdivision."
B.
A proposal involving land, other than a land development, which is
either:
A subdivision:
That results in only one or two new additional residential lots
or only one or two new additional clearly agricultural lots of
more than 10 acres each or only one new additional business
or institutional lot in addition to the one preexisting parent lot;
and
(a)
Which does not involve an extension or new segment of a street
(other than what was previously approved); or
(b)
(1)
(2) A lot line adjustment.
A.
See § 165-40A of this ordinance regarding the maximum number of
minor subdivisions permitted from a parent tract in a five-year period.
B.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-24 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-24
160:355
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
Unless otherwise stated, this shall mean the Board of Supervisors and its
authorized agents.
TRACT — One or more abutting or adjacent lots proposed to be subdivided
or developed following an overall coordinated plan.
USGS — United States Geological Survey or its successor agency.
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas, by establishing permanent long-term vegetative cover, by
seeding of the soil or planting sod.
WALKWAY — A strip of land, including a right-of-way dedicated to public
use, in order to facilitate pedestrian access through or into a block.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, millrace, canal, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows
in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and
which has a definite channel and bed. This term shall include any area
adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATER, ON-LOT OR NONPUBLIC OR NONCENTRAL SERVICE — Service
by a water system that does not meet the definition of "public water
service."
WATER, PUBLIC OR CENTRAL SERVICE — Service by a central water
system that is owned and operated by a municipal authority or a Public
Utility Commission regulated water company and that serves more than 20
dwelling units or principal uses.
§ 165-24 PALMER CODE § 165-24
160:356
ARTICLE III
Overview of General Procedures
§ 165-25. Purpose.
This Article summarizes the general procedures for the submission and
review of proposed subdivisions and land developments. This Article is only
a general explanation and is not binding on the Township or an applicant.
See the actual provisions of the other Articles of this ordinance. Two
flowcharts are included at the end of this Article107 to show the general
process for major and minor subdivisions.
§ 165-26. General procedure for subdivisions and land
developments.
A. Review and approval stages.
(1) Three types of plan submission are included in the procedure for
filing and approval of subdivision and land development plans:
sketch, preliminary and final.
(2) These plans enable the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors to have an adequate opportunity to review the
submission and to ensure that their formal recommendations are
reflected in the final plan which is recorded in accordance with this
Article.
(3) The table below outlines the stages for the different types of
proposed subdivision or land development.108 See definitions of
each term in Article II.
B. Sketch plan.
(1) While sketch plans are not required for major and minor
subdivisions or land developments, it is strongly recommended that
they be filed to allow the applicant to consult early and informally
with the Planning Commission before preparing a preliminary plan.
An early review will help a developer avoid the need to make major
changes to the plan after the engineering is completed and thereby
avoid unnecessary expenses and delays.
(2) Comments made and not made by Township officials on the sketch
plan are only recommendations and are not binding upon the
Township or the applicant.
C. Preliminary plan. Except where a preliminary plan is not required, the
initial plan filed to the Commission for formal review of a major
subdivision or land development shall be considered the official
107. Editor's Note: The flowcharts regarding generalized processes for major and minor
subdivisions or land developments are included at the end of this chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-25 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-26
160:357
§ 165-27. General plan submission procedures.
preliminary plan. The preliminary plan is intended to provide for
Township approval of the major facets of the development and to ensure
that the engineering of the project would be workable.
D. Final plan. After approval of the preliminary plan of a major subdivision
or land development, the applicant files a final plan. The final plan
allows the Township to ensure that technical matters are resolved
before the plan is recorded or the buildings can be built.
E. Guaranty of improvements installation. Where improvements are
required by this ordinance and the improvements are not completed in
advance, the applicant is required to enter into a development
agreement, including the posting of financial security to make sure that
the improvements are completed. See Article VIII.
F. Recording of final plan. In most cases, the applicant is required to have
the approved subdivision final plan recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds within 90 days after final approval. See Article IX.
No lots may be sold or buildings constructed until the plan is approved
and recorded.
A. Submission. Plans should be hand-delivered to a Township staffperson
who is responsible for administering this ordinance. The list of
requirements in this ordinance is in the form of a checklist to make it
easier for the Township and the applicant to determine whether a
submittal is complete.
B. Completeness. The Planning Commission may refuse to accept a
submittal if it is significantly incomplete. In that case, the plans will
have to be resubmitted to the Township.
C. Attendance. The applicant or his/her representative should endeavor to
attend the Commission meeting to discuss the filed plans.
D. Action by the Commission and the Board of Supervisors. The Planning
Commission recommends approval or disapproval to the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors then approves or disapproves
the plan within the time limits established by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.109
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-26 PALMER CODE § 165-27
160:358
ARTICLE IV
Sketch Plan
§ 165-28. Preplan consultation.
Prior to submission of a sketch plan, applicants for larger developments are
encouraged to informally discuss their intent with the Zoning Officer, Plans
Administrator, Planning Commission and/or the Board of Supervisors.
§ 165-29. Plan submission and drawing requirements.
A. Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, developers are very
strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan in person at a regular or
special meeting of the Planning Commission of Palmer Township. A
sketch plan review often allows an applicant to save substantial time
and engineering costs, because many concerns about layout and issues
concerning Township ordinances can be resolved prior to detailed
engineering. This can often reduce the need for future redesign at a
more detailed stage, thereby saving the applicant significant money and
time.
B. Review. Sketch plans shall be subject to review by the Township staff,
the Township Engineer, the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors. No official action shall be required by the Township on a
sketch plan. The Township shall not be bound by comments made or not
made as part of the sketch plan review.
C. Timing of submittal. When submitted, sketch plans and the required
application should be, but are not required to be, submitted to the Plans
Administrator a minimum of 21 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which the applicant desires review. Any plans submitted
after such time limit may be placed at the end of the agenda and may be
tabled until the next meeting if time does not permit adequate review.
D. Prints. When submitted, 15 print copies of the sketch plan shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
E. Drawing requirements. The sketch plan shall be drafted to scale and
should generally include the following:
(1) Property boundaries (may be obtained from County Tax Map or
similar sources).
(2) General topographic contours [from maps available from the
Township staff or from a United States Geological Survey map
(USGS)] and approximate areas of over 15% slope (such as from
the Northampton County Soil Survey or USGS map).
(3) Proposed lot and street layout with approximate areas of lots and
existing and proposed widths of street rights-of-way and street
cartways.
§ 165-28 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-29
160:359
§ 165-30. Sketch plan review procedures.
(4) Site data, including:
(a) Approximate acres of entire tract.
(b) Number of lots and types of dwelling units (if residential).
(c) Zoning district and major applicable requirements (such as
minimum lot area).
(5) North arrow; graphic and written scale. Plans should be drawn to a
scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger.
(6) Approximate proposed building locations (if known) and proposed
types of uses.
(7) Preliminary name of project (may be owner's name).
(8) A location map showing the general location of the project in
relation to adjacent lots, streets and waterways (such as from the
Township Zoning Map110 or USGS map, preferably at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet).
(9) Approximate location of any area within the one-hundred-year
floodplain (from Federal Insurance Administration map).
(10) General provisions for stormwater management (such as
approximate location of any detention basin).
(11) If required by Article X, whether the applicant proposes to dedicate
common open space or fees in lieu of land, and the proposed
locations of any such open space.
(12) Description of general methods of providing water and sewer
service, with sufficient information to show the general feasibility
of providing any central water and central sewage service (such as
proximity of existing lines).
(13) Land uses of adjacent lots and any zoning district boundaries in the
area.
(14)Name and address of person responsible for the preparation of the
plans and the date of completion of the plans and any subsequent
revision dates.
(15) Approximate locations of any potential wetlands (which may be
based upon hydric soils from the County Soil Survey).
(16) Approximate locations of any tree with a trunk diameter of over 18
inches measured 4.5 feet above the surrounding average ground
level.
110. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 165-29 PALMER CODE § 165-30
160:360
A. Reviews. The Township should distribute copies of the sketch plan to
the Township Engineer, the relevant Township staffperson(s), the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors for any advisory
reviews they may wish to offer.
(1) If the Township staff determines that there are mature trees on the
site, a copy should be provided to the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Recreation Commission. A copy of the plan should be provided to
the Township Recreation Commission for a review of whether open
space or recreation fees should be required. Recreation
Commission review should especially be sought if the sketch plan
would involve land along a creek or river or more than five dwelling
units or be adjacent to an existing Township park.
(3) JPC. One copy of the sketch plan should but is not required to be
submitted to the Joint Planning Commission for any informal
review.
B. A summary of the comments of such Boards and persons should be
provided to the applicant or his/her representative if such person is not
in attendance.
§ 165-30 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-30
160:361

ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plan
§ 165-31. Purpose.
The purpose is to achieve formal approval of the overall development
scheme proposed in order to minimize the need for any revisions of final
plans.
§ 165-32. Submission and review procedure.
A. Preliminary plan submission required.
(1) A preliminary plan submission for a major subdivision or land
development [except as provided in Subsection A(2) below]
meeting all of the requirements of this Article shall be filed by the
applicant and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
(2) A preliminary plan submission is not required for:
(a) A minor subdivision (See limitations in § 165-40A.)
(b) A submission that only involves a lot line adjustment or what
the Township determines to be minor revisions to an approved
plan. (See Article VII.)
(c) A land development involving only one principal nonresidential
building (other than a shopping center) or not more than three
new dwelling units.
(3) The applicant should make an appointment with the Plans
Administrator to submit the plans.
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the staff at least 21 calendar days*
prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not including a
workshop meeting), except that such filing shall be made a
minimum of 28 days prior to such meeting if the plans involve more
than 50 dwelling units:
(a) The required fees.
(b) The forms, information and plans required under § 165-33.
§ 165-31 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-32
160:363
*NOTE: Revisions to a plan actively under review shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Township and the Township
Engineer a minimum of 21 calendar days prior to a Planning
Commission meeting at which such plan will be considered,
except for an adjustment that the Plans Administrator
determines to include only a minor correction or addition
of a notation which may be submitted five days prior to a
Planning Commission meeting. Revisions to a plan actively
under review shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Township and the Township Engineer a minimum of 14
calendar days prior to the Board of Supervisors meeting at
which the plan is intended to be voted upon.
(2) Applicant's distribution. The applicant is fully responsible for the
following:
(a) Contacting the appropriate utility companies, as appropriate,
including the water and sewerage supplier, as applicable.
(b) Encouraged to seek at least an informal review by PennDOT of
any new proposed access(es) onto a state road and providing
PennDOT with sufficient information for such a review.
(c) Determining whether any permits or approvals are needed
from any agency outside of the Township, including DER (such
as any obstruction of a waterway) and the Army Corps of
Engineers (including determining whether any wetland will be
disturbed).
(d) Providing a copy of the sedimentation and erosion control
plans to the County Conservation District, together with its
required review fees, if any earth disturbance is proposed.
(e) Providing a copy of the plans to the Joint Planning Commission,
with a JPC application form and the JPC's review fee, and then
providing the Township with a copy of the receipt from the JPC
within five days after submittal to the Township.
(3) Each preliminary plan and supporting documents should seek to
incorporate any revisions recommended by the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer and other appropriate
Township officials during any sketch plan review.
(4) Colored layout plan. It is recommended that the applicant provide
one copy of the layout plan that is lightly colored to allow clear
understanding by the general public at public meetings.
(5) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions from a previously submitted
plan shall be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted.
C. Initial actions by the Township staff; zoning variances.
§ 165-32 PALMER CODE § 165-32
160:364
(1) Any submittal to the Township staff under this ordinance shall
automatically be considered to be submitted under the condition
that the Planning Commission shall have the authority at its next
regular meeting to determine whether the submission is
significantly complete and should be officially accepted.
(2) The Township staff shall forward applicable plans to the following
agencies to seek their comments prior to preliminary plan
approval:
(a) Sewage Enforcement Officer (if on-lot septic systems are
proposed).
(b) Township Police Chief and Fire Commissioner (layout and
utility plan, if deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission
or Township staff). [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-365]
(c) The appropriate Township staff (including one complete file
copy of all materials submitted by the applicant).
(d) Township Engineer, with the plans provided prior to the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
(e) The Township Recreation Commission (layout, natural features
and grading plans only).
(f) The Township Planning Commission, (including copies of the
application form, at least one copy of the preliminary plan
checklist, several copies of the preliminary plan and at least
one copy of the supporting documents) with such information
provided prior to or at the first regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting after a proper submission.
(g) The Township Shade Tree Commission (layout and landscaping
plans only).
(3) Adjacent municipalities. If any portion of a major subdivision or
land development is proposed within 200 feet of the boundary of
another municipality or would clearly have a regional impact upon
another municipality as determined by the Township staff, then the
staff should provide a copy of the layout plan to that municipality
for an advisory review.
(4) Zoning variances.
(a) A preliminary or final plan application under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance shall not be officially
accepted for the purposes of the time limits under the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code111 if any aspect of
the plan does not comply with the Township Zoning Ordinance.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-32 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-32
160:365
After any applicable zoning variances that affect the
subdivision or land development plan have been granted, then
the applicant may make a formal submittal under this
ordinance. This limitation shall not apply to modifications
permitted to be granted by the Board of Supervisors for a
planned residential development (PRD).
(b) An applicant is encouraged to request an advisory sketch plan
review by the Planning Commission prior to the granting of a
variance that directly impacts upon the layout of the site.
However, such submittal and review shall not be considered an
official submittal for the purposes of the ninety-day time limit
on plan approvals.
(c) A subdivision or land development review and approval shall
not be delayed because of a court appeal of a zoning variance
granted to an applicant. However, the Township may establish
as a condition of Township approval that the appeal needs to be
resolved in a manner that is consistent with the approved plan.
D. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Engineer should review the engineering
considerations of a duly submitted preliminary plan and prepare an
initial report on such considerations to the Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors
during review of the plan. Policy matters that should be dealt with
directly by the Planning Commission and/or the Board of
Supervisors should be listed separately from technical engineering
considerations. These policy concerns should be made available to
the Planning Commission at least four days prior to each meeting,
when possible.
(3) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable efforts
to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of and prior
to Planning Commission meetings. The Township Engineer may
require the applicant or his/her engineer to meet with him/her for
this purpose.
(4) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent or
handed in person to the applicant or his/her representative.
(5) Applicant's response to reviews. With any submittal of revised
plans, the applicant and/or his/her representative shall also provide
a cover letter that shall respond to all written comments of the
Township Engineer and the Township staff. Such cover letter shall
either state that all such comments were incorporated or shall state
which comments were not incorporated. If the applicant and/or his/
her representative disagrees with a review comment, such cover
letter shall state the reasons why.
§ 165-32 PALMER CODE § 165-32
160:366
(6) See § 165-32B(1) regarding deadlines for submittal of plan
revisions prior to Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors
meetings.
E. Review by Planning Commission.
(1) Completeness.
(a) The Plans Administrator and/or the Township Engineer shall
review the submission items that were filed against the
checklist for completeness. The Township and the Township
Engineer may also begin a substantive review immediately
after submittal. The applicant's escrow/review fees may be
deposited and used after submittal.
(b) Based upon such review, the Planning Commission shall have
the authority to determine whether the submission is
significantly incomplete. The Commission may accept
numerous submittals in one motion or in separate motions. If
the submittal is determined by the Commission to be
significantly incomplete, the submittal shall be considered to
have not been officially accepted by the Township. In such
case, the filing and review fees shall be returned to the
applicant, minus the cost of Township and consultant reviews
up to that point in time. If the Commission does not make a
motion on the matter, then the submittal shall be considered to
be accepted.
(c) Any determination that a plan is significantly incomplete shall
occur at a meeting of the Planning Commission within 30 days
after a duly filed submittal. If a submittal is not accepted, no
further action is required by the Township, and no deemed
approval shall occur.
(2) The Planning Commission should, but is not required to, begin a
substantive review of a submittal at the first meeting.
(3) If the submission is accepted, the Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code112 (unless the applicant
grants a written time extension), while allowing a sufficient number
of days within this deadline for a decision by the Board of
Supervisors:
(a) Review all applicable reports received from any official
reviewing agencies.
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets the
requirements of this ordinance and other applicable
ordinances.
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-32 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-32
160:367
(c) Recommend any revisions to the submission that are needed to
comply with this ordinance or that would generally improve
the plan.
(d) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
the preliminary plan submission in a written report to the
Board of Supervisors that specifies any recommended
conditions for approval, identifies defects found in the
application, describes requirements which have not been met
and cites the provisions of the ordinance relied upon.
(4) See § 165-32B(1) regarding deadlines for submittal of plan
revisions prior to Board of Supervisors action.
F. Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the plans, the report of the Commission and any reports
that have been received from reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets the
requirements of this ordinance and other ordinances.
(3) Approve or reject the preliminary plan submission within the time
required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.113 (As
of 1993, this law requires: The Board of Supervisors to act not later
than 90 days following the date of the first regular meeting of the
Commission held after it has been properly filed for review; but in
no case shall the Board of Supervisors' decision be made later than
90 days following the date the submission was accepted as being
filed for review, unless the applicant grants a written extension of
time; and that no subdivision or land development shall be granted
final approval until a report is received from the Joint Planning
Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
application was forwarded to the JPC.)
G. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or by mail at his/
her last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(2) Approval of the preliminary plan submission shall constitute
conditional approval of the subdivision or land development as to
the character and intensity but shall not constitute approval of the
final plan or authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(3) If the preliminary plan submission is disapproved, the decision
shall specify defects found in the submission, describe
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-32 PALMER CODE § 165-32
160:368
§ 165-33. Preliminary plan requirements.
requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Joint preliminary/final approval. At its sole discretion, if the
preliminary plan submission meets all requirements for both
preliminary and final plan approval, then the Board of Supervisors
may grant a combined preliminary/final plan approval. In such
case, a separate final plan submittal and approval will not be
required.
H. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a complete final plan within five years from
the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Supervisors, unless an extension in writing has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors for good cause.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan null and void, and a new preliminary plan
submission and approval shall be required.
I. Development in stages. See § 165-36I.
A. Applicability.
(1) All of the following information and materials listed in this section
are required as part of all preliminary plans for any of the
following:
(a) A land development of two or more new principal
nonresidential buildings.
(b) A land development of four or more new dwelling units.
(c) Any major subdivision.
(d) Any minor subdivision required to be treated as a major
subdivision under § 165-40A.
(2) The list of requirements in this § 165-33 shall serve both:
(a) To establish the requirements; and
(b) As a checklist for the applicant and the Township to use to
ensure completeness of submissions.
(3) The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of this ection as
part of a preliminary or a final plan application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that all information is clearly
readable.
§ 165-32 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-33
160:369
§ 165-34. Certification.
All certification shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor.
C. Preliminary plan for major subdivision or land development checklist
and list of submittal requirements.114
114. Editor's Note: The checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-33 PALMER CODE § 165-34
160:370
ARTICLE VI
Final Plan
§ 165-35. Applicability.
This Article lists the requirements for final plans for a major subdivision
and for certain land developments. See the requirements of Article VII for
a project that only involves a minor subdivision, a lot line adjustment, what
the Township determines to be only minor corrections or minor revisions
to an approved plan or a land development involving only a single
nonresidential building (other than a shopping center) and three or less
dwelling units.
§ 165-36. Submission and review procedure.
A. Final plan submission required.
(1) A final plan submission for each major subdivision or land
development must be filed by the applicant and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Article VI.
(2) A final plan shall only be submitted after a preliminary plan has
been approved by the Board of Supervisors, if a preliminary plan is
required, except:
(a) If a preliminary plan submittal has been recommended for
approval by the Planning Commission and the plan is actively
awaiting action by the Board of Supervisors and no
outstanding conditions exist other than any needed approvals
or permits by outside agencies, then the applicant may submit
a final plan for review. Such final plan shall not be considered
by the Planning Commission at a meeting until the preliminary
plan has been approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such final
plan submittal shall be at the risk of the applicant. If the
preliminary plan is rejected by the Board of Supervisors, such
final plan submittal shall immediately become null and void.
B. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan submission within five years from
the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Supervisors, unless an extension in writing has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan submission null and void, and a new preliminary
plan submission must be filed.
C. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff at least 21 days*
prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting (not including
§ 165-35 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-36
160:371
workshop meetings) all of the required plans, information and
fees listed and referenced in § 165-37 of this ordinance. (*NOTE:
Revisions to a plan actively under review shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Township and the Township Engineer a minimum
of 21 calendar days prior to a Planning Commission meeting at
which such plan will be considered, except for an adjustment that
the Plans Administrator determines to include only a minor
correction or addition of a notation which may be submitted five
days prior to a Planning Commission meeting. Revisions to a plan
actively under review shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Township and the Township Engineer a minimum of 14 calendar
days prior to the Board of Supervisors meeting at which the plan is
intended to be voted upon.)
(2) Applicant's distribution. It is the applicant's responsibility to:
(a) Make agreements with the appropriate utility companies.
(b) Provide information to PennDOT that is required for any
needed permit for access to or work within a state road rightof-
way.
(c) Provide information to DER or other agencies for any permits
that might be required.
(d) Submit a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation plan to the
County Conservation District and pay its required review fees,
if earth disturbance is proposed and if such erosion control
plan was not approved at the preliminary plan level.
(e) Provide a copy of the plans to the Joint Planning Commission.
(3) The filing of the final plan shall conform with the approved
preliminary plan and any conditions and changes recommended by
the Township during the preliminary plan review.
(4) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions from a previously submitted
plan shall be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted.
(5) Applicant's response to reviews. With any submittal of revised
plans, the applicant and/or his/her representative shall also provide
a cover letter that shall respond to all written comments of the
Township Engineer and the Township staff. Such cover letter shall
either state that all such comments were incorporated or shall state
which comments were not incorporated. If the applicant and/or his/
her representative disagrees with a review comment, such cover
letter shall state the reasons why.
(6) See Subsection C(1) regarding deadlines for submittal of plan
revisions prior to Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors
meetings.
D. Initial actions by the Township staff.
§ 165-36 PALMER CODE § 165-36
160:372
(1) Any submittal to the Township staff under this ordinance shall
automatically be considered to be submitted under the condition
that the Planning Commission shall have the authority at its next
regular meeting to determine whether the submission is
significantly complete and should be officially accepted.
(2) The Township staff shall forward applicable plans to the following
agencies to seek their comments prior to final plan approval:
(a) Sewage Enforcement Officer (if on-lot septic systems are
proposed).
(b) Township Engineer, provided prior to the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
(c) Township Police Chief and Fire Commissioner (layout and
utility plan, if not reviewed at the preliminary plan level and if
deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission or Township
staff). [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
(d) The appropriate Township staff (including one official file copy
of all materials submitted by the applicant).
(e) The Township Planning Commission (including copies of the
application form, at least one copy of the preliminary plan
checklist, several copies of the preliminary plan and at least
one copy of the supporting documents), with such information
provided at or before the next regular meeting of the
Commission.
(f) The Township Recreation Commission and Shade Tree
Commission (layout and landscaping plans if deemed
appropriate by the Township staff).
(3) Zoning variances. See § 165-32C.
E. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) Within 30 days from the date the plans are duly submitted for
review (unless granted an extension by the Commission or unless
the Township Engineer believes the plans are severely incomplete),
the Township Engineer should review the engineering
considerations of the preliminary plan and prepare an initial report
on such considerations to the Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors
during review of the plan. Matters that should be dealt with
directly by the Planning Commission and/or the Board of
Supervisors should be listed separately from technical engineering
considerations. These policy concerns should be made available to
the Planning Commission at least four days prior to each meeting.
§ 165-36 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-36
160:373
(3) The applicant and/or his/her plan preparer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of
and prior to Planning Commission meetings. The Township
Engineer may require the applicant or his/her plan preparer to
meet with the Township Engineer for this purpose.
(4) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent or
handed in person to the applicant or his/her representative.
F. Review by Planning Commission.
(1) Completeness.
(a) The Plans Administrator and/or the Township Engineer shall
review the submission items that were filed against the
checklist for completeness. The Township and the Township
Engineer may also begin a substantive review immediately
after submittal. The applicant's escrow/review fees may be
deposited and used after submittal.
(b) Based upon such review, the Planning Commission shall have
the authority to determine whether the submission is
significantly incomplete. The Commission may accept
numerous submittals in one motion or in separate motions. If
the submittal is determined by the Commission to be
significantly incomplete, the submittal shall be considered to
have not been officially accepted by the Township. In such
case, the filing and review fees shall be returned to the
applicant, minus the cost of all Township and consultant
reviews up to that point in time. If the Commission does not
make a motion on the matter, then the submittal shall be
considered to be accepted.
(c) Any determination that a plan is significantly incomplete shall
occur at a meeting of the Planning Commission within 30 days
after a duly filed submittal. If a submittal is not accepted, no
further action is required by the Township, and no deemed
approval shall occur.
(2) Consistency with preliminary plan. If the Commission determines
that a final plan submission, as filed, departs substantially from the
approved preliminary plan, the Commission may classify the
submission as a revised preliminary plan (with the applicable
review fees required) and process the application as such.
(3) If the submission is accepted, the Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code115 (unless the applicant
grants a written time extension), while allowing a sufficient number
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-36 PALMER CODE § 165-36
160:374
of days within this deadline for a decision by the Board of
Supervisors.
(a) The Commission shall review applicable reports received from
official review agencies.
(b) The Commission shall determine whether the final plan
submission meets the requirements of this ordinance and may
consider other applicable ordinances.
(c) The Commission may recommend some/all of any needed
revisions needed for the submission to conform to this
ordinance or that would generally improve the plan.
(d) The Commission shall recommend approval, conditional
approval or disapproval of the final plan submission in a
written report to the Board of Supervisors that specifies any
recommended conditions for approval, identifies defects found
by the application, describes requirements which have not
been met and cites the provisions of the ordinance relied upon.
(e) The Commission's report should be mailed to the last known
address or handed to the applicant or his/her representative.
G. Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the report of the Commission and any reports received from
any official reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or reject the final plan submission
within the time required by the Municipalities Planning Code.116
(As of 2000, state law requires the Board of Supervisors shall
render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date the application is
filed or after a final order of court remanding the application,
provided that should the next regular meeting occur more than 30
days following the filing of the application or the final order of
court, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the application has been filed. An applicant may
always grant a written extension to the Township extending the
ninety-day period.) [Amended 2-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-298]
H. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) Notice to applicant. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-36 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-36
160:375
personally or mailed to him/her at his/her last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) Dedications.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors shall
not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way, space or area, unless the
such acceptance is specified at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall only occur after formal
action of the Township at such time.
(c) As part of an improvements agreement, if the Board of
Supervisors elects to accept lands offered for dedication, the
submission shall be accompanied by duly executed instruments
of conveyance to the Township. Such instruments shall state
that the title thereof is free and unencumbered.
(3) Disapproval. When a final plan submission is disapproved, the
decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall
describe requirements which have not been met and shall cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. The Board of Supervisors may attach reasonable
conditions to a subdivision or land development approval to ensure
the carrying out of the Comprehensive Plan, this ordinance, other
Township ordinances and state laws and regulations.
I. Development in stages.
(1) If requested by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors may permit
the undertaking of the required improvements and the preparation
of the final plan to be completed in a series of sections or stages,
each covering a portion of the proposed subdivision or land
development as shown on the preliminary plan. Each section in any
residential subdivision or land development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of
dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan for said
subdivision/land development previously approved by the Board of
Supervisors. Further, the developer must submit a staging plan for
said phased development to be approved by the Township at the
time of preliminary plan approval. [Amended 11-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-328]
(2) If final plans are to be filed in sections or stages, each section or
stage shall provide sufficient access, utilities and amenities to allow
the development to properly function if future stages are not built.
(3) The boundaries of phases and the timing of related improvements
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 165-36 PALMER CODE § 165-36
160:376
§ 165-37. Final plan requirements.
§ 165-38. Certification.
All certification shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor, as required by state law.
J. Statement of approval. If requested by the applicant, the Township shall
furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the applicant's final plan contingent upon the applicant
obtaining a satisfactory financial security. However, such statement
shall not cause Township officials to sign the plan, until after a
satisfactory financial security is presented. The resolution of contingent
approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial
security agreement is not executed within time limits established by
this ordinance.
A. Applicability of final plan.
(1) All of the information and materials listed in this section117 are
required to be submitted by the applicant as part of all final plans
for:
(a) A major subdivision.
(b) A land development involving two or more nonresidential
principal buildings or four or more new dwelling units.
(c) A shopping center (as defined by the Zoning Ordinance).
(d) Any minor subdivision required to be treated as a major
subdivision under § 165-40A.
(2) This list of requirements in this section shall serve as both:
(a) A list of requirements; and
(b) As a checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure
completeness of submissions.
(3) For a final plan submittal, the applicant shall submit completed
photocopies of:
(a) The list of requirements in this section for a final plan.
(b) The list of requirements in § 165-33 for a preliminary plan.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable.
117. Editor's Note: The Final Plan for Major Subdivision or Land Development Checklist and
List of Submittal Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-36 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-38
160:377

ARTICLE VII
Minor Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments
§ 165-39. Purpose.
This Article provides simplified procedures for submitting and reviewing
minor subdivisions, land developments involving only a single
nonresidential building and lot line adjustments.
§ 165-40. Submission and review procedure.
A. Final plan submission required. A final plan submission meeting the
submission and review procedures of this Article VII shall apply for any
of the following:
(1) Minor subdivisions (as defined in Article II), except as follows:
(a) From the same parent tract in any five-year period, the minor
subdivision approval process shall not be used to create a total
of more than two new lots. If any additional new lot(s) are
proposed within such five-year period, then such additional
lots shall be required to meet the submittal and approval
requirements for a major subdivision.
(2) Lot line adjustments.
(3) Annexations of one lot onto an existing lot, not involving the
construction of more than one principal nonresidential building.
(4) Land developments involving only a single nonresidential building
(other than a shopping center) and which involve a maximum of
three new dwelling units.
(5) What the Township determines to be minor revisions of approved
plans under § 165-42.
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the staff at least 21* days prior to a
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting the required
fee(s) and required number of copies of required plans and
materials. (See § 165-41.) (*NOTE: Revisions to a plan actively
under review shall be submitted by the applicant to the Township
and the Township Engineer a minimum of 14 calendar days prior to
a Planning Commission meeting at which such plan will be
considered, except for an adjustment that the Plans Administrator
determines to include only a minor correction or addition of a
notation, which may be submitted five days prior to a Planning
Commission meeting. Revisions to a plan actively under review
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Township and the
Township Engineer a minimum of 14 calendar days prior to the
§ 165-39 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-40
160:379
Board of Supervisors meeting at which the plan is intended to be
voted upon.)
(2) If a state road is involved, the applicant shall forward the required
information to PennDOT and apply for a highway occupancy
permit. If such permit is not granted prior to final plan approval,
then it shall automatically be a condition of final plan approval, and
the plans shall not be recorded until it is granted.
(3) Each final plan filed for minor subdivisions shall provide the
information required by § 165-41. Plans for lot line adjustments
shall provide the information required by § 165-42.
(4) The applicant shall provide a copy of the plans for review to the
Joint Planning Commission. A soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be provided to the County Conservation District.
C. Initial actions by the staff.
(1) Any submittal to the Township shall automatically be considered to
be conditionally accepted, based upon whether the Planning
Commission determines that the submittal is significantly
complete.
(2) The staff shall retain in the Commission's files one copy of all
materials submitted by the applicant.
(3) If the submission is duly submitted and accepted, the staff shall
forward to the Commission at or before the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Commission:
(a) Two copies of the application form.
(b) One copy of the final plan checklist.
(c) Several copies of the final plan.
(d) At least one copy of the supporting documents.
D. Zoning variances. An application under the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall not be considered to be complete for the
purposes of the ninety-day approval time limit if one or more zoning
variances will be required for the subdivision or land development to
legally occur as submitted until such time as the needed zoning
variances have been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
E. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) Within 30 days from the date duly submitted the plan for review
(unless granted an extension by the Commission), the Township
Engineer should review the engineering considerations in the plan
and prepare an initial report on such considerations to the
Commission.
§ 165-40 PALMER CODE § 165-40
160:380
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors
during review of the plan.
F. Review by Commission.
(1) Based upon staff reviews of the checklist, the Planning Commission
shall have the authority to determine that a submittal is significant
incomplete. If such determination is made, the Township shall be
considered to not have accepted the submittal. In such case, the
unexpended review fees shall be returned to the applicant, and no
further action shall be required by the Township, and a deemed
approval shall not occur.
(2) The Planning Commission shall accomplish the following within the
time limitations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code118 (unless the applicant grants a written time extension):
(a) Review all applicable reports received from the appropriate
review agencies and officers.
(b) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this ordinance and other applicable
ordinances.
(c) Review the final plan submission and recommend any needed
revisions so that the submission will conform to this ordinance
and other applicable ordinances.
(d) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
the final plan submission in an advisory report to the Board of
Supervisors, specifying any recommended conditions for
approval, identifying defects found in the application,
describing requirements which have not been met and citing
provisions of the ordinance or statute relied upon.
G. Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review any reports of the Commission and other official reviewing
agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Approve or reject the final plan submission within the time
required by the Municipalities Planning Code.119 (As of 1993, this
law requires the Board of Supervisors to act not later than 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the Commission
held after it has been duly filed for review, but in no case shall the
decision of the Board of Supervisors be made later than 90 days
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-40 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-40
160:381
§ 165-41. Minor subdivision final plan requirements.
All of the following information and materials listed in this section121 are
required as part of all minor subdivision submissions, other than lot line
adjustments or submittals under § 165-42. This list of requirements shall
serve as both a list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant
and the Township to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall
submit completed photocopies of this section as part of the application.
§ 165-42. Lot line adjustments, annexations and minor revisions of
approved plans.
following the date the submission was accepted as being filed for
review, unless the applicant grants a written extension of time.)
(4) Joint Planning Commission (JPC) review. No subdivision or land
development shall be granted final approval until a report is
received from the JPC or until the expiration of the maximum time
limit established by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.120
H. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him/her at the last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision.
(2) Acceptance.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors shall
not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way, space or area, unless such
acceptance is specifically made at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall be specifically stated
along with the signatures required for approval.
(c) If the Board of Supervisors elects to accept lands offered for
dedication, the submission shall be accompanied by duly
executed instruments of conveyance to the Township. Such
instruments shall state that the title thereof is free and
unencumbered.
(3) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall specify
defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements which
have not been met and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
121. Editor's Note: The Minor Subdivision Final Plan Checklist and List of Submittal
Requirements are is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-40 PALMER CODE § 165-42
160:382
§ 165-43. Recording plans.
See Article IX.
A. Applicability. The reduced submission requirements listed in this
section shall apply, together with the procedural requirements of
§ 165-40, if either of the following apply:
(1) The proposal will meet the definition of a "lot line adjustment" (see
Article II); and/or
(2) In the determination of the Township staff, which may be based
upon the advice of the Township Engineer, the proposal will involve
revisions to a previously approved plan and those revisions only
involve changes in the supporting documentation or engineering
details or to correct erroneous data or minor omissions concerning
a plan previously granted final plan approval.
B. The following list122 of requirements shall serve as both a list of
requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to
ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit
completed photocopies of this section as part of the application. The
required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable.
C. Additional information. The Planning Commission may require that a
plan under this section include the submission of specific additional
information that would be required if the plan would be a final minor
subdivision plan, if such specific information is necessary to determine
compliance with this ordinance.
D. An annexation under this section shall be made part of the same lot with
the same deed.
122. Editor's Note: The list and checklist are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-42 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-43
160:383

ARTICLE VIII
Improvements Guaranties
§ 165-44. Guarantee of improvement installation required.
A. Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for
recording, the Township Supervisors shall require that the applicant
assure the Township, by means of a proper development agreement and
performance guaranty, that the improvements required by this
ordinance will be installed in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of this ordinance and the approved development plan,
unless the applicant constructs all required improvements in advance
of any buildings or any sale of lots, as specified in Subsection B below.
B. Construction of improvements prior to final plan approval or in place of
financial security. An applicant may begin grading and the construction
of improvements (other than buildings) prior to final plan approval. An
applicant may also choose to construct all required improvements prior
to the construction of any buildings and prior to the sale of any lots in
place of providing financial security. However, any construction of
improvements prior to final plan approval shall be at the risk of the
applicant and may be required by the Township to be reinstalled or
modified if such construction is not in compliance with the approved
final plan and Township requirements. Any earthmoving or work on
improvements before final plan approval or any construction of
improvements prior to the posting of financial security with the
Township shall only occur if:
(1) An approved sedimentation and erosion control plan has been
approved by the County Conservation District and is carried out;
(2) The Township, if it deems necessary, may require the developer to
show proof of basic liability insurance and to provide a hold
harmless agreement to the Township;
(3) The applicant proves compliance with the Township's tree
preservation requirements;
(4) The applicant establishes an escrow account to cover the costs of
inspections; and
(5) Such work does not include construction of foundations or any
other portions of buildings or installation of utility laterals or
construction of driveways.
C. No construction of buildings or sales of any individual lot or
condominium unit within a subdivision or land development shall take
place in any subdivision unless:
(1) There is on file, with the Township, a current, duly executed
performance bond (and security escrow agreement, if necessary);
or
§ 165-44 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-44
160:385
§ 165-45. Improvements to be provided by applicant.
§ 165-46. Development agreement.
(2) All grading is complete (other than finish grading immediately
around proposed buildings) and all required public improvements,
binder course of streets, utilities, drainage facilities and sewer
lines have been completed and determined to be acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors, based upon inspection by Township officials
or their designees.
D. The applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for the
cost of any improvements for which financial security is required by and
provided to the Department of Transportation and connected with the
issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to Section 420 of the
Act of June 1, 1945 (PL 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway
Law."123 [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-298]
A. In all cases, the subdivider or land developer shall be responsible for
the installation of all improvements required by this ordinance.
B. The Township Engineer or other Township designee shall make such
inspections of the required improvements at such intervals as may be
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this ordinance. The
reasonable costs of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider or
land developer, making use of an escrow account.
A. Development agreement required.
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development
which provides for the installation of improvements required by
this ordinance or any improvements required as a condition of the
final plan approval shall be required to enter into a legally binding
development agreement with the Township prior to recording of
the final plan, unless the applicant agrees to meet § 165-44C,
concerning the construction of all improvements prior to the
construction of any buildings or the sale of any lots or homesites.
(2) The development agreement shall guarantee the installation of said
improvements in strict accordance with all Township requirements.
(3) The final plan shall not be approved for recording by the Township
Supervisors prior to the execution of this agreement and the
delivery of a required performance guaranty.
B. Terms of development agreement. The development agreement shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and shall be
acceptable in content to the Township Board of Supervisors. The
Township may require that a development agreement include any of the
123. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 165-44 PALMER CODE § 165-46
160:386
following items, where applicable, and such additional items as are
necessary to carry out this ordinance:
(1) A reference to approved plans that specify the types and locations
of improvements, such as streets, drainage facilities, utility lines
and other improvements. Such improvements may also be
described in an itemized list.
(2) A work schedule setting forth the beginning and ending dates of
such work tied to the construction of the development and
provisions to allow proper inspection by the Township Engineer.
(3) The provision of a performance guaranty for completion of required
improvements in compliance with § 165-47, including a detailed
breakdown of the estimated costs of the improvements, including
the total amount of the performance guaranty.
(4) Provisions concerning the developer's responsibilities for damage
to other property, including maintenance by the developer of public
liability insurance for the duration of improvements construction,
with a hold harmless clause to protect the Township from liability
related to such work. A copy or other evidence of such liability
coverage shall be provided to the Township prior to such work.
(5) Provisions concerning measures to prevent erosion, sedimentation
and water damage to the subject and adjacent properties.
(6) Provisions for the dedication of streets and water and sewer lines
and any other easements or improvements approved to be
dedicated.
(7) See § 165-53 concerning the requirement for a record plan.
(8) Provisions for the developer to reimburse the Township for all
reasonable engineering costs directly related to the review,
construction and inspection of the proposed development and to
the review and preparation of the development agreements.
(9) Provisions concerning any violations of the development
agreement.
(10) Any other lawful terms which the Township Supervisors may
require to carry out the provisions of this ordinance.
(11) Signatures. The development agreement shall be signed by all
responsible landowners and/or developers.
C. Ownership of land and guaranty.
(1) A certificate of ownership in the form of Appendix C124 shall be
executed in the exact name in which title is held. If the developer(s)
124. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-46 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-46
160:387
§ 165-47. Performance guaranty.
The performance guaranty for completion of required improvements shall
meet the following requirements:
of a subdivision is someone other than the landowner(s) of the
subdivision, the developer shall also execute this affidavit, along
with a performance bond and security agreements.
(2) Change in ownership or developer. Any conveyance of all or a
substantial portion of the unimproved lots or public improvements
or streets of any subdivision or change in developers, whether
voluntary or by action of law or otherwise, shall require the prior
approval of the Township Supervisors. In giving or denying said
approval, the Township Supervisors shall require that such new
landowner and/or developer fully assume all applicable
responsibilities under the development agreement and post all the
appropriate bonds and security agreements.
D. Utility agreements. If a development will connect into a public water or
public sanitary sewage system, the applicable authority, agency or
company may also require separate development agreements.
A. Security.
(1) The guaranty shall be secured by the credit of any of the following:
(a) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a federal- or
state-chartered lending institution.
(b) A restrictive or escrow account in a federal- or state-chartered
lending institution.
(c) Such other financial security approved by the Township
Supervisors (which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld), but not including a second or third mortgage on the
unimproved lands.
(2) Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the
public the completion of any improvements which may be required
within one year of the date fixed in the development schedule (see
§ 165-38F) for the completion of such improvements.
(3) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federally issued or state-chartered lending institution chosen by
the party posting the financial security, provided that said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the state.
(a) The Township Supervisors may require that evidence be
provided that such institution or company has sufficiently
adequate and secure assets to cover the security.
§ 165-46 PALMER CODE § 165-47
160:388
(b) The Township shall be an authorized signatory on any account
in which the escrow funds are held, and all escrow funds from
sales of lots shall be paid directly to such fund, and a monthly
statement shall be furnished to the Township.
B. Establishing the improvements security amount. [Amended
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-379]
(1) Subsequent to final plan approval of any land development or
subdivision plan by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall
prepare an improvements security estimate. If conditional final
plan approval has not been granted by the Board of Supervisors, or
all conditions of final plan approval (if any) have not been fulfilled
prior to the developer's submission of the improvements security
estimate, the Township reserves the right to require a revision of
the estimate to reflect any plan changes. The improvements
security estimate shall be established using pricing consistent with
prevailing wage rates.
(2) Prior to submitting an improvements security estimate, the
developer's project engineer shall consult with the Township
Engineer's office to confirm which plan project improvements are
required to be secured. The developer's engineer shall then submit
an improvements security estimate to the Township for review by
the Township Engineer. Where appropriate, a contingency shall be
included in the construction cost as part of the improvements
security estimate to address unforeseen items (sinkhole
remediation, utility conflicts, etc.).
(3) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion, estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled
for completion by the developer in the official development
schedule and within the process for increases to cover inflation as
permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.125
(4) The improvements security estimate submitted on behalf of the
developer must be certified by a professional engineer registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5) If the Township Engineer does not concur with the submitted
improvements security estimate, those items of disagreement will
be indicated on an annotated copy of the estimate, or on a revised
estimate form, which will be returned to the developer's engineer
for further consideration and resubmission, or for such further
action as acknowledged by the Municipalities Planning Code.126
(6) The final improvements security estimate ultimately acceptable to
the Township Engineer will then be transferred to standard
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-47 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-47
160:389
improvements security release certification forms by the Township
Engineer's office and returned to the developer with a standard
cover letter requesting that the developer thoroughly review the
improvements security release certification forms before certifying
their accuracy. The developer shall send the final forms directly to
the Township, as its formal submission, with a copy to the Township
Engineer.
(7) The developer shall be solely responsible for the installation,
construction, erection and/or completion of project improvements.
The developer shall not be relieved of its obligation to provide for
the same, even if the improvement security estimate provided by
the Township Engineer's office fails to include necessary items of
the project or is undervalued. In such event, the Township may
require the developer to post additional security in the required
form and amount to address the deficiency as a condition
precedent to proceeding with the development.
(8) If all or portions of the required improvements are satisfactorily
completed by the developer prior to conditional final plan approval,
the provision of financial security to cover the costs of constructing
said improvements will not be required. However, maintenance
security for those improvements shall still be required once the
Township has accepted all required public improvements.
(9) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by a maximum of an additional 10% for each one-year
period beyond the first anniversary date from the posting of the
financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of
completing the required improvements as reestablished on or
about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the
above procedure.
(10) Multiyear or multistage development. In the case where
development is projected over a period of years, the Township
Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by phases/
stages of development subject to such requirements or
improvements guaranties concerning future improvements as they
find necessary for the proper functioning of each phase and for the
eventual development as a whole.
C. Multiyear or multistage development. In the case where development is
projected over a period of years, the Township Supervisors may
authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development
subject to such requirements or improvement guaranties concerning
future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of
each phase and for the eventual development as a whole.
§ 165-47 PALMER CODE § 165-48
160:390
§ 165-48. Approval of improvements. [Amended 5-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-379]
A. In general. As the work of installing the required improvements
proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the
Township Supervisors to release or authorize the release of, from time
to time, portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor(s) performing the work.
B. Notice of completion. When the developer has completed an
improvement, the developer shall notify the Township and request
release of related financial security, in writing, to the Township
Supervisors by certified or registered mail. The developer shall send a
copy of the letter to the Township Engineer at the same time.
C. Releasing of improvements security.
(1) Prior to the formal submission of an improvements security release
request to the Township, the developer or its representative shall
first contact the Township Engineer's office and meet at the project
site for an informal preliminary consultation with the Township
Engineer's field representative. The purpose of the consultation is
for the developer and the Township Engineer's field representative
to review the extent of completion of each item of work listed on
the improvements security release certifications forms for the
project. Note that this preliminary consultation shall not be
considered as a submission for improvements security release
process.
(2) The Township Engineer shall then complete a suggested draft of
the improvements security release certification forms (retaining
10% of the total monies to be released, but not less than 15% of the
total costs of improvements offered for dedication to the Township)
and forward the draft forms — which reflect the suggested
security release amount established during the preliminary
consultation — to the developer for its consideration. To begin the
formal request for an improvements security release, the developer
shall review and, if acceptable, sign and submit the improvements
security release certification forms directly to the Township with a
copy to the Township Engineer.
(3) The formal improvements security release submission to the
Township by the developer is to be accompanied by the completed,
reviewed and signed improvements security release certification
forms, which shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township upon review and recommendation by the Township
Engineer.
(4) If an improvements security release that is submitted to the
Township and subsequently forwarded to the Township Engineer is,
in the opinion of the Township Engineer, inconsistent with the
extent of the work completed, improvements security release
§ 165-48 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-48
160:391
certifications forms will be annotated by the Township Engineer
to reflect the extent of improvements believed to have been
constructed and the corresponding security amount recommended
for release by the Township.
(5) The maintenance security, as required by the improvements
agreement, shall be equal to 15% of the total cost of improvements
offered for dedication to the Township. Prior to posting of the
maintenance security by the developer, the Township shall retain
no less than an amount equal to the maintenance security. Upon
posting the maintenance security, the developer may request the
release of all remaining improvements security, as applicable.
D. Engineer's report.
(1) Within 30 days of the receipt of such request, the Township
Engineer shall submit a written report certifying which
improvements have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan to the Township Supervisors.
(2) This report shall be based on the inspections made according to the
approved inspection schedule included in the development
agreement and shall recommend approval or rejection of the
improvements, either in whole or in part.
E. Security; decision by Township Supervisors.
(1) At its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the
Engineer's report (but not later than 45 days after receipt of the
request), the Township Supervisors shall review the Township
Engineer's report and shall render a decision on the release
request, upon consideration of the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, based upon the fair value of the improvements
completed.
(2) The Township Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested if the Township Supervisors fail to act
within 45 days of receipt of the developer's request.
(3) The Township Supervisors shall notify the developer, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the decision.
F. Completion of unapproved improvements. The developer shall proceed
to complete any improvements not approved by the Township
Supervisors and, upon completion, request approval in conformance
with the procedures specified in this section.
G. Updating the improvements security.
(1) On projects for which the improvements have not been completed
by the expiration of the improvements agreement, concurrent with
any requests to extend the improvements agreement, the
developer's engineer shall recommend suitable adjustments to the
§ 165-48 PALMER CODE § 165-48
160:392
improvements security estimate to reflect increases in construction
costs, where appropriate, and submit the revised security amount
to the Township for review. The Township Engineer shall review the
proposed adjustments and make recommendations to the Township
on the adequacy of said adjustments. If for any reason the revised
amount (or remaining improvements security) is determined to
be inadequate to secure the incomplete portion of the project,
an update to the improvements security estimate and additional
security may be required.
(2) If a developer's improvements security is considered to be
inadequate, the Township Engineer shall annotate the
improvements security release certification forms with the
recommended adjustments based on the then-current construction
prices, thereby maintaining the improvements security estimate
current for the remaining unconstructed improvements.
(3) The Township Engineer shall forward the annotated improvements
security release certification forms, which reflect the
recommended adjustments, to the Township for its consideration.
Additionally, a copy will be sent to the developer for its
consideration.
(4) The Township shall reserve the right to not enter into any extension
of the land development improvements agreement or subdivision
improvements agreement unless the improvements security is
reevaluated in accord with the improvements security procedures
adopted by the Township.
H. Final release.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall request final
release in conformance with this section. See time limitations and
procedures in § 510 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) Such final release shall include all moneys retained under
Subsection C above.
I. Appeal. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Township Supervisors or the
Township Engineer.
J. Certificates of occupancy and completion of improvements.
(1) A temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
and a structure shall not be occupied unless:
(a) The structure is safe and substantially completed in conformity
to all applicable ordinances, laws and plans;
§ 165-48 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-48
160:393
§ 165-49. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 165-50. Maintenance agreement.
(b) The structure is served by electricity and telephone service
and any required water, fire hydrants and sewage service; and
(c) The structure has access to a clearly permanently passable
street with at least a complete paving binder course and any
required curbing installed.
(2) No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the structure
is completed as approved with service by all required utilities and
with approved access onto a street. Any new or improved street
shall be completed to required standards, if applicable.
A. Enforcement of security.
(1) In the event that any improvements which may be required have
not been installed as provided in this ordinance or in accord with
the approved final plan or in the event of the bankruptcy of the
owner or developer, the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the
power to elect to enforce any security posted under this ordinance
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. This may include
taking all actions necessary to obtain moneys under said bond,
including but not limited to seizure of undeveloped lots, confession
of judgment, suit on the bond, seizure of escrow funds, revocation
of building permits and prosecution under this ordinance.
(2) Rate of construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and
other public improvements reasonably at the same time or prior to
the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public
improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are
completed, shall be a violation of this ordinance and a cause for
default.
B. Completion by Township. If the proceeds of such bond or other security
are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or
corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board
of Supervisors may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all
or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary
to complete the remainder of the improvements.
C. Proceeds for installation of improvements. The proceeds from use of the
security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the
developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security.
A. Maintenance agreement required.
§ 165-48 PALMER CODE § 165-50
160:394
§ 165-51. Maintenance guaranty.
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development
which provides for the dedication of improvements required by this
ordinance shall be required to enter into a legally binding
maintenance agreement with the Township prior to acceptance of
dedication of the improvements by the Township.
(2) The dedication of any significant improvement, as determined by
the Township Supervisors, shall not be accepted by the Township
prior to the execution of a maintenance agreement and the delivery
of the maintenance guaranty.
B. Terms of maintenance agreement. The maintenance agreement shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and in content to the
Township Supervisors and shall include all of the following:
(1) That the applicant shall make any repair or reconstruction of any
improvement stipulated in the maintenance agreement which is
specified by the Township Supervisors if needed because of faulty
construction, workmanship or materials, prior to acceptance of
such improvement by the Township.
(2) That the applicant shall maintain at his/her own cost all
improvements stipulated in the maintenance agreement, up to a
maximum period of 18 months from the date of acceptance or
dedication by the Township, except for any special purpose escrow
or maintenance agreements required by the Township.
(3) That the applicant shall post financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plan, for a maximum term of 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication.
(4) That the developer shall plow snow and maintain all streets until
such time as the Township may accept such streets.
C. Public utilities and authorities. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines,
or both, and related apparatus or facilities are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and under the rules and regulations of a public utility or
municipal authority, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations
of the controlling public utility or municipal authority. This amount of
financial security shall not also be required by the Township if it is
required by such utility or authority.
A. Security. The maintenance guaranty shall be secured by the credit of
any of the following:
(1) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a federal- or
state-chartered lending institution.
§ 165-50 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-51
160:395
(2) A restrictive or escrow account in a federal- or state-chartered
lending institution.
(3) Such other financial security approved by the Township
Supervisors (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld).
B. Terms. Such maintenance guaranty shall be in the form approved by the
Township Solicitor and Township Supervisors, payable to the Township,
to guarantee the maintenance and repair of the streets and other public
improvements in the subdivision or land development for 18 months
from the date of acceptance thereof by the Township.
C. Amount. The amount of the maintenance guaranty shall be determined
by the applicant's engineer, conditioned upon acceptance by Township
Supervisors, but shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation
of such improvements.
D. Release. After a maximum of 18 months from the date of acceptance of
said improvements, the Township shall release the maintenance
guaranty to the developer (or party that posted the guaranty) if all
improvements are in satisfactory condition, as determined by the
Township.
§ 165-51 PALMER CODE § 165-51
160:396
ARTICLE IX
Recording of Final Plan; Postconstruction Plans
§ 165-52. Recording of final plan.
§ 165-53. Recorded final plan.
The applicant shall provide to the Township one Mylar copy and four
paper clear and legible copies of the recorded final plan (also known as
the "record plan"), in addition to providing a Mylar copy to the county
(or whatever form is required by the county). The Township copies shall
be made after recording and shall be exact copies of those portions of
the approved final plan that the Township requires to be recorded. Such
recorded final plan, at a minimum, shall include all of the following:
A. Deadline.
(1) The applicant is responsible to ensure that the final plan as
approved by the Township Supervisors is recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of the county within 90 days of such final
approval. In such case, the applicant shall mail or deliver a receipt
of the recording to the Township offices.
(2) If the final plan approval included official conditions that must be
met prior to recording, then the plan shall be recorded within 90
days following the compliance with such conditions, up to a
maximum total of one year following the final plan approval.
(3) In any case, specific extensions of these time periods may be
granted in writing by the Township Supervisors.
B. At its option, the Township may voluntarily agree in advance to record a
final plan, in which case the applicant shall compensate the Township
for such costs.
C. The final plan shall not be recorded unless the applicant proves that
they have met all required conditions that the Township staff and/or
Township Engineer determine would impact the recorded final plan. No
construction of buildings or sale of lots shall occur until after a plan is
recorded. All subdivisions shall be recorded. In addition, all land
developments shall be recorded if the plan would involve the dedication
of land to the Township or PennDOT or if the Board of Supervisors
require the plan to be recorded.
D. The Board of Supervisors may determine that Township approval has
expired regarding a subdivision plan that was not recorded within the
time limits of this section.
A. Street rights-of-way.
B. Any common open spaces.
§ 165-52 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-53
160:397
§ 165-54. Effect of recording.
§ 165-55. Post-construction plans.
C. Easements and any covenants that the Township required to be placed
on the final plan.
D. Lot lines and lot dimensions.
E. Waterlines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and stormwater drainage
facilities.
F. The required signatures of Township officials and the JPC staff.
G. Notations stating whether the streets, any common open space and
other proposed improvements are to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township.
A. Official Map. If the Township has adopted or does adopt an Official Map,
any streets and common open space on the record plan shall be
considered to be part of that Official Map.127
B. Private improvements. Every street, park or other improvement shown
on a subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided
herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, open space or
improvement until such time as it may be offered and officially accepted
for dedication to the Township or is duly condemned.
C. Dedication of improvements. The record plan shall state by formal
notation whether the streets, any common open space and other
proposed improvements are proposed to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township.
A. Submission. Simultaneously with the conveyance of the respective
subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall provide one Mylar
reproducible and three clear light background paper prints of the
record final plan. Prior to submitting these plans, one clear light
background paper print shall be submitted to the Township Engineer
for review.
B. Information. The location of improvements and other data shall
conform to the final plan requirements of this ordinance. All
construction changes shall be noted by drawing a line through the
design data and showing the postconstruction data adjacent thereto.
The following specific information shall also be noted:
(1) Water distribution system: stationing of each gate valve, bend, tee,
cross, plug and lateral. Each curb stop and valve box shall be
stationed and defined with a reference tie when necessary. The
127. Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 165-53 PALMER CODE § 165-55
160:398
location of the water main with respect to the street center line or
utility easement shall be shown and dimensioned.
(2) Sanitary sewerage system: depth, length and station of each
lateral. In the case of skewed laterals, an additional reference tie
shall be provided. Stationing shall be based on the commonly
accepted practice of using Station 0 + 00 for the nearest
downstream manhole.
(3) Storm sewerage system: invert elevations, sewer lengths, slopes,
pipe diameters and types.
(4) Streets: postconstruction curb and/or pavement grades for
intersections. Any significant deviations from the record center-line
profile shall be noted on the plan.
§ 165-55 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-55
160:399

ARTICLE X
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 165-56. Applicability.
§ 165-57. Required improvements. [Amended 1-29-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-313; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-378]
In addition to standards set forth in this article, the Township Standard
Construction Documents apply to any required improvement in the
Township, regardless of whether the improvement is or is not publicly
dedicated. These standards shall be provided to the developer, contractor
or party constructing said improvement(s) prior to commencement of
construction. These standards are made a part hereto of this ordinance as
Appendix F128 and shall be modified from time to time by resolution passed
by the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 165-58. Overall requirements.
A. Evaluating plans. The design standards and improvements required in
this Article shall be the minimum requirements applied by the Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors in evaluating plans for any
proposed subdivision or land development.
B. Additional improvements. Additional or higher-type improvements may
be required in specific cases where, in the determination of the Board
of Supervisors, they are clearly necessary to protect the public health
and safety.
C. Modifications, waivers and exceptions. See § 165-7 of this ordinance.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
B. Hazardous conditions. Land subject to hazardous conditions (such as
open quarries, unconsolidated fill, floods, excessive erosion or unsafe
water supply) shall not be subdivided until the hazards have been
eliminated or overcome by adequate safeguards provided by the
developer and approved by the Board of Supervisors. See the floodplain
requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. Comprehensive Plan. The subdivision or land development should
generally be designed in consideration of any applicable provisions of
the Township Comprehensive Plan.
D. Zoning. All aspects of a proposed subdivision or land development shall
conform to the Township Zoning Ordinance and floodplain regulations
and all other Township ordinances and specifications.
128. Editor's Note: Appendix F, and subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 165-56 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-58
160:401
§ 165-59. Streets.
(1) Zoning variances. See Sections §§ 165-32C, 165-36D and 165-40D
of this ordinance.
E. Nearby development. A subdivision or land development and its street
pattern shall be coordinated with existing or approved nearby
developments or neighborhoods so that the area as a whole may be
developed harmoniously and to prevent serious conflicts between
neighboring development.
F. Safety. No subdivision or land development shall occur in such a way
that would significantly threaten the public health and safety, including
hazards of toxic substances, groundwater pollution, traffic hazards and
explosive and fire hazards.
A. Access to proposed subdivisions and land developments. All proposed
subdivisions and land developments shall have adequate and safe
access to the public street system.
B. Streets and topography. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of
reasonable gradient. See the steep slope regulations in Article XVI of
the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Street continuations.
(1) Where deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors, stub
streets shall be extended to the boundary of the tract being
subdivided or developed so as to eventually provide for proper
circulation of traffic within the Township and abutting
municipalities. Also, where a stub street exists on an abutting lot,
that stub street shall be extended into the proposed development
unless the Board of Supervisors determines that such extension
would not serve a valid traffic purpose.
(2) Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an
existing street of inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-ofway
width and widening of the cartway shall be required in
conformance with Table 10.1, Design Standards for Streets.129
D. Intersections.
(1) The center lines of streets shall intersect at right angles unless
existing conditions dictate otherwise. In such case, the intersection
shall be as nearly at right angles as possible but not less than 75º at
intersections.
(2) Minimum offset distance.
129. Editor's Note: See Subsection F(1) below.
§ 165-58 PALMER CODE § 165-59
160:402
(a) Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided. Where streets intersect other streets, the intersecting
street shall be aligned with any street intersecting on the other
side or be offset by the minimum distance stated in this
subsection. This minimum offset and the minimum distance
between center lines of parallel or approximately parallel
streets intersecting a cross street from opposite directions
shall be:
[1] One hundred fifty feet along a local street.
[2] Four hundred feet along a collector street.
[3] One thousand feet along a minor arterial street. (See
Figures below.)
(b) The distances of this subsection shall be measured between
the intersections of the center lines of the legal rights-of-ways
of the streets.
(3) At street intersections, the property line shall be rounded by arcs
with the radii listed below. For streets other than local streets, the
Township may require a larger radius. (See chart below and above
figures.)
Type of Street
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection of
Cartway Edge or
Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection of
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Minor arterial 40 30
Collector 35 25
Local 25 15
E. Minor arterial street frontage. Where a subdivision or land
development abuts or contains an existing or proposed minor arterial
street, as the Board of Supervisors determines is reasonable, feasible
and necessary to avoid increased traffic congestion and further traffic
safety, based upon recommendations of the Planning Commission, the
Township Engineer, any comments from PennDOT and any professional
§ 165-59 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-59
160:403
traffic studies that have been submitted, the Board of Supervisors shall
require one or more of the following methods of layout and site design:
(1) The use of a marginal access or frontage streets or access only onto
side or interior streets to collect traffic from numerous driveways
and direct it to a select few number of entrances to the minor
arterial street.
(2) The minimization of the number and length of driveway cuts or
street intersections onto an arterial or collector street, which may
include requiring the use of shared driveways between adjacent
uses or lots.
(3) The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand turns onto
or off of the minor arterial street.
(4) The prohibition of driveways from individual dwellings entering
directly onto a minor arterial street. If there is no alternative to
this, each driveway entering onto a minor arterial street shall have
adequate turnaround space for vehicles provided within the lot so
that vehicles do not back onto the street.
(5) See also § 190-198 of the Township Zoning Ordinance, Access onto
arterial and collector streets.
F. Street design standards.
(1) Minimum street design standards shall be as shown in Table 10.1,
unless a more restrictive requirement is established by PennDOT.
TABLE 10.1 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Type of Street
Design Specifications
Minor
Arterial Collector
Local and
Marginal
Access
Right-of-way width 805 605 50
Cartway width
With on-street parking and
4 lanes
605 605 NA
§ 165-59 PALMER CODE § 165-59
160:404
TABLE 10.1 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Type of Street
Design Specifications
Minor
Arterial Collector
Local and
Marginal
Access
4 lanes without on-street
parking
445 445 NA
With on-street parking and
2 lanes
405 365 306
2 lanes without on-street
parking
345 305 266
Acceleration/Deceleration
lane width (where deemed
necessary by the Board of
Supervisors)
12 12 NA
Minimum sight distance1 475 300 200
Minimum tangent between
reverse curves2
200 100 100
Minimum center-line radii
for horizontal curves
4003 300 150
Maximum grade4
(percent)
6 8 10
NOTES:
1 Horizontal sight distances shall be measured from a point 3.5
feet above the road surface to a point six inches above the road
surface and shall be based upon standards of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO).
2 All tangents shall be measured along the street center line.
3 Larger radii may be required as determined by the Township
Engineer.
4 Minimum grades for all streets shall be 1.0%, unless a lesser
grade is determined to be acceptable by the Township Engineer.
5 Larger widths may be required by PennDOT or the Township, as
needed for turning lanes and on-street parking.
6 Except up to 36 feet where the Board of Supervisors determines
such width is needed for on-street parking where townhouses are
proposed along the street.
§ 165-59 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-59
160:405
TABLE 10.1 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
(All Dimensions in Feet Unless Specified)
Type of Street
Design Specifications
Minor
Arterial Collector
Local and
Marginal
Access
KEY:
NA = Not applicable.
(2) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of one degree,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%.
The minimum length of the vertical curve shall be determined by
multiplying the absolute difference in change of percent in grade
by the following factors:
(a) Minor arterial streets: 160 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 80 feet.
(c) Local and marginal access streets: 30 feet.
(4) All approaches to an intersection of two streets shall have a
leveling area not greater than four-percent grade for a distance of
25 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street. The profile of the higher order street shall be
maintained.
(a) If two streets have the same classification (such as both being
collector streets), then the profile of the street with the higher
traffic volume shall be maintained. The Planning Commission
may require submission of traffic volume data to support such
choice.
(5) The maximum grade across the turnaround in a cul-de-sac shall not
exceed 5%.
(6) To provide for adequate drainage, the minimum grade of any street
gutter across an intersection shall be not less than 2.0%, unless
inlets connected to storm drain lines are provided to collect gutter
flow on the upstream sides of the intersection.
(7) Improvements to existing streets. See § 165-59M.
G. Easements. Easements shall be provided adjacent to street rights-ofway,
tract boundaries and lot lines and other required areas, within the
following standards:
§ 165-59 PALMER CODE § 165-59
160:406
(1) Drainage, sanitary or domestic water easements shall be provided
as indicated and required by the plans. The minimum width of
easement shall be 20 feet (which might include 10 feet on each side
of abutting lots within a subdivision) with an additional width of
five feet for each additional utility.
(2) Utility easements of a minimum of 10 feet in width shall be
provided adjacent to all street rights-of-ways and all lot lines. Such
lines are intended for, but not limited to electricity, telephone and
television cable lines so that each lot or dwelling unit can be
served. For natural gas distribution lines, see § 165-66.
H. Sight lines at intersections of streets. See § 190-194C of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
I. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets shall be permitted with a maximum length of
1,000 feet and a minimum length of 250 feet and must be provided
with a turnaround with a minimum cartway radius of 40 feet to the
outside curb, except that such radius may be 35 feet if permitted by
PennDOT at such time to qualify for liquid fuels reimbursement.
The maximum radius of a cul-de-sac shall be 60 feet. Such
maximum and minimum length shall be measured from the
intersecting street's right-of-way line and the center of the cul-desac
bulb. The same width between the edge of the cartway and the
edge of the right-of-way shall be maintained around the cul-de-sac
as is required along the main stem of the street. (See Figure below.)
(2) The circular paving of the cul-de-sac shall be connected to the
approach paving by an arc having a radius of not less than 25 feet
(see Figure below).
(3) The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may permit acceptable alternative
turnaround designs, including turnarounds of acceptable radii
incorporated into a parking court or a landscaped island (with an
acceptable system for maintenance) within a cul-de-sac.
(4) No street shall dead-end without an approved turnaround at the
end of the street. Temporary stub streets shall be required to
include at least a temporary cul-de-sac, if the stub would be longer
than 150 feet or serve more than three dwellings or lots.
§ 165-59 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-59
160:407
(5) See also the design standards in Table 10.1.
(6) A cul-de-sac street, or a combination of cul-de-sac streets
connected so as to effectively form a system with only one point of
entry, shall serve a maximum of 20 dwelling units.
J. Maintenance. As a condition for final plan approval, the developer must
enter into a legally binding agreement which shall state who is to be
responsible for the improvement and maintenance of any street not
offered for dedication. If an association of lot owners is to be made
responsible, such association must be legally organized prior to plan
approval by an agreement approved by the Township.
K. Street design and traffic improvements.
(1) In general. Streets shall be graded, improved and surfaced to the
grades and dimensions shown on approved plans, profiles and
cross sections and in conformance to the Township street
improvement standards.
(2) Right-of-way grading.
(a) The entire right-of-way shall be graded to the approved cross
section. All trees, stumps and other material deemed
unsuitable by the Township Engineer shall be removed. The
excavation shall be backfilled and suitably compacted to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(b) The entire street structure shall be crowned in conformance
with the Township street and improvement specifications.
(c) A proper super-elevation (banked curves) shall be provided on
arterial and collector streets and when required by the
Township Engineer. Additional provisions shall be provided to
prevent hazardous surface cross drainage.
(3) Grading beyond right-of-way.
(a) The subdivider or developer may be required to grade beyond
the right-of-way line in order to provide continuous slope from
the right-of-way line to the proposed elevation of the abutting
property.
(b) Such grading beyond the right-of-way shall maintain the
original conditions of slope and contours except where
stormwater runoff designs dictate or warrant improvement or
alteration of the original slope and contours.
(c) Approved plans, either preliminary or final, showing proposed
grading, shall be a covenant running with the land, unless
altered by written permission from the Board of Supervisors in
conjunction with the Northampton County Conservation
District.
§ 165-59 PALMER CODE § 165-59
160:408
(d) In areas of earth excavation or earth fill, such grading shall be
done to a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one feet
vertical.
(4) Drainage of streets.
(a) Parallel- and cross-drainage facilities shall be properly located,
designed and installed to maintain proper drainage of the
completed streets.
(b) Proper design and construction in accordance with those
requirements may require the use of curb and gutter or paved
drainage swales to prevent erosion. Drainage facilities shall be
designed in accordance with requirements of § 165-63.
(c) The minimum diameter of any cross-drainage or culvert pipe
shall be 15 inches.
(d) Open pipe ends must be fitted with concrete end walls or wing
walls or prefabricated end sections and with protective safety
gratings.
(e) No open pipes shall be allowed to end within the Township
street right-of-way, except in cases where new driveways must
cross existing deep roadside swales adjacent to existing
Township streets. In the case of these exemptions to the
standard, the pipe shall be located as far off the edge of
pavement as possible (at least 20 feet from the street center
line).
(f) Energy dissipators shall be placed at the outlets of all pipes
where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel
velocities.
(g) Bridges and culverts shall be designed to support expected
loads in accordance with applicable federal and/or state
standards, to accommodate expected stormwater flows and to
be constructed to adequate width in accordance with PennDOT
standards. The applicant shall apply for and obtain a DER
permit when required.
(h) Consideration shall be given for subgrade drainage of those
soils subject to frost heave. Design of the roadbed in such
locations may require parallel drainage facilities and/or
underdrains to properly stabilize the subgrade. The Board of
Supervisors may require that such drainage facilities be
provided. The design of such subgrade drainage facilities shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Township
Engineer.
(i) Sedimentation and erosion control. See § 165-76.
(j) Stormwater drainage. See § 165-63.
§ 165-59 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-59
160:409
(k) A set of approved design plans shall be maintained on file at
the site during construction, as record drawings.
(5) Street construction standards. See the Township street and
sidewalk standards (Chapter 160).
L. Private streets. Any private street or accessway that will eventually
serve traffic from three or more dwelling units or two or more
industrial, commercial uses and/or institutional uses shall be designed
and constructed to Township construction standards, including the
provision of a street right-of-way.
M. Required traffic improvements.
(1) Purpose. In recognition of the provisions of the Article V-A and
Sections 503(2)(ii) and (3) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,130 this section is primarily intended to ensure that
streets bordering a subdivision or land development are
coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such locations as
deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and to
facilitate fire protection and to ensure that the access into and out
of subdivisions and land developments is sufficiently safe.
(2) Process. This Subsection M shall be carried out through
determinations of the Board of Supervisors, after considering any
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer, the applicant, the applicant's professional
representatives, any comments from PennDOT that may be
provided regarding a state road and any professional traffic studies
that may have been submitted.
(3) On-site/abutting traffic improvements. If, in the determination of
the Board of Supervisors, there is a reasonable relationship
between the need for an on-site improvement of a street and the
traffic created by a proposed subdivision or land development, the
applicant for such subdivision or land development shall be
required to complete the needed improvement or fund his/her fair
share of the cost of such traffic improvement and to dedicate
sufficient street right-of-way for needed improvements.
(a) Widening of abutting street. An applicant for any land
development or major subdivision shall be required to widen
the cartway and any shoulders of abutting streets to Township
standards (or other specifications approved by the Board of
Supervisors or PennDOT) and to a width determined to be
adequate by the Board of Supervisors.
[1] The applicant shall only be responsible for improvements
from the center line of the street right-of-way inward
toward the project's lot lines, unless the Board of
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(2)(i) and (3) and also 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 165-59 PALMER CODE § 165-59
160:410
Supervisors determines that improvements on the other
side of the center line are essential for public safety.
(b) Such improvements and right-of-way shall be required unless
the Board of Supervisors determines:
[1] That there is not a reasonable relationship between the
improvements and the traffic created by the proposed
development;
[2] That widening of right-of-way or other improvements are
not needed or that a lesser improvement is sufficient;
[3] That PennDOT specifically refuses in writing to allow such
improvement to a state road in the foreseeable future, in
which case the Township may still require that abutting
right-of-way be dedicated to the Township or reserved for
future dedication if needed in the future.
(c) Any improvement to a state street shall meet all PennDOT
standards.
(4) Types of required traffic improvements.
(a) The following shall be the definition of "on-site improvement"
(unless this definition is amended by state law): "all street
improvements constructed on the applicant's property, or the
improvements constructed on the property abutting the
applicant's property necessary for the ingress or egress to the
applicant's property."
(b) On-site improvements may include, but are not limited to, a
new or upgraded traffic signal, land dedication to improve an
abutting intersection, realignment of an abutting curve in a
road or the widening of the abutting cartway and right-of-way.
(c) The Township shall not require an applicant to fund or
complete a road improvement that is an "off-site improvement"
as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code,131 unless the Board of Supervisors determines that such
improvement is clearly essential for the physical safety of the
occupants/residents of the proposed development (such as for
emergency vehicle access).
(5) Funding. In place of completing a required street improvement as a
condition of final approval, an applicant may enter into a legally
binding development agreement with the Township for the
applicant to fund the improvement or his/her fair share of such
improvement, as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 165-59 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-59
160:411
§ 165-60. Blocks.
§ 165-61. Lots.
(6) Accounting. Any such funds may be placed in escrow until such
time as sufficient funds are available for a more comprehensive
improvement, with interest being used toward the cost of the
improvement. Any such funds received under this subsection shall
be accounted for separately.
(7) Staging. Any completion or funding of a required road
improvement may occur in stages in relationship to the stages of
the development, if so stated in a legally binding development
agreement and/or as a condition of final plan approval.
N. Future street right-of-way. Any subdivision or land development shall
comply with § 190-196 of the Township Zoning Ordinance if the Board
of Supervisors determines that the subdivision or land development
would generate need for additional right-of-way.
A. Residential.
(1) Maximum length. Residential blocks shall not exceed 1,500 feet in
length in subdivisions using an average lot size of one acre or
larger and shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length in subdivisions
having an average lot size less than one acre.
(2) Minimum length. Residential blocks shall have a minimum length
of 250 feet.
(3) Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots except
where access is limited by virtue of an adjoining arterial street or
by virtue of topographic limitations.
B. Nonresidential. Nonresidential blocks shall not be less than 800 feet in
length.
A. Lots shall conform to the applicable minimum lot sizes, lot widths,
setback and all other requirements as set forth in the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
B. All lots shall front on a public or private street improved to meet
Township standards or for which such improvements have been insured
by the posting of an acceptable performance guaranty under this
ordinance.
C. The depth-to-width ratio of a lot shall generally not be greater than
three to one (3:1).
D. Side lines of lots shall abut and be approximately at right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines to curved streets. Pointed or very
irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided. (See figures below.)
§ 165-59 PALMER CODE § 165-61
160:412
E. Double-frontage lots.
(1) Double-frontage lots shall not be created, except as needed to avoid
direct vehicular access onto a minor arterial street, or a collector
street intended to carry high volumes of through traffic, by
individual driveways.
(2) Planting strips.
(a) On any double-frontage or reverse-frontage lots, each lot shall
include a fifteen-foot-deep planting strip along one of the
streets, with vehicle access across this strip clearly prohibited
by notes on any approved plan.(See figures below.)
(b) In addition to the street trees required by § 165-73 of this
ordinance, this planting strip shall include evergreen plantings
meeting the requirements of § 190-194 of the Township Zoning
Ordinance. Any fencing in the rear of such lots shall be placed
on the inside side of such plantings.
(c) This planting strip shall be placed along the street that the
Planning Commission determines will eventually serve the
most through traffic. (For example, if a lot abuts a collector and
a local street, the planting strip shall be placed along the
collector street and the lot shall only have vehicular access
onto the local street.)
F. If remnants of land (other than rights-of-way) exist after subdividing,
they shall be incorporated into existing or proposed lots. No lot shall be
created that would abut a minor arterial street that would not be
suitable for a use permitted in that zoning district.
G. Bus stops.
§ 165-61 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-61
160:413
§ 165-62. Recreation land, open space and fee requirements.
(1) Residential land developments or subdivisions that involve 15 or
more dwelling units shall contact the School District to seek to
establish one or more acceptable and safe locations for a school bus
stop.
(2) A major subdivision or land development may be required by the
Planning Commission to contact the local public transportation
agency to seek an appropriate location for a public bus stop.
A. Purposes. The purposes of these regulations shall be to:
(1) Provide adequate open spaces, recreational lands and recreational
facilities primarily to serve new inhabitants of new developments,
for both active and passive recreation.
(2) Recognize and work to carry out the Palmer Township Park,
Recreation and Open Space Plan.
(3) Recognize the rationale for these common open space and fee-inlieu-
of-land requirements, as described in the Park, Recreation and
Open Space Plan and associated memoranda to the Township from
the Township's professional recreation planning consultants.
B. Applicability. Subdivision and land development applications submitted
and/or approved prior to this section becoming effective shall be bound
by the previous language of section. This new section shall apply to any
subdivision or land development for which a preliminary plan or a
combined preliminary/final plan is submitted after the effective date of
this amendment, except that this section shall not apply to:
(1) Submittals that the Planning Commission determines only involve
clearly minor adjustments or corrections to a preliminary plan that
was duly submitted and actively under consideration or approved
prior to the effective date of this amendment.
(2) Planned residential development (PRD) only to the extent of active
recreational facilities (see § 165-62J) being provided by the
developer in said PRD. In such an event, for all such facilities so
provided, credit for the value thereof is to be given against the
recreational fee schedule set forth in § 165-62E hereof. If no such
facilities are provided by the developer in said PRD, then the
provisions of the aforesaid § 165-62E are fully applicable to a PRD.
[Amended 4-8-1996 by Ord. No. 263]
(3) Any plan that only involves changes that do not increase the
number of lots.
C. Limitations on use of recreation fees.
(1) Uses and accounting. Any fees collected under this section shall be
placed within an interest-bearing account and shall be accounted
§ 165-61 PALMER CODE § 165-62
160:414
for separately from other Township funds. Such fees shall only
be used for the following: acquisition of public open space for
recreation, development of public recreation facilities, landscaping
of public open space and closely related legal, engineering,
construction document preparation and design work fees.
(2) Locations. The Township should identify the location at which fees
from a subdivision or land development are intended to be
expended. Such location should be reasonably accessible to
inhabitants of the development that paid the fee. If such location is
not specifically identified or if the Board of Supervisors determines
that circumstances have changed, then such fees shall be used for
the acquisition of land or development of facilities at a communitywide
park in the northern portion of the Township or at Riverview
Park or at another recreation area intended to serve the entire
Township.
D. Land dedication. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 283]
(1) Amounts of land. Any applicant for any residential subdivision or
land development shall dedicate common open space that consists
of land suitable for passive and active recreation, at a rate of 2,000
square feet per dwelling unit or lot, unless the Board of Supervisors
determines that such land in that location would not be reasonable
or efficient, in which case recreation fees in lieu of land shall be
required under Subsection E.
(2) The land and fee requirements of this section shall be based upon
the maximum number of new dwelling units granted final approval
within a subdivision or land development. In the case of a
subdivision of single-family detached dwellings, the fee shall be
based on the number of newly created lots.
E. Land or fees for residential development. [Amended 2-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 283]
(1) If the Board of Supervisors determines that a land dedication
within a proposed subdivision or land development would not be
reasonable or efficient, the applicant shall be required to pay fees
in lieu of dedicating open space. A notation stating that such fees
are required shall be stated on the final record plan. This fee shall
be made at a rate as set from time to time by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors. NOTE: The current Fee Schedule is
available at the Township Municipal Building. A general guide for
future increases may be increases in the consumer price index. See
§ 165-62I regarding timing of fees.
(2) The Township should consider the following standards when
determining whether or not common open space proposed for
dedication is reasonable or efficient:
§ 165-62 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-62
160:415
(a) Whether common open space in that location would be suitable
for active or passive recreation. (Active recreation would take
place on slopes less than six-percent and support the
construction of recreational facilities. Passive recreation would
take place on land that would accommodate the construction of
trails, picnic areas and other pedestrian amenities.)
(b) Whether common open space could be added to an existing
recreation area that is adjacent or a potential future recreation
area on an adjacent property.
(c) Whether the proposed land would meet the requirements of
this section.
(d) Whether the area surrounding the proposed development has
sufficient existing recreation and open space land and whether
it is possible for pedestrians and bicyclists to safely reach those
lands.
(e) Any relevant policies of the Township Park, Recreation and
Open Space Plan.
(f) Whether the proposed open spaces would preserve important
natural features (such as woodlands or creek valleys) that
might otherwise be negatively altered.
(g) Whether the area will involve a significant concentration of
homes without large yards.
(h) Any recommendations that may be received from the
Recreation Commission, Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer, the Township staff or the School District.
(i) Reference Subsection F for additional items.
F. Land to be dedicated. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 283]
(1) Land required to be dedicated shall be suitable, prior to dedication,
for its intended purpose, in the determination of the Board of
Supervisors, after providing the Recreation Commission with an
opportunity for a review.
(2) The applicant shall state what improvements, if any, that he/she
intends to make to the land to make it suitable for its intended
purpose, such as rough grading, drainage improvements,
landscaping, clearance of undesirable vegetation or development
of rough trails. The applicant shall not be required to actually
construct or install active recreation facilities as part of land
dedication except as part of any agreement under Subsection J, Fee
modification process. Open space shall be free of construction
debris, excavated materials and solid waste prior to dedication.
§ 165-62 PALMER CODE § 165-62
160:416
(3) Ownership. Required common open space shall be deeded to the
Township, unless the Board of Supervisors agrees to allow a
dedication to any of the following: the Easton Area School District,
Northampton County, a property-owner/condominium association
or an environmental organization or other entity acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors. In the case of a rental development, the
Township may permit the common open space to be retained by the
owner of the adjacent residential buildings.
(4) Homeowner association. If required common open space is to be
owned by a homeowner association, such organization shall require
all property owners within the development to annually contribute
to the maintenance of the common open space. Such provisions
regarding required common open space shall be subject to
acceptance by the Board of Supervisors, based upon the review by
the Township Solicitor and generally follow as a model the
provisions of Section 705(f) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code regarding homeowners associations.132
(5) Any required common open space dedication shall include deed
restrictions to permanently prevent the development of buildings,
except buildings for noncommercial recreation or to support
maintenance of the land for recreation.
(6) Priority shall be given to dedication of land in approximate
locations identified by the Township Park, Recreation and Open
Space Plan. The Township may accept the dedication of common
open space that is not contiguous to the development that it relates
to, provided that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Township that the land would clearly serve a valid common open
space purpose.
(7) A minimum of 50% of the required common open space to be
dedicated shall be usable for active recreation. Areas intended for
active recreation shall be well-drained, of less than six-percent
average slope and not require filling in of a wetland for use.
(8) Land used to meet the minimum required amounts of common open
space shall exhibit the following conditions:
(a) Has adequate access for its maintenance and for pedestrians.
Note, a minimum of two access points shall be required from a
public street or land shall adjoin and become part of an
existing open space area that is accessible from a public street.
The width of street frontage shall not be less than the minimum
lot width as established in the zoning district for which the land
to be dedicated is located; and
(b) Is suitable for both active and passive recreation; and
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(f).
§ 165-62 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-62
160:417
(c) Is not located within a stormwater detention basin; and
(d) Is not required to be provided under another section of this
ordinance or another Township ordinance; and
(e) Is not located within 15 feet of any principal building; and
(f) Is not located within 15 feet of a parking area of six or more
parking spaces (other than parking areas specifically
developed to serve the open space); and
(g) Would not result in a total contiguous tract of common open
space of less than 1/2 acre (including any preexisting adjacent
common open space); and
(h) Is not within the right-of-way of overhead high-voltage
electrical lines; and
(i) Fifty percent of land required to be dedicated has a usable
shape for active recreation; and
(j) Has a minimum width of the lot width established for the
zoning district in which the land to be dedicated is located,
except for developed pathways and except for portions of the
open space needed for maintenance access.
(9) Residual land. If only a portion of a larger tract of land is currently
proposed to be subdivided or the applicant owns one or more
adjacent tracts that not currently proposed to be subdivided, the
applicant shall provide a sketch of a possible future land dedication
on these adjacent lands in case they would be developed in the
future. This is intended to encourage long-term coordination of
open space.
(10) Coordination with future adjacent dedication. The Board of
Supervisors may require that a required land dedication within a
property currently being subdivided shall be placed along an
adjacent undeveloped property so that in the future open spaces on
both sides of the property line may be combined.
(11) Configuration and general siting of land.
(a) Open space shall be configured to serve and be accessible to all
residents of the development.
(b) Common open space shall be arranged to take maximum
advantage of the natural and physical characteristics of the
site, to provide buffer yard provisions for adjacent parcels and
to place common open space within easy access and view of a
majority of dwelling units.
§ 165-62 PALMER CODE § 165-62
160:418
(c) Lands able to support the construction of active recreation
facilities as described above must be incorporated into the
required open space of the development as follows:
[1] Land shall be centrally located so as to conveniently serve
all residents of the development and shall consist of one
parcel of land. Note, active recreational areas shall not be
within 100 feet of a residential building or residential lot.
[2] Land shall be accessible from a public street or shall
become part of an existing park or common open space
that is accessible by a public street. In addition, the active
area shall be access to sewer, water and public utilities.
(d) Environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, onehundred-
year floodplains, rock outcroppings, and sloping areas
over 15% may count toward 25% of the required percentage of
passive common open space. Such environmentally sensitive
areas listed above can be included as part of the lands to be
dedicated but shall be provided above and beyond the acreage
required in Section D.
(e) Land dedicated for passive common open space shall be able to
support the construction or location of pedestrian trails and
amenities along the pathway such as benches and picnic areas.
G. Fees for business development. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
283]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these regulations shall be to recognize
that the development of commercial and industrial uses creates
significant demand for many types of Township recreation facilities,
such as athletic fields, volleyball courts and picnic areas.
(2) Any new commercial or industrial subdivision or land development
shall be required to dedicate 5% of the buildable area of the tract
for recreational purposes. The land to be dedicated shall not
include wetlands, slopes over six-percent, floodplain areas, or
stormwater detention or management areas. Note, the applicant
may pay a recreation fee in lieu of land dedication in an amount as
set from time to time by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors. NOTE: The current Fee Schedule is available at the
Township Municipal Building. This fee may be revised by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors. No land shall be required for
dedication or fee shall be charged for a change in use of or
expansion of an existing building.
(3) See possible modifications of these requirements in Subsection J
below.
H. Combination of land and fees. Upon mutual agreement of the Board of
Supervisors and the applicant, the Township may accept a combination
§ 165-62 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-62
160:419
of common open space and fees in lieu of land to meet the requirements
of this section for a residential subdivision or land development. This
combination shall be based upon the common open space requirement
that applies to a certain number of dwelling units and the fee-in-lieuof-
land requirement that applies to the remaining number of dwelling
units.
I. Timing of fees. Fees required under this section shall be due and
payable upon the receipt of the signed and sealed final plan from the
Township and, in any case, shall be paid prior to recording of the final
plan, except as follows:
(1) The payment of fees may be delayed for up to six months after the
recording of the final plans if the applicant provides financial
security acceptable to the Township to ensure the payment of the
fees at such time. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 283]
J. Fee modification process.
(1) An applicant may seek a modification or reduction of requirements
of this section by offering in writing, in a contractually binding form
to:
(a) Construct substantial, permanent recreation facilities within
the proposed subdivision or land development;
(b) Construct substantial, permanent recreation facilities on
existing public open space; or
(c) Donate or sell appropriate land at a reduced market value to
the Township or the county for public recreation, provided that
the applicant proves by evidence from qualified professionals
that such market value is in fact reduced by an amount greater
than or equal to the value of the modification.
(d) Should the applicant/developer agree to construct recreation
facilities, as described in Subsection J(1)(a) and (b) above,
100% of the facilities shall be constructed within six months
from their receipt of the signed and sealed final plan from the
Township, unless otherwise agreed to by the Township.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 283]
(e) As part of the contractual binding form, the applicant shall
provide construction drawings, technical specifications and
cost estimate. Note, the construction of facilities shall be at a
minimum equal to the amount of the fee that would have been
generated from in-lieu-of land dedication. [Added 2-15-2000
by Ord. No. 283]
(2) The Township may accept such modification if the applicant clearly
proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, after
providing the Recreation Commission with an opportunity for a
§ 165-62 PALMER CODE § 165-62
160:420
§ 165-63. Stormwater management.
review, that such alternative will be substantially equivalent to the
value of the land and/or facilities needed to meet the majority
of the recreation needs that can be expected to be generated
within the Township from the inhabitants of the development. Such
modification shall be based upon an estimate of the market value
of the improvements by the applicant's engineers, which shall be
subject to acceptance by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The applicant must prove to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors the cost value of the
proposed permanent recreational facilities in order for the same to
be credited against the applicable recreation fees. Permanent
recreation facilities may include playground equipment, courts,
ball fields, picnic areas, pavilions, bike paths, parking areas, and
other facilities related to or accessory to use by the public as
recreational facilities, as so determined by the Planning
Commission and the Board Supervisors. [Added 4-8-1996 by Ord.
No. 263]
K. Timing of land dedication. [Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 283]
(1) Land required to be dedicated shall be due upon the receipt of the
signed and sealed final plan from the Township and, in any case,
shall be dedicated prior to recording of the final plan. In the event
that the subdivision is proposed in phases, the applicant can choose
to dedicate the full area of land required for the total tract as
shown in the preliminary plan or dedicate the open space required
for the approved phase. If the development or subdivision occurs in
phases, the following calculation shall be used:
Required
Phase I
Open
Space
=
Phase I Units or
Lots
Total Units or Lots
x [(Total Required Open Space) + (.1 x Total Required
Open Space)]
Total Required open space = 2,000 square feet total number of units in all phases
(2) Should the applicant/developer elect to dedicate open space by
phase, each open space area to be dedicated shall be contiguous to
the open space area proposed for each subsequent phase. It is the
specific intent of this subsection not to promote location of small
isolated pockets of open space within a subdivision. Further,
acceptable mechanisms of ownership shall be established as
required in Subsection F.
A. General provisions.
(1) Stormwater runoff from any subdivision or land development
(including during construction and earthmoving) shall not occur at
§ 165-62 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:421
a peak rate (measured in cubic feet per second) that is greater after
development than occurred prior to development.
(2) Control of runoff from a site shall occur using appropriate means of
detention of the water on the site and/or other approved types of
stormwater management, within the requirements of this
ordinance.
(3) Runoff that is detained shall be held and released at a
predetermined controlled rate by appropriately installed devices.
The release shall be in the same manner as the natural or
predevelopment means of discharge from a site (such as point
discharge or sheet flow).
(4) Stormwater runoff shall not be increased or redirected in such a
way that it results in hazards to persons or property or interferes
with the normal movement of vehicles.
(5) All stormwater management methods are subject to approval by
the Township Engineer.
(6) Stormwater shall be directed away from buildings and on-lot septic
systems.
(7) All stormwater management plans shall take into account and
provide for existing flow from upstream areas within the entire
watershed.
(8) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered nor shall the concentration of water
runoff be increased because of development without the written
approval of all affected landowners.
(9) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so
diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding
or the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands, without complete approval of provisions
being made by the developer for properly handling such conditions,
including water runoff impoundments, if necessary.
(10) All lots shall be laid out and graded to prevent cross-lot drainage
and to provide positive drainage away from proposed building
locations and any primary or alternate septic system locations.
(11) See regulations concerning setbacks from swales and slopes of
swales in §§ 190-150 and 152 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
(12) An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets and other
underground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be
constructed where the runoff of stormwater and the prevention of
erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage
facilities, as determined by the Board of Supervisors, based upon
the recommendation of the Township Engineer.
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-63
160:422
(13) Outlet locations shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(14) Sequence of construction. No substantial grading shall occur and
no building permits shall be issued for any building unless any
detention basin, siltation basin or improved major swale approved
to handle the resulting runoff is in place. Any detention basin shall
be seeded and stabilized and have an installed outlet structure
prior to the construction of any streets or buildings within that
drainage basin.
B. Calculations of stormwater runoff.
(1) Stormwater calculations shall be submitted in a clear and legible
manner for any lot or tract that would result in an increase of 3,000
square feet or greater of total impervious cover.
(2) These calculations shall follow a method preapproved by and
acceptable to the Township Engineer. The following methods are
recommended:
(a) Rational method. See description in Appendix D.133
(b) Soil cover complex method. See United States Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
(3) Rainfall data shall be from the National Weather Service or
PennDOT, for the Lehigh Valley.
(4) The stormwater calculations shall include the following:
(a) Pre- and postdevelopment drainage maps, showing existing
and proposed grades and including any off-site tributary area.
(b) Pre- and postdevelopment runoff calculations.
(c) Detention-basin design calculations (as applicable).
(d) Pipe and swale sizing calculations.
(e) All other information that is needed to construct proposed
stormwater drainage facilities, including, but not limited to,
slopes, proposed elevations and typical cross sections and
details.
(f) Such information as the Township Engineer determines is
needed to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(g) If the development occurs in phases, the entire system shall be
shown.
133. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-63 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:423
(5) Where crop farming or disturbed earth exists on the site prior to
development, meadow in good condition shall be used as the
starting base for the calculation.
C. Design storms. The following shall apply unless superseded by
PennDOT or other stricter standards:
(1) At a minimum, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer that no increase in peak stormwater discharge
will leave the tract during earthmoving, construction or after
development than occurred prior to any of these activities, under
the following conditions and storm frequencies (considered
individually), unless any more restrictive requirements of an
applicable official stormwater management plan approved by DER
and the county pursuant to State Act 167 of 1978, as amended,
exist:134
(a) Two-year storm.
(b) Five-year storm.
(c) Ten-year storm.
(d) Twenty-five-year storm.
(2) If using the SCS calculation method, a twenty-four-hour Type II
storm shall be used in the calculations required by this subsection.
(3) Storm sewer piping, roadside swales and inlet systems shall be
designed for a twenty-five-year storm. A twenty-four-hour Type II
rainfall shall be used if using the soil complex method. The
openings of culverts and under bridges shall be designed for a fiftyyear,
twenty-four-hour Type II rainfall (except within the onehundred-
year floodplain). Bridges shall be designed with one foot
of freeboard.
(4) Within the one-hundred-year floodplain, any stormwater
management structures and systems shall be designed to handle a
one-hundred-year storm. A twenty-four-hour Type II storm shall be
used if using the soil complex method.
(5) The stormwater management plan shall show that a one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour storm can be safely conveyed without
jeopardizing any existing or proposed principal building on the site
or any existing principal building downstream of the site. For
downstream properties, the applicant shall study areas where the
development could have significant impact, considering the size of
drainage areas and the amount of runoff from the development.
D. Design submission.
134. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-63
160:424
(1) All plans showing the proposed storm drainage construction must
be accompanied by a complete design stamped and signed by a
Pennsylvania-registered engineer.
(2) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete general storm sewer
design for the proposed subdivision or land development shall be
submitted at the preliminary plan level. The proposed design must
take into account the entire tract and the watershed.
(3) All stormwater controls shall be designed to function adequately
after the completion of each phase of a development. This may
require the use of temporary structures, which shall be shown on
submitted plans.
(4) A development shall be required to include the construction of
stormwater controls in areas of future phases of a development
prior to construction of earlier phases if the Township Engineer
determines that is necessary to make sure that the system will
work after the completion of each phase. This shall, for example,
include the extension of the main outfall line.
(5) A set of approved design plans shall be maintained on file at the site
during construction, as record drawings.
(6) Drainage structures that are located on state highway rights-of-way
shall be found to be acceptable to PennDOT, and PennDOT approval
shall be a condition of any final approval of the Township.
(7) Submission requirements. The submission requirements for
stormwater management plans for preliminary and final plans
within Articles V and VI of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall apply to all required submissions under this
ordinance.
E. County watershed plans. For areas of a development that are located
within a watershed for which a stormwater management plan has been
approved by DER and the county (pursuant to the State Act 167 Storm
Water Management Act), where specifically provided under state law,
such Act 167 plan shall supersede any conflicting parts of this section.
(NOTE: The Act 167 plans primarily establish differing detention levels
for different areas.) Where necessary for public safety, the Board of
Supervisors may require adjustments to such Act 167 plan provisions,
within the limitations of the Act 167 plan.
F. Joint storm drainage facilities.
(1) Stormwater management facilities may be planned and
constructed in coordination by two or more developments,
provided that all other parts of this section are complied with.
§ 165-63 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:425
(2) The Township may require a development to contribute its fair
share of the costs of a comprehensive regional or subregional
stormwater system in place of requiring an on-site detention basin.
G. Methods of detention and flow delay. The following methods of
detention or flow-delay devices may be found to be acceptable by the
Township Engineer:
(1) Wet or dry ponds and detention basins.
(2) Roof storage and increased roof roughness.
(3) Parking lot detention.
(4) Infiltration trenches.
(5) Porous pavements, grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(6) Cisterns, underground reservoirs or covered ponds.
(7) Increasing the roughness coefficients on the development's surface
area.
(8) Decrease percentage of impervious area.
(9) Groundwater recharge.
(10) Routing flow over lawns in swales within stormwater easements.
(11) Detention storage within the storm sewer.
(12) Another method that may be approved by the Township Engineer.
H. Rooftop storage. If a roof is to be used for detention, a condition of such
use shall be that the applicant shall submit appropriate calculations and
a signed statement from a registered architect or registered engineer
that the structure will be able to support the roof loadings. This
statement shall be required prior to issuance of the building permit.
I. Parking lot storage. A maximum of 30% of paved parking lot may be
found acceptable as a stormwater detention but not retention facility.
Ponding shall be arranged so that pedestrians may cross the parking lot
relatively dryly. There shall be a maximum designed depth of six inches,
and the pavement shall be designed to withstand the effects of ponded
water. The area used for the storage shall be the least used portions of
the parking.
J. Groundwater recharge. In general, all runoff control measures shall be
designed to encourage groundwater recharge, if suitable subsurface
conditions are present. However, in any such recharge, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent pollution of the groundwater,
prevent the formation of sinkholes and to promote safety.
K. Detention basin standards.
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-63
160:426
(1) For the purpose of this section, a retention basin shall be required
to meet the same standards as a detention basin.
(2) Emergency spillways. All detention basins shall be designed with
an emergency spillway.
(a) These spillways at a minimum shall be able to handle a onehundred-
year postdevelopment peak discharge of the principal
pipe barrel and the emergency spillway.
(b) Whenever possible, the emergency spillway for detention
basins shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. If the
emergency spillway cannot be constructed on undisturbed
ground, it shall be constructed of suitable material adequately
compacted in accordance with specifications preapproved by
the Township Engineer.
(c) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, mortared-in-place riprap or concrete rubble. All
emergency spillways shall be constructed so that the detention
basin berm is protected against erosion.
(d) The emergency spillway shall be a minimum of two feet below
the adjacent berm elevation. The emergency spillway shall
convey the one-hundred-year storm at a maximum depth of one
foot over the spillway. The downstream slope of the spillway
shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of the berm
embankment. The edge of the basin grading shall be within the
subject property.
(e) All detention basin outflow structures shall be designed with
trash racks over the outflows.
(3) Slope of detention basin embankment. The maximum inside slope
of earthen detention basin embankments shall be four horizontal to
one vertical. The maximum outside slope shall be three to one (3:1).
The top or toe of any slope shall be located a minimum of five feet
from any property line. Whenever possible, the side slopes and
basin shape shall be amenable to the natural topography. Straight
side slopes are prohibited.
(4) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin berms
shall be 10 feet, unless the Township Engineer determines that a
greater width is needed for maintenance and/or structural
purposes.
(5) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of the
detention basin, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for all
sheet flow. A minimum grade of 1% shall be maintained for all
channel flow, provided that a synthetic low-flow channel of suitable
materials is provided.
§ 165-63 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:427
(6) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. Antiseep collars shall not be required on
basins designed to have a depth of water of less than three feet.
The antiseep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall
be watertight. The antiseep collars shall extend a minimum of two
feet beyond the outside of the principal pipe barrel. The maximum
spacing between collars shall be 10 times the minimum projection
of the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe.
(7) Fencing.
(a) The Township may require an applicant to surround a
detention basin with galvanized vinyl-clad chain link metal
fencing or an alternative type of fence acceptable to the
Township if any of these conditions are present:
[1] The maximum depth of water in the basin after a twentyfive-
year storm is greater than 30 inches.
[2] The basin is intended to hold water for periods of longer
than three hours after the rainfall subsides.
[3] The basin is to be dedicated to the Township, and the
Board of Supervisors requests fencing.
[4] The earthen inside slopes of the detention basin will be
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical.
(b) Fencing of a detention basin under the above subsection shall
not be required if the nearest residential district, school, daycare
center, existing residence or recreation facility is at least
1,500 feet away in walking distance from the basin.
(8) Landscaped screening of detention basins.
(a) A detention basin shall be screened from view of existing
residences, a residential zoning district or a public street,
unless the basin would meet both of the following conditions:
[1] It would have an average inside slope of less than five to
one (5:1) on the outside of the basin, and both the inside
and outside would be planted in grass and intended to be
mowed or would be designed to closely resemble a natural
pond.
[2] It would not be surrounded by a primarily metal fence.
(b) Any required screening shall meet the standards of § 190-194
of the Township Zoning Ordinance. This landscaping shall not
be required along an area where natural vegetation that will
completely fulfill this purpose will be maintained.
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-63
160:428
(9) Multiple basins. The use of multiple detention basins should be
investigated over the use of one larger storage facility.
(10) All outflow structures from storage facilities shall be equipped with
a regulatory device that will permit modification to regulate the
amount of outflow. Suitable antivortex and/or velocity retarders
shall be used.
(11) An outflow control structure shall be provided at the outlet of all
detention basins. This structure shall be constructed of metal or
concrete and shall be designed so that the rate of outflow is
controlled by the pipe barrel through the basin berm when the
depth of water within the basin exceeds the height of the structure.
A trash rack or similar device shall be provided to prevent debris
from entering the outflow structure. The crest elevation shall be set
at a minimum of 12 inches below the emergency spillway.
(12) Retention basins. Aeration devices may be required, dependent
upon the quality of the influent and detention time.
(13) Recreation. When reasonable, efforts should be made to allow
suitable recreational uses of portions of detention areas. This might
include designing a detention basin so that only a portion would be
wet after a minor storm, and the remainder would be well-drained
during all except the most serious storms. These areas may be
acceptable at the discretion of the Township as part of any
recreation land that may be required under any other Township
ordinance.
(14) Detention basins shall not be placed within an existing sinkhole or
a location known to be highly vulnerable to sinkholes, without a
suitable liner. The Board of Supervisors may require a clay liner
where deemed necessary, based upon the recommendations of the
Township Engineer and the Township staff. If such liner is required,
it shall have a permeability rate of at least 1 x 10-6 centimeters per
second.
L. Construction standards. Construction and materials of storm drainage
and control facilities (including pipes), erosion control facilities and all
other required improvements shall be in accordance with the approved
plans and any accompanying specifications. The construction details
and standards of the following publications, or their successor
publications, in their most recent revision shall be used:
(1) County Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook.
(2) PennDOT, Form 408, specifications.
(3) PennDOT, RC Series, Roadway Construction Standards.
§ 165-63 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:429
(4) In cases where the above documents conflict with Township
specifications, the Township's specifications shall supersede,
except in areas of PennDOT jurisdiction.
M. Storm sewers.
(1) The construction of new storm sewers or the connection into
acceptable existing storm sewers shall be required or allowed by
the Board of Supervisors if the Board of Supervisors determines, on
the basis of the recommendation of the Township Engineer, that
this is the most feasible and reasonable option.
(2) Any storm sewers shall be constructed to Township specifications
and shall not interconnect with sanitary sewers.
N. Drainage pipe, culvert and catch basin design.
(1) The minimum diameter of any cross-drainage or culvert pipe shall
be 15 inches.
(2) Open pipe ends must be fitted with concrete end walls or
prefabricated end sections.
(3) Drainage pipes shall have a minimum slope of 0.5%, and drainage
swales and gutters 2.0%. As a minimum, the tops of all pipes should
be at the same elevation when changing pipe sizes.
(4) Manholes or inlets shall be used at all changes in horizontal
alignment, at changes of vertical grade and at all pipe
intersections. No run of pipe shall exceed 400 feet in length
without appropriate measures to allow cleanout. Trash racks shall
be placed on all stormwater entrance structures.
(5) Bridges and culverts shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with applicable PennDOT standards. The applicant
shall apply for and receive any required DER permits.
(6) Grating. Appropriate safety grates shall be attached to all catch
basins, stormwater inlets, pipe openings and other stormwater
receiving structures, as needed, to ensure that maximum openings
do not exceed 25 square inches. Along streets, bikeways and
pedestrian paths, bicycle-safe grates as specified by PennDOT shall
be used as needed.
(7) Storm sewer outfall. Storm sewer outfalls shall be designed, with
respect to the elevation of the invert or other features, so that when
the receiving watercourse is within a twenty-five-year storm, the
storm sewer will continue to drain the area it is designed to serve.
(8) Street construction; inlet spacing.
(a) To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the
lower side of streets and to divert flow away from building
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-63
160:430
areas, the cross section of the street as constructed shall
provide for parallel ditches or swales or curbing on the lower
side which shall discharge only at drainage easements.
(b) Inlet spacing shall be designed such that in a twenty-five-year
storm, one traffic lane of at least 10 feet in width shall be free
from stormwater.
O. Stormwater easements.
(1) Where a subdivision or development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming substantially with the high-water line of such
watercourse attributable to a flood of one-hundred-year frequency,
in order to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage and to
provide for future possible widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting of such drainage facilities. See also
setbacks from waterways and drainage swales in §§ 190-150 and
190-152 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Obstructions; maintenance easements. Structures and other
obstructions to flow (except fences made of such materials and so
placed as to not obstruct flow) shall be prohibited within
stormwater easements. Such easements shall grant the Township
the right to enter the easement to accomplish maintenance work,
although the Township assumes no responsibility for such work.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all
stormwater easements on, over or through other properties that
are needed to carry out the proposed storm management plan.
(4) Areas where stormwater easements have or will be granted shall
not be obstructed during or after construction.
(5) See format of easements in Appendix B.135
P. Surface waters.
(1) All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage systems and/or
areas of concentration of surface water shall be maintained in their
existing condition unless alteration is approved by the Township
Engineer. The applicant shall be responsible to obtain all necessary
DER permits. (See Chapter 105 of Title 25 of the state regulations.)
(2) Creek alignments. Any change to the alignment of a watercourse or
any blocking, impeding or redirecting of a watercourse shall only
occur with written approval of DER and the Township Engineer.
Q. Ownership and maintenance of stormwater facilities. A system for the
ownership and maintenance responsibilities of all temporary and
permanent stormwater facilities and erosion and sedimentation control
135. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-63 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-63
160:431
facilities that is satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors shall be
established prior to final plan approval, including:
(1) Description of temporary and permanent maintenance
requirements.
(2) Identification of responsible individual, corporation, association or
other entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary and
permanent stormwater management and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
(3) Establishment of suitable easements for access to all facilities.
(4) Where the grading and storm drainage plan proposes Township
ownership and/or maintenance, a description of the methods,
procedures and the extent to which any facilities shall be turned
over to the Township, including a written approval and agreement
from the Township indicating acceptance of responsibilities as
proposed, shall be incorporated as an integral part of the plan.
(5) The Township may, at the complete discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, accept or not accept an offer by the applicant for
Township ownership of stormwater facilities. If the Township
accepts ownership and maintenance responsibilities for
stormwater facilities, the applicant shall be required by the Board
of Supervisors to fund a dedicated account to fund the first 25 years
of such maintenance. This funding shall be based upon a
reasonable estimate by the Township staff or the Township
Engineer.
(6) Stormwater facilities shall be designed to require minimal
maintenance and shall have suitable access for maintenance.
(7) All storm drainage facilities shall be properly maintained by the
party designated as responsible on the final subdivision plan,
unless the Board of Supervisors agrees to accept a change in the
party responsible or the party owning the facility.
(8) Should a facility not be maintained in proper working order, the
Board of Supervisors may, after due notice to the responsible party,
arrange for the needed maintenance to be accomplished with all
such expenses charged to the responsible party. These expenses
shall be collectible as municipal claims are now collected by law.
(9) The Township Engineer and code enforcement staff shall have the
right to enter private property to inspect storm drainage facilities.
Reasonable effort should be made to contact the property owner
prior to any such inspection.
(10) Township maintenance easements. See Subsection O(2) above.
§ 165-63 PALMER CODE § 165-64
160:432
§ 165-64. Sanitary sewage systems.
(Hereafter in this section referred to as "sewage.")
A. In general. All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with
an adequate sewage disposal system (either on-lot or centralized
systems) that will meet current DER rules and regulations, the State
Sewage Facilities Act136 and Township standards.
B. Public sewage service. Connection to the public sewage system shall be
required, except where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors, based upon review by the Sewer Authority staff,
that such connection is not possible or is cost-prohibitive.
(1) See also § 190-157 of the Township Zoning Ordinance regarding
future connections to the public sewage system.
(2) Any connection to the public sewage system shall meet the
applicable standards of the Township Sewer Authority.
(3) Where extension of public sewage service is required, the
developer shall be required to extend the sanitary sewage lines and
all lateral extensions necessary to serve each lot.
(4) Where public sewage service is required, the developer shall at a
minimum provide an easement(s) suitable for the future extension
of sewage lines to serve adjacent properties, unless the developer
shows that such extensions would not be physically possible.
C. Nonpublic central sewage service. Nonpublic central sewage service
shall only be permitted where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that all three conditions apply:
(1) There are no other reasonable alternatives.
(2) The service would be consistent with the Township's Sewage
Facilities Plan.
(3) There will be an acceptable system to ensure and fund long-term
professional operations and maintenance.
D. Capped sewers.
(1) Where sanitary sewage service is not yet accessible but is planned
to be extended in the future to the subdivision or land development,
the subdivider or developer shall install both capped sewers and
each use shall also be served by an approved on-lot septic system.
(a) If both capped sewers and an on-lot septic system is provided
to a lot, then an alternative septic field location is not required.
136. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 165-64 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-64
160:433
§ 165-65. Water supply systems and fire hydrants.
(b) Such dry sewer lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of
the subdivision, and the laterals shall be capped at the street
right-of-way.
(c) Such dry capped sewer lines shall be constructed so that they
can be connected into the public sewage system in the future.
All such improvements shall be subject to design approval and
construction inspection by the Township Sewer Authority and
shall meet applicable DER and Sewer Authority rules and
regulations.
E. On-lot sewage service.
(1) Where the Board of Supervisors deems that it would be impossible
or cost-prohibitive to connect to the public sewage system, on-lot
systems may be used and shall be constructed in accordance with
DER regulations.
(2) The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer's site and soils
investigation and favorable report are required prior to approval of
the preliminary plan for a subdivision or land development
proposed to use on-lot septic systems.
(3) Any use with an on-lot septic system and that does not have capped
sewers shall include a suitable land area set aside in open space for
a second septic system that could be used if the first system failed.
The applicant shall provide a written and signed statement from a
state-certified Sewage Enforcement Officer, stating that the
alternate location would meet state requirements as the location
for an on-lot septic system.
A. In general. All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with
an adequate water supply system (either on-lot or centralized system)
that will meet DER and Township requirements.
B. Central water service.
(1) Proposed extensions of central water systems shall meet all
applicable procedures, reviews and requirements of the
appropriate Municipal Authority or public utility and shall be
approved by such agency prior to final plan approval.
(2) All lots and principal buildings within a subdivision or land
development shall be required to be served by the public water
system or by an existing central water supplier in their respective
franchise/service areas, unless the Board of Supervisors
determines that such connection is not possible or is costprohibitive,
based upon the review of such water supplier.
§ 165-64 PALMER CODE § 165-65
160:434
§ 165-66. Utilities other than water and sewer.
(3) A new nonpublic water supply system serving two or more principal
uses or lots shall only be permitted where it is not possible or costprohibitive
to extend service from an existing central water system.
Any new central water system shall be required to provide
adequate water pressure and provide a system to ensure long-term
professional operations and maintenance, in the determination of
the Township. The Township may require that a subdivision or land
development of 12 or more dwelling units or of nonresidential lots
with an average lot area of 30,000 square feet or less include the
development of a central water system.
(4) Where public water service is required, the developer shall at a
minimum provide an easement(s) suitable for the future extension
of waterlines to serve adjacent properties, unless the developer
shows that such extensions would not be physically possible.
C. On-lot water supply system.
(1) When a subdivision or land development is not required to connect
to an existing central water system, on-lot water systems shall be
constructed in accordance with regulations of DER.
(2) Wells should be located no closer than 25 feet from any future
street right-of-way.
D. Fire hydrants. All subdivisions and land developments that will be
served by public water service shall provide fire hydrants as needed
with appropriate water pressure so that all dwelling units and principal
buildings are within 600 feet of an active fire hydrant.
A. All electric power, telephone, cable television and natural gas
distribution lines within new subdivisions and land developments shall
be placed underground, except where the Board of Supervisors
determines it is not feasible, and in accordance with the current
standards of the utility serving the subdivision or development.
B. Any natural gas distribution lines shall be placed beneath the cartway
of a street.
C. In extending lines to new subdivisions and/or land developments within
the Township, each cable operator shall accept from the developer only
those easements which provide nonexclusive rights to operate a cable
system within such subdivision and/or land development. No such
easement shall prevent any other cable operator authorized to operate
within the Township, then or in the future, from using such easement to
extend other and further lines to such subdivision and/or land
development. In each new subdivision and each new land development,
the developer shall, upon notifying public utilities of the opportunity to
serve such subdivision or land development, also notify all cable
operators licensed to operate a cable system in the Township of the
§ 165-65 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-66
160:435
§ 165-67. Access drives and driveways.
opportunity to install cable facilities to serve the subdivision or land
development. Each owner of a separate tract of land of record in such
subdivision or land development and all persons within the Township
shall have the right to freely choose any cable operator permitted in the
Township to serve such person with such cable operator's cable system.
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-360]
D. Changes required by public improvements. The cable operator shall,
upon reasonable notice and at its reasonable expense, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove from the street or other public place any
of its property when required by the Township by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction,
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or any other type of
structure or improvements by public agencies. [Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-360]
E. Requests for removal or change. The cable operator shall, on the
request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of said building. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall
be paid by the person requesting the same, and the cable operator shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The cable
operator shall be given not less than 15 days' advance written notice of
any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes.
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-360]
A. Access. A state highway occupancy permit is required for all entrances
of access drives or driveways onto a state road.
B. Location. Except for streets and driveways that are aligned to intersect
directly across from each other, the minimum distance between an
access drive or driveway to a street intersection on the same side or
opposite side of a street shall be as follows:
§ 165-66 PALMER CODE § 165-67
160:436
§ 165-68. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XVII of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 165-69. Sidewalks, pathways, driveway aprons and fences.
[Amended 1-29-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-313]
Distance Between Center Lines of
Access Drive or Driveway and
Nearest Intersecting Street By Type
of Intersecting Street
Type of Subdivision or
Land Development
Minor
Arterial
(feet)
Collector
(feet)
Local
(feet)
Single-family detached
dwellings or garden
apartments
150 100 75
Residential, other than
single-family detached
dwellings or garden
apartments
150 75 50
Nonresidential or mixed 300 200 100
C. Sight lines at intersections of driveways or access drives with streets.
See § 190-194 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
D. Grades. Grades of access drives or driveways shall not exceed 14%
(except 10% for an access drive) when connecting to a local or collector
street and 7% when connecting onto an arterial street; however, the
initial 20 feet from the edge of the cartway shall not exceed 5%.
E. Drainage. The developer shall make adequate provisions to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street where intersected
by an access drive or driveway. Access drives and aisles within parking
lots shall be graded and drained to keep the primary travel lane free of
stormwater.
A. Sidewalks built to Township specifications shall be required in all
subdivisions and land developments. See Chapter 160, Streets and
Sidewalks, of the Township Code.
(1) Defer. The Board of Supervisors may, after receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, defer a requirement
for sidewalks on one or both sides of a street if a development
would include an acceptable system of internal pathways or be
within in a clearly industrial area or where all of the lots in a
residential subdivision would be both greater than one acre in lot
area and have greater than 150 feet of street frontage.
§ 165-67 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-69
160:437
§ 165-70. Streetlighting.
B. Pathway or bikeway.
(1) If deemed necessary for the convenient and safe circulation of
bicycles and pedestrians, the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may require that a
major subdivision or land development include the granting of an
easement for a pathway or bikeway.
(2) A bikeway or pathway may be required to have a width of up to
eight feet and may be required to be illuminated and/or paved to
Township standards.
(3) A bikeway or pathway may be included within the required
minimum area of an abutting lot.
C. Location of sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks, where required or provided, shall be located within the
street right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Supervisors. A standard street cross-section diagram is available
from the Township Engineer.
(2) A grass planting strip may be required by the Township between
the curb and sidewalk. Such planting strip shall have sufficient
width for street trees, unless the Township permits the street trees
to be planted in another location. Any strip between the curbing
and the sidewalk shall not be paved except at driveway entrances.
D. Width. Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet along minor
arterial streets and four feet along all other streets, except where the
Board of Supervisors determines there is a need for a five-foot-wide
sidewalk (such as near a school or park).
E. Handicapped access. All sidewalks and curbs at the intersection of two
or more public streets shall include a sloped curb cut suitable for use by
wheelchairs.
F. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of adjacent landowners to
maintain sidewalks. See the sidewalk covenant provisions in Appendix
F.137
G. Driveway aprons. See Township specifications.
H. All fences constructed in conjunction with a land development plan
shall meet the Township Mini Specifications referred to in the Palmer
Township Subdivision and Land Development Chapter § 165-57.
A. The developer shall be required to provide streetlights when the Board
of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
137. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 165-69 PALMER CODE § 165-70
160:438
§ 165-71. Identification signs and street names.
§ 165-72. Regulatory signs.
The developer shall be required to provide or fund traffic regulatory signs
that shall meet current design standards as established by PennDOT.
§ 165-73. Street trees, tree preservation and historic buildings.
deems them necessary to provide safe traffic or pedestrian circulation.
Streetlights shall be required to be provided at intersections involving
a collector or arterial street, at sharp curves in streets and at very
isolated areas of a development.
B. Such lights shall meet design standards established by the Township
and the public utility. The Planning Commission may approve
alternative pole designs that still meet electric company standards.
C. The Board of Supervisors may require a developer to establish a
homeowner or condominium association to fund the maintenance of
and electricity for streetlights in a development.
A. The developer shall provide the subdivision or land development with
adequate Township-approved street signs at the intersection of all
streets and with any other signs required or fund such signs if provided
by the Township.
B. Sign style, color and lettering shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
C. Street names are subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors
and United States Postal Service and shall continue the name of any
street with the same alignment and shall not duplicate or be closely
similar to the name of another street within the Township or the zip
code.
A. Street trees and species for paved-area trees.
(1) Street trees are required to be planted under this section within all
land developments and major subdivisions. Street trees shall not be
required for frontage along a single-family detached residential lot
with a lot area of greater than two acres or a clearly agricultural lot
with a lot area of greater than two acres.
(a) The Planning Commission or Township Shade Tree
Commission may approve other species of trees than those
listed below if the applicant provides reference information
that proves to the satisfaction of either Commission that the
trees would be sturdy, attractive, resistant to disease and
suitable for the proposed site. Trees with a shorter height at
maturity shall be used under utility lines.
§ 165-70 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:439
(b) The following variety of species shall be used for required
trees:
Number of
Required Trees
Minimum
Number of
Species
Maximum Percent
of Any 1 Species
1 to 9 1 100
10 to 24 2 50
25 to 44 3 40
45 to 99 4 30
100 or more 5 20
(c) The following species of deciduous trees shall be used to meet
Township requirements, including paved-area landscaping
required by the Township Zoning Ordinance. The species of
tree shall be suitable to the site. Only trees marked with an
asterisk (*) are permitted to be used where the root system will
be restricted (such as street trees).
Small and Medium-Sized Trees
* Acer bungeranum - trident maple
* Acer campestre - hedge maple
* Acer ginnala - Amur maple
* Acer tartaricum - Tartarian maple
* Amelanchier arborea - shadblows serviceberry
* Amelanchier X grandiflora (many cultivars) -
serviceberry
* Amelanchier laevis - Alleghany serviceberry
* Carpinus betulus - European hornbeam
* Carpinus caroliniana - American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis - American redbud
Chinonanthus virginicus - white fringe-tree
Cornus florida - flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood
* Cornus mas - Conelian dogwood
Cotinus coggygria - smoketree
* Crataegus curg-galli, Inermis - thornless hawthorn
Crataegus mongyna - single-seed hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn
Crataegus laevigata, Crimson King or Superba - English
hawthorn
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:440
Crataegus lavallei - Lavalle hawthorn
Crataegus toba - Toba hawthorn
Crataegus viridus cultivar Winterking - winterking
hawthorn
Halesia carolina - Carolina silverbell
* Macckia amurensis - Amur maackia
Magnolia soulangeana - saucer magnolia
Magnolia virginiana - sweetbay magnolia
Magnolia stellata - star magnolia
* Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crabapple
* Malus cultivars that are disease resistant, Adams,
Baskatong, Bob White, Evelyn, Liset, Madonna, Ormiston
Roy, Professor Spengei, Red Jewel, Sentinel, Sugar
Tyme, Strawberry Parfait, Donald Wyman and Centurion
- crabapple
* Malus sieboldii X Zumi calocarpa - Zumi crabapple
* Ostrya virginiana - hophornbeam
Oxydendrun arboreum - sourwood
* Prunus accodlade - flowering cherry
* Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry
* Prunus serrulata varieties - Japanese flowering cherry
Prunus virginiana varieties - chokecherry
* Prunus yedoensis - Yoshino cherry
* Sorbus alnifolia - mountain-ash
Sorbus aucuparia - European mountain-ash
* Sorbus amurensis - Amur mountain-ash
Styrax japonica - Japanese snowbell tree
* Syringa reticulata - Japanese lilac tree
Large-Sized Trees
Acer nigrum - black maple
Acer platanoides - Norway maple
Acer pseudo-platanus - sycamore maple
* Acer rubrum - American red maple
Acer saccharum - sugar maple
Aesculus carnea cultivar Briotti -
horsechestnut
Aesculus hippocastanum - common horsechestnut
Betula nigra - river birch
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:441
Betula platyphylla - white birch
* Celtis jessoensis - Jesso hackberry
* Celtis laevigata - hackberry
* Celtis occidentalis - common hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonicum - Katsura tree
Cladrastis lutea - yellowwood
* Corylus colurna - Turkish filbert
* Eucommia ulmoides - hardy rubber tree
Fagus grandiflora - American beech
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
* Fraxinus americana - white ash
* Fraxinus pennsylvania (seedless variety) - green ash
* Ginko biloba - maiden hair tree (male only)
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky coffee-tree (male only)
* Koelreuteria paniculata - golden rain tree
* Liquidambar styraciflua - sweetgum
* Cornus mas - Conelian dogwood
Cotinus coggygria - smoketree
* Crataegus curg-galli, Inermis - thornless hawthorn
Crataegus mongyna - single-seed hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn
Crataegus laevigata, Crimson King or Superba - English
hawthorn
Crataegus lavallei - Lavalle hawthorn
Crataegus toba - Toba hawthorn
Crataegus viridus cultivar Winterking - winterking
hawthorn
Halesia carolina - Carolina silverbell
* Macckia amurensis - Amur maackia
Magnolia soulangeana - saucer magnolia
Magnolia virginiana - sweetbay magnolia
Magnolia stellata - star magnolia
* Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crabapple
* Malus cultivars that are disease resistant, Adams,
Baskatong, Bob White, Evelyn, Liset, Madonna, Ormiston
Roy, Professor Spengei, Red Jewel, Sentinel, Sugar
Tyme, Strawberry Parfait, Donald Wyman and Centurion
- crabapple
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:442
* Malus sieboldii X Zumi calocarpa - Zumi Crabapple
* Ostrya virginiana - hophornbeam
Oxydendrun arboreum - sourwood
* Prunus accodlade - flowering cherry
* Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry
* Prunus serrulata varieties - Japanese flowering cherry
Prunus virginiana varieties - chokecherry
* Prunus yedoensis - Yoshino cherry
* Sorbus alnifolia - mountain-ash
Sorbus aucuparia - European mountain-ash
* Sorbus amurensis - Amur mountain-ash
Styrax japonica - Japanese snowbell tree
* Syringa reticulata - Japanese lilac tree
Large-Sized Trees
Acer nigrum - black maple
Acer platanoides - Norway maple
Acer pseudoplatanus - Sycamore maple
* Acer rubrum - American red maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Aesculus carnea cultivar Briotti -
horsechestnut
Aesculus hippocastanum - common horsechestnut
Betula nigra - river birch
Betula platyphylla - white birch
* Celtis jessoensis - Jesso hackberry
* Celtis laevigata - hackberry
* Celtis occidentalis - common hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonicum - Katsura tree
Cladrastis lutea - yellowwood
* Corylus colurna - Turkish filbert
* Eucommia ulmoides - hardy rubber tree
Fagus grandiflora - American beech
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
* Fraxinus americana - white ash
* Fraxinus pennsylvania (seedless variety) - green ash
* Ginko biloba - maiden hair tree (male only)
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky coffeetree (male only)
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:443
* Koelreuteria paniculata - golden rain tree
* Liquidambar styraciflue - sweetgum
* Liriodendron tulipifera - tulip poplar
* Metasequoia glyptostroboides - dawn redwood
* Nyssa sylvatica - black gum
* Phellodendron amurense - Amur corktree
Platanus X acerifolia cultivar Bloodgood - Bloodgood
London plane-tree
* Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry
* Pyrus calleryanna (not Bradford) - Callery pear
selections
* Quercus acutissima - sawtooth oak
* Quercus alba - white oak
* Quercus bicolor - swamp white oak
* Quercus cerris - Turkey oak
* Quercus coccinea - scarlet oak
* Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak
* Quercus macrocarpa - bur oak
* Quercus montana - chestnut oak
* Quercus palustris - pin oak
* Quercus phellos - willow oak
* Quercus robur - English oak
* Quercus rubra (borealis) - red oak
* Quercus shumardii - Shumard oak
* Quercus velutina - black oak
* Sophora japonica - Japanese pagoda tree
* Taxodium distichum - bald cypress
Tilia americana - American linden
* Tilia cordata - little leaf linden
* Tilia X euchlora (ungrafted only) - Crimean linden
* Tilia petiolaris - pendant silver linden
* Tilia tomentosa - silver linden
* Ulmus parvifolia - Chinese lacebark elm
* Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova
(d) Evergreens. The Township may permit the following types of
evergreen trees to be substituted for deciduous street trees if
needed to buffer a residential area from a high-traffic road and
if such trees are located to avoid sight distance hazards:
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:444
Cedrus altlantica - atlas cedar
Chamaecyparis obtusa - Hinoki cedar
Chamaecyparis pisifera - Hinoki false cypress
Chamaecyparis thyoides - Atlantic white cedar
Cupressocyparis leylandii - Leyland cypress
Ilex opaca - American holly
Picea abies - Norway spruce
Picea omorika - Serbian spruce
Picea orientalis - Oriental spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce
Pinus bungeana - lace bark pine
Pinus densiflora - Japanese red pine
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine
Pinus strobus - eastern white pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas fir
Pseudotsuga taxifolia - Douglas fir
Sciadopitys verticillat - Japanese umbrella pine
Taxus species - yew varieties
Thuja occidentalis culitivars Nigra, Emerald or Techy - darkgreen
arbor vitae
Tsuga canadensis - Canada hemlock
Tsuga caroliniana - Carolina hemlock
(e) Prohibited trees. The following trees shall not be planted
within the street right-of-way and shall not be used to meet any
Township requirement. Such trees may be planted by a
property owner on private property if such tree is in addition to
Township requirements.
Acer negundo - box elder
Acer saccharinum - silver maple
Ailanthus altissima - tree-of-heaven
Catalpa speciosa - catalpa
Elaeagnus species - Russian olive
Ginkgo - female only
Maclura pomifera - Osage-orange
Morus species - mulberry
Populus species - poplar
Salix species - willow
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:445
Ulmus americana - American elm
Ulmus pumila - Siberian elm
(2) Quality of trees.
(a) Trees permitted shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect
pests and disease and durable under the maintenance
contemplated.
(b) Trees which have died or have become diseased or pest-ridden
within 18 months from the time of planting shall be replaced by
the developer.
(3) Minimum size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height of six
inches above the finished grade level) shall be a minimum of two
inches.
(4) Planting and maintenance.
(a) Trees shall be planted and staked in conformance with good
landscaping practices.
(b) Trees adjacent to or within parking areas shall be properly
protected from damage by vehicles by raised curbs or similar
devices or sufficient setback.
(c) Required trees shall be properly maintained and shall not be
removed by the developer without being replaced by another
tree that meets the requirements of this section.
(5) Required number of street trees.
(a) Within and abutting all land developments and major
subdivisions, along any street or any access drive serving more
than one commercial, industrial or institutional principal use,
an average of one deciduous street tree shall be required for
every 50 feet of distance along the street right-of-way line on
each affected side of the street.
(b) In a residential subdivision or land development, if dwellings
do not front onto the street right-of-way, evergreen trees
meeting the requirements of this section may be substituted
for deciduous trees.
(6) Spacing. The trees required under this section shall be generally
spaced throughout the development but may be clustered at
locations acceptable to the Shade Tree Commission. If trees are to
be planted on both sides of a street, the trees should be planted so
that the trees alternate and are not lined up exactly with the tree on
the other side of the street.
(7) Location of street trees. The proposed location of street trees shall
be shown on plans and shall be subject to approval of the Board of
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:446
Supervisors. The street trees shall be located within the street
right-of-way.*
(a) If a street is curbed, the trunk of street trees required under
this section shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the
curbline.* The tree should be within a vegetated open unpaved
area with a minimum width of four feet.
(b) If a street is not curbed, then the trunk of the street tree shall
be planted at least five feet from the edge of the cartway and
the shoulder of a street.*
(c) Where trees are to be planted between the curb and the
sidewalk, special consideration shall be given to the species of
trees that are planted.
*NOTE: Unless the Board of Supervisors approves or requires
another location (such as outside of the right-of-way) or
another location is needed to ensure adequate sight distance.
(8) Other requirements. The street trees required under this section
shall be in addition to any trees required under other Township
regulations, including the parking lot landscaping requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance.
(9) Credit for existing trees. If existing healthy street trees are to be
preserved that would, in the determination of the Shade Tree
Commission, generally meet the intent and requirements of this
section, they may serve as a credit towards the number of street
trees required to be planted.
B. Ground cover. Exposed ground surface in all parts of the subdivision
shall be paved or covered with stone screenings or other solid material
or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil
erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
C. Buffer yards. See the requirements for buffer yards in § 190-194 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance.
D. Preservation of existing trees.
(1) Applicability.
(a) If tree cutting and related development activity are not
regulated by the tree preservation requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
("SALDO") of 1994, as amended, then see the tree preservation
requirements of § 190-164 of the Zoning Ordinance. (The tree
provision provisions in this SALDO and the Zoning Ordinance
are identical, as of 1994.)
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:447
(b) If these SALDO provisions apply, then waivers or modifications
may be granted by the Board of Supervisors for just cause
without having to meet requirements for a zoning variance.
(2) The provisions of this Subsection D shall not apply to the following
activities:
(a) Bona fide tree nurseries for replanting, bona fide Christmas
tree farms or commercial orchards.
(b) Forestry, commercial, which is regulated as a distinct land use.
(See § 190-210 of the Zoning Ordinance.)
(c) Cutting of trees on a lot of less than two acres that has a
primarily residential use, after a certificate of occupancy has
been granted.
(d) Cutting of trees of less than six inches diameter. [NOTE:
Except trees that were required to be planted by any Township
ordinance, such as § 165-164E(10) below, shall not be cut down
unless replaced by a closely similar tree.]
(3) Purposes. The purpose is to protect wildlife and bird habitats,
encourage groundwater recharge, avoid thermal pollution,
decrease air pollution, maintain the attractive character of areas,
maintain and increase property values, protect water quality and
conserve energy and, through these purposes, to serve the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(4) Measurement. For the purposes of this section, the "width of trees"
shall be the diameter of the trunk at a height of 4.5 feet above the
average surrounding original ground level.
(5) Tree removal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to
show that tree cutting or removal will be held to a reasonable
minimum. Except as exempted within Subsection D(1),
Applicability, above, trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or
greater may only be cut down, killed or effectively destroyed if such
trees meet one or more of the following standards:
(a) In addition to other provisions of this section, a maximum of
five trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or more on a lot
may be cut down in a one-year period.
(b) The thinning of woods is specifically permitted, provided that
selective cutting is used instead of clear-cutting, and provided
that a maximum of 15% of trees six inches or more in diameter
in a lot are cut down, and provided that the tree cutting is
clearly intended to promote the healthy development of the
remaining trees.
(c) Trees may be cut down if the applicant proves that it is
necessary to allow reasonable development of the lot as part of
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:448
an approved development plan or building permit (after
considering reasonable alternatives, such as adjusting the
location of a building, street or driveway). For example, trees
may be cut down where necessary in the following situations:
[1] The trees would be located within 10 feet of an existing or
proposed uncurbed vehicle cartway or stormwater
detention basin or paved area or streetlight or fire
hydrant.
[2] The trees would be located within three feet of an existing
or proposed vehicular cartway, parking area, vehicle
shoulder, utility corridor, sidewalk or driveway.
[3] The trees would be located within 25 feet of a proposed onsite
sewage system or the structural walls of the new or
expanded structure.
[4] The trees would be located within the area of proposed use
that needs to be kept open, such as the fairway of a golf
course.
[5] The locations of the trees would be affected by
unavoidable significant grade changes.
[6] The trees would be an unresolvable hazard to a public
utility.
(d) Trees may be cut down if they are clearly a hazard to the public
safety, such as being a sight distance hazard, an obstruction to
a traffic signal or stop sign or a danger to existing buildings.
(e) Trees may be cut down if they are dead, mostly dead or clearly
not healthy, such as trees that are diseased, unresolvably pestinfected
or clearly near the extreme end of their life span.
(f) Trees may be cut down if the majority of their root system
would need to be destroyed or the root system would need to
be covered by paving or significant grade changes.
(6) Protection of trees during construction.
(a) Reasonable efforts shall be taken during any construction to
ensure that trees protected by this section are not intentionally
or accidentally injured or effectively destroyed, including root
compaction by equipment and materials, mechanical damage
or change in grade level.
(b) Within buffer areas. See § 190-194D of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) A tree protection area shall be designated on development
plans. This area to be protected shall include the outer limits of
land areas (the dripline) under the branches of trees.
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-73
160:449
(d) Fencing. The tree protection area shall be separated from all
construction, storage and vehicle areas by a substantial
temporary fence with a minimum four-foot height. Such fence
may include snow fencing or wood planks or strong wires or
ropes attached to metal posts or a similar secure method. The
fence shall be kept in good repair. Such fence shall be removed
only after completion of the work. Trees that are to be removed
may also be used as a temporary buffer to protect trees to be
preserved.
(e) The following shall not occur within the defined tree protection
area:
[1] Paving (other than sidewalks*). (*NOTE: Where practical,
sidewalks should but are not required to curve around
and/or be placed as far from the trunk as possible or be
placed outside of the dripline of a tree. )
[2] Storage of building materials, equipment, debris or fill.
[3] Movement of motorized vehicles or equipment.
[4] Grade changes or unnecessary compaction of soil.
(f) If vehicles will need to cross through areas of trees, a defined,
fenced path shall be established. The tree protection area
should be noted with prominent signs, such as "Tree Protection
Area - Please Keep Out." Such fences and signs shall be
removed upon completion of the work.
(g) Root and limb protection. The cutting of root systems of trees
to be protected shall be minimized. When activity must occur
under the dripline of a tree to be protected, tunneling is
recommended instead of trenching. Limbs should be trimmed
or tied back if likely to be damaged during construction.
(h) A concrete washout area shall not be located in close proximity
to the tree protection area.
(i) Layout. Buildings and other features of a development shall be
laid out to maximize the preservation of healthy mature trees.
For example, building and paving areas should be designed so
that trees are located within islands of sufficient size.
(j) Replacement of trees.
[1] If tree(s) that were required by the Township to be
protected and preserved are killed, removed or otherwise
destroyed, then the Township shall require the applicant
or developer to replace such tree(s) with approved species
of trees with a minimum trunk diameter of four inches
measured at one foot above the average grade level.
§ 165-73 PALMER CODE § 165-73
160:450
§ 165-74. Monuments and lot pins.
§ 165-75. Curbs.
[a] One such tree shall be planted for each tree
destroyed.
[b] These replacement trees shall be in addition to any
trees required by other provisions of this ordinance.
[2] This replacement provision shall not limit the Township's
ability to also seek fines or other enforcement actions and
remedies under this ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance.
(7) If the Township Shade Tree Commission should ever become
inactive, then any responsibilities stated for such Commission in
the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall be assumed by the Planning Commission.
E. Natural and historic feature preservation. Substantial and sensitive
natural features and historic structures and important archaeological
sites worthy of protection, as determined by the Board of Supervisors
upon the advice of the Planning Commission, shall be respected,
incorporated into and protected in any subdivision or land
development. These features include but are not limited to natural
drainage channels, waterways and falls, large trees or groves, highly
scenic views and important community landmarks.
A. Monuments.
(1) Location. Permanent reference monuments shall be located at each
intersection of street center lines of street(s) constructed by the
developer, at the beginning and ending of all street curves and at
exterior corners of the subdivision. With the approval of the
Township Engineer, the subdivider may install monuments on only
one side of the street, provided that enough monuments are set to
permit a surveyor to stake out accurately any building lot shown on
the record plan.
(2) Type. Reference monuments shall be constructed of steelreinforced
portland cement concrete or other material approved by
the Township Engineer.
(3) Placement. Reference monuments shall be placed so that the top of
the monument is as shown in the accompanying sketch.
B. Lot pins. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and shall
be at least a three-fourths-inch metal pin or pipe with a minimum length
of 20 inches, located in the ground to existing grade.
A. Curbs shall be provided along both sides of all public streets and all
private streets.
§ 165-73 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-75
160:451
§ 165-76. Sedimentation and erosion control.
B. Waiver. Curbs may be waived by the Board of Supervisors along singlefamily
detached residential lots that have a lot area of greater than two
acres or clearly agricultural lots that have a lot area of greater than two
acres.
C. If curbs are waived, appropriate stabilized drainage channels designed
to handle a twenty-five-year storm shall be required along all streets,
within the street right-of-way or drainage easements.
D. Rolled curbs are not permitted.
E. All required curbs shall meet Township specifications.
A. Any land development or subdivision that will involve the disturbance of
more than 5,000 square feet of earth, or as otherwise provided under
state regulations, shall be required to submit to the County
Conservation District and the Plans Administrator an erosion and
sedimentation control plan that shows how the project will comply with
applicable DER erosion and sedimentation control regulations. (See
Title 25, Chapter 102, as amended.) These DER regulations are hereby
made a part of this ordinance by reference. Any violation of such
regulations or any violation of an approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall also be a violation of this ordinance.
B. Compliance with the submitted erosion and sedimentation control plan
(and any revisions officially filed with the Township) shall automatically
be a condition of any final plan approval and any building permit.
C. The County Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, or its successor
publications, shall be used as a resource in soil protection planning and
in the review of such plans.
D. The landowner, developer and builder shall all be responsible for
carrying out the requirements of the erosion and sedimentation control
plan during earthmoving activities.
E. All areas of the subdivision shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
Slopes steeper than 15% shall be further protected by mulching, which
shall be adequately tied down.
§ 165-75 PALMER CODE § 165-76
160:452
ARTICLE XI
Mobile (Manufactured) Home Park Design Standards and
Improvements
§ 165-77. Applicability.
§ 165-78. Exemptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:
§ 165-79. Contents, submission and review of plans.
The provisions of Articles IV, V, VI, VIII and IX shall apply with respect to
the contents, submission and review of mobile home park plans.
§ 165-80. General standards and requirements.
A. The requirements in this Article shall apply to a mobile (manufactured)
home park which is on a tract held in single ownership and provides
mobile home spaces on a lease or rental basis.
B. Mobile home parks proposed to be developed for sale of lots shall be
designed in accordance with all requirements set forth for single-family
dwelling residential development.
C. Every proposed mobile home park shall be submitted, reviewed,
approved and recorded as either a land development or major
subdivision.
D. Definitions. The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall
have the same meaning.
A. The business of mobile home sales, except for accessory sales of mobile
homes to be located within the mobile home park.
B. The storage or garaging of mobile homes not being used for living or
sleeping purposes within a building or structure.
C. A single mobile home used as a residence on a lot with no other
dwellings.
D. A mobile home located on the site of a construction project, survey
project or other similar work project and used solely as a field office or
work- or toolhouse in connection with such project, provided that such
mobile home is removed from said site within 30 days after the
completion of such project.
A. See standards in § 190-208 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. All mobile homes within a mobile home park shall be located on land
where the average natural slope of the area of the site intended for
development shall not exceed 15%.
§ 165-77 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-80
160:453
§ 165-81. Design standards.
C. The mobile home park shall have access to a paved public street.
A. Access.
(1) Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from interior
parking courts, access drives or private streets and shall not be
from public streets exterior to the development. Streets within the
development providing access to 20 or more dwellings shall have a
paved cartway width of at least 24 feet, and other streets shall have
a paved cartway width of at least 20 feet.
(2) All streets within the mobile home park shall be private and be
maintained as part of the mobile home park. All construction of
streets that serve a minimum of 20 dwelling units shall conform to
the requirements for public streets contained in § 165-59. All
construction of access drives and driveways shall meet the
requirements of § 165-67.
B. Parking.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be provided with a minimum of two
paved off-street parking spaces. In addition, an average of 0.5 offstreet
parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided in
convenient locations for visitor parking.
(2) Parking courts are encouraged to meet the off-street parking
requirements.
(3) An appropriate area shall be set aside for the parking of
recreational vehicles of residents.
C. Street trees. Street trees shall be provided in accordance with § 165-73.
D. Other design standards and improvements.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be graded to provide a level, stable
and well-drained stand for the mobile home.
(2) Every mobile home space in the mobile home park shall be
provided with connections to an adequate supply of potable water
and to a centralized sewage disposal system which conforms to the
standards required in Article X of this ordinance.
(3) Every space shall be provided with underground electric, telephone
and television-cable (if available) service.
(4) All fuel storage and supply systems shall be constructed and
maintained in conformity with the regulations of all authorities
having jurisdiction and, if above ground, shall be adequately
screened with landscaping or a screen wall compatible with the
home.
§ 165-80 PALMER CODE § 165-81
160:454
(5) Each mobile home park shall be required by the Board of
Supervisors to provide, as necessary, facilities for solid waste
collection, streetlighting, open space maintenance, water flow and
hydrants for fire protection and any other improvement specified in
this Article X.
§ 165-81 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-81
160:455

ARTICLE XII
Sinkhole/Carbonate Regulations
[Added 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-339]
§ 165-82. Purpose.
Palmer Township's topography may be defined as a karst topography due
to the presence of carbonate rock that generally consists of dolomite and
limestone. The limestone and dolomite are divided into formations. The
carbonate formations present in Palmer Township consist of Epler,
Rickenbach, Allentown, Jacksonburg and Leithsville Formations. These
formations are susceptible to the development of solution cavities and
sinkhole development. Therefore, anyone considering developing property
within the Township should be aware of the potential geological hazards.
The regulations contained herein are intended to minimize the risk of
sinkhole occurrence in areas of new development and on lands adjacent to
these developments.
§ 165-83. Governance.
The regulations established by this ordinance shall apply to all land
development or subdivision applications pertaining to commercial,
governmental (except those owned by Palmer Township) and industrial/
office structures, apartment complexes and multiple single-family home
developments with three or more lots.
§ 165-84. Exemptions.
All single-family homes and the alteration of single-family homes to include
detached structures such as garages, barns and swimming pools shall be
exempt from the regulations established in this article.
§ 165-85. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARBONATE ROCK — Rock types that are affected by dissolution
weathering process caused by slightly acidic groundwater. The most
common types of rock that are categorized as carbonate rock are limestone
(calcium carbonate) and dolomite (calcium magnesium carbonate).
CAVERN — Interconnected solution features within the bedrock surface.
CLAY LINER — Fine-grained soil that is used in the construction of a liner
that limits the rate of surface water intrusion into the subsurface.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A bowl-shaped depression in the land surface
characterized by internal drainage. A ghost lake is a closed depression
which has visible standing water after a heavy rainfall event.
FAULT — A fracture in bedrock along which movement has taken place.
§ 165-82 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-85
160:457
FINE GRAINED SOIL — Materials that predominantly consist of silt and
clay size particles.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS (CHEMICAL OR BIOHAZARD) — As defined and
regulated by the PADEP or EPA.
IMPERMEABLE LINERS — A liner system that prohibits the infiltration of
surface water into the subsurface.
KARST — The terrain that results from the dissolution of carbonate rock.
KARST PROCESS — The dissolution of carbonate rock by slightly acidic
groundwater. Dissolution weathering, the removal of soluble materials from
intact carbonate rock by slightly acidic groundwater.
LINEAMENTS — Aligned topographic features that locate faults and
fractures.
RESIDUAL SOIL — Soils derived from the in-place weathering of the
underlying bedrock.
SINKHOLE — Localized land surface subsidence or collapse due to karst
processes. Sinkholes are categorized as solution sinkholes, collapse
sinkholes and subsidence sinkholes.
SPRING — Where water flows naturally out of the bedrock or the overlying
soil mantle on to the land surface.
TOXIC AND/OR BIOLOGICAL OR CHEMICAL HAZARDOUS MATERIALS —
Biological species or chemical compounds which are deemed to be toxic or
hazardous by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 165-86. Specific regulations.
A. All of the following specific requirements shall apply to land
developments and/or subdivisions covered by this article:
(1) No buildings, structures or stormwater management basin shall be
placed in or over the following features if unremediated in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance: sinkholes, closed
depressions, lineaments, or faults.
(2) Building structures and stormwater management basins shall be
located no closer than 100 feet from the rim of unremediated
sinkholes, and no closer than 50 feet from lineaments, faults, or
closed depressions.
(3) Outflow from a stormwater management basin and/or postdevelopment
stormwater flows shall not be directed to any of the
following carbonate features: sinkholes, closed depressions,
lineaments, or caverns.
(4) Lagoons containing substances defined as toxic and/or hazardous
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection are
not permitted.
§ 165-85 PALMER CODE § 165-86
160:458
§ 165-87. Carbonate assessment report.
(5) Storage and handling areas for hazardous materials must have
impermeable surfaces designed to contain materials stored/
handled and from which they shall be directed to a predetermined
collection point.
(6) The land application of hazardous materials is not permitted.
(7) The underground storage of any hazardous materials, except
gasoline and diesel fuel, shall be prohibited.
(8) Groundwater monitoring devices approved by the Township are
required for all facilities handling hazardous materials.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors shall not entertain requests for
waivers from the requirements listed above until a Carbonate
Ordinance assessment report, as required by the ordinance, has been
supplied to the Planning Commission and the Township Engineer for
their review and comment.
A. All land developments and/or subdivisions covered by this article shall
be evaluated by a licensed professional civil engineer with expertise in
geotechnical engineering or a licensed professional geologist; each of
said experts being licensed in their field of expertise by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A list of the engineer's/geologist's
qualifications shall be submitted to the Township prior to the
commencement of the site's evaluation. The Township reserves the
right to reject any report that in its opinion was authored by an
individual or firm which does not possess the background to properly
assess the site conditions as they relate to this ordinance. Further, the
Carbonate Ordinance assessment report submitted to the Township
must be signed by the licensed professional civil engineer with
expertise in geotechnical engineering and/or a licensed professional
geologist.
B. The format and content of the Carbonate Ordinance assessment report
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Statement of purpose. This section shall indicate those specific
Carbonate Ordinance standards being addressed in the report and
whether the applicant is attempting to demonstrate compliance or
justify noncompliance with those specific Carbonate Ordinance
standards.
(2) Description of existing conditions. This section shall present a
description of existing characteristics of the property with respect
to geology, topography, ground and surface water hydrology, soils,
vegetation, and existing improvements and uses of property.
§ 165-86 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-87
160:459
(3) A map, at a scale no smaller than one inch = 100 feet and a contour
interval of two feet, indicating the location of the property and all
proposed improvements.
(4) The developer/applicant shall submit information for the affected
properties, indicating the presence of any of the following
carbonate features: depressions, fissures, lineaments, faults, ghost
lakes, bedrock outcrops, sinkholes, seasonal high water levels, soil
mottling, springs, surface drainage entering the ground,
disappearing lakes or streams and caverns.
(5) A recommended plan for the repair or remediation of surface or
subsurface features that may impact the proposed development as
well as the adjacent improved or unimproved properties.
(6) The information requested above shall be based upon previously
published data and field surveys which may include test borings,
excavation of test pits, air-track probes, and geophysical methods.
C. In addition to the Carbonate Ordinance assessment report, the
developer shall also be required to provide the following information:
(1) A plan indicating the existing and proposed drainage conditions,
locations of all proposed private and public sewage disposal
systems, and the location of existing private and public water
supplies on adjoining properties (within 1,000 feet of applicant
property).
(2) Type, location and phasing of proposed site disturbance and
construction, as well as proposed future ownership, utilization and
maintenance of the property and the proposed improvements.
(3) Proposed measures to control potential adverse environmental
impacts on groundwater quality and stormwater management
resulting from the development and utilization of the property.
(4) Plans describing the design and construction of the proposed
stormwater management facilities proposed for the project. A
description of the minimum requirements are outlined below.
D. Stormwater management.
(1) All submissions for proposed developments must include a
stormwater management plan prepared in accordance with
adopted regulations and which limits surface water runoff and the
intrusion of concentrated flow of surface water into the subsurface.
Facilities that are required as part of the stormwater management
plan include the collection of all runoff from commercial, office and
industrial building roofs into storm drains by watertight gasketed
joint conduits or adequately lined drainage swales and the
collection of surface water flow on pavements into drop inlets
connected to a watertight gasketed joint stormwater conduit or
§ 165-87 PALMER CODE § 165-87
160:460
§ 165-88. Review process.
adequate lined drainage swales. The stormwater conduit must
discharge into lined detention basins.
(2) Approved stormwater conduits include HDPE, PVC, concrete, steel
and cast-iron pipe all with watertight rubber gaskets at each joint.
The use of corrugated metal pipe is not permitted. Construction of
the piping system must follow all other applicable ordinances.
Where rock is encountered at or above the planned conduit design
grade, the rock shall be undercut and over-excavated a minimum of
one foot and backfilled with a compacted fine-grained soil.
(3) All detention basins in areas of sinkhole-prone soil shall be lined.
The liner used in a detention basin may consist of a clay liner, a
composite synthetic and soil liner or a synthetic liner. The type of
liner required shall depend on the condition of the detention basin
bottom and the probability of sinkhole occurrence resulting from
the construction of the detention basin. The use of low-flow channel
may also be required, depending on the duration and frequency of
stormwater discharge into the detention basin. Subsurface
detention systems must be in leakproof tanks or piping which
follows the same standards as in Subsection D(2). The Township's
Geotechnical Engineer shall make the final determination as to
what is an acceptable form of liner for the proposed detention
basins.
(4) Additional items that must be included in the stormwater
management plan include details with regard to the sealing of all
pavement curbs and gutters, manholes and drop inlets.
A. The Carbonate Ordinance assessment report must be received by the
Township when a plan is submitted for preliminary land development or
subdivision approval. However, the report may be submitted at the time
of sketch plan review. Four copies of the report shall be submitted to
the Township. The report shall be reviewed by the Township
Geotechnical Engineer and other consultants as designated by the
Township. Based on this review the Township may require additional
information to be submitted if the Township concludes that such
information would be instrumental in assessing the proposed
development as it relates to the Carbonate Ordinance.
B. Approvals required.
(1) Where compliance with this section is required as part of an
application for subdivision or land development approval, the
Township's decision on whether compliance has been achieved
shall be made as part of its review of the subdivision or land
development application.
§ 165-87 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-88
160:461
§ 165-89. Limitations.
In carbonate areas, alteration and development of land may be hazardous
with respect to foundation safety of structures, the creation of unstable
land as a result of changes in drainage, and the contamination of ground
and surface waters. Within the limitations of the information available
at the time of the review of individual applications, the Township shall
attempt to make reasonable judgments as to the applicant's compliance
with the Carbonate Ordinance. Under no circumstances shall the Township
of Palmer or any officer or employee of the Township or consultant to
the Township assume any liability for any damages that may result from
an applicant's or any interested party's reliance upon the regulations of
the Carbonate Ordinance or any decisions made by the Township in the
administration of such regulations by an applicant, developer, and/or any
interested party.
(2) Where the application is part of a request for a zoning permit, the
Zoning Officer shall issue no permit until he/she receives adequate
written substantiation from the appropriate designated experts
referred to above that the terms of this section and any conditions
imposed upon the use of the property at the time of subdivision or
land development approval are satisfied.
§ 165-88 PALMER CODE § 165-89
160:462
Chapter 173
TAXATION
§ 165-89 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 165-89
160:463

ARTICLE I
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 5-31-1974 as Ord. No. 153]
§ 173-1. Authority for tax; when effective.
This ordinance and the business privilege tax it imposes is enacted under
the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act 511 of December 31, 1965, P.L.
1257, 53 P.S. § 6901, and amendments thereto. This ordinance shall go into
effect 30 days after enactment, as provided by said Act.
§ 173-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for profit in the Township,
including but not limited to the sale of merchandise or other tangible
personalty or the performance of services, professional or otherwise.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
trust, firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or
imposing a penalty, "person" as applied to associations means the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
TAX — The business privilege tax imposed herein.
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax.
TAX YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is due.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Palmer, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 173-3. Imposition of tax and rate.
There is hereby levied for the last six months of the year 1974 and annually
thereafter, a tax for general revenue purposes on all persons for the
privilege of doing business as herein defined in the Township, and the rate
of the tax on every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business or
services transacted within the territorial limits of the Township shall be 1 1/
2 mills (1 1/2 mills means $1.50 per $1,000 of gross volume of business),
except that the rate of the tax on every dollar of the whole or gross
volume of business or services transacted by wholesale dealers or wholesale
vendors within the territorial limits of the Township shall be one mill (one
mill means $1 per $1,000 of gross volume of business). All nonwholesale
business of such wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors shall be taxed at
the general rate of 1 1/2 mills. The tax shall be payable by April 15 of the tax
§ 173-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-3
160:465
year based upon estimated gross business volume for the tax year computed
from prior years or other methods according to § 173-4 of this chapter.
§ 173-4. Business volume computation.
§ 173-5. Exemptions.
A. Every person subject to the tax who commenced his business on or
before January 1 of the calendar year preceding the tax year shall
compute his annual estimated gross volume of business for the tax year
upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during
such prior year.
B. Every person subject to the tax who commenced his business after
January 1 and in the calendar year preceding the tax year shall compute
his estimated annual gross volume of business for the tax year upon the
gross volume of business transacted by him during such preceding
calendar year by taking the monthly average during the period and
multiplying the same by 12.
C. Every person subject to the tax who commenced his business after the
beginning of a tax year, if there are less than three months from the
commencement of his business to the end of the tax year, shall compute
his annual gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the tax year. If there are more than
three months from the commencement of his business to the end of the
tax year, he shall compute his estimated gross volume of business for
such tax year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him
during the period from the commencement of his business to the end of
the tax year, taking the monthly average during the first three months
of business and multiplying the same by the number of months from the
commencement of business to the end of the tax year.
D. Persons subject to the payment of the tax who are engaged in a
business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature shall
compute the estimated gross amount of business to be transacted
within the Township by a method to be determined by the collection
officer.
E. The collection officer is hereby authorized to accept payment under
protest of the tax where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of
the tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that the tax has been overpaid, the amount of the
overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
A. Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the business of any political
subdivision or of any municipal authority are exempt from the tax.
§ 173-3 PALMER CODE § 173-5
160:466
§ 173-6. Deductions.
The gross volume of business upon which the tax is computed shall include
the gross consideration credited or received for or on account of sales made
or services rendered, or both, subject only to the following deductions:
B. State tax or license fee. The fact that a taxpayer receives a certificate or
other document which is designated as a "license" from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or from some other state for which the
taxpayer pays a sum of money does not exempt the taxpayer from this
business privilege tax. Even though the charge is labeled a "license
fee," it cannot be regarded as such if it is nominal in amount and not
equated to the probable cost of supervision or regulation of the
licensee's activities. Flat annual fees, fees which are not related to
gross income or amount of production or fees that are nominal in nature
are not considered true license fees, and hence, payment of such fees
will not exempt the taxpayer from this business privilege tax.
[Amended 11-27-1990 by Ord. No. 238138]
C. Any person or company whose rates of service are fixed and regulated
by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission on any public utility
service rendered by any such person or company or any privilege or
transaction involving the rendering of any such public utility service is
exempt from the tax.
D. The privilege of employing such tangible property as is subject to a
state tax, except on sales of admission to places of amusement or sales
or other transfers of title or possession of property, is exempt from the
tax.
E. Goods, articles and products or byproducts of manufacture, or
minerals, timber, natural resources and farm products manufactured,
produced or grown in the Township, or the preparation or processing
thereof for use or market, or any privilege, act or transaction related to
the business of manufacturing, the production, preparation or
processing of minerals, timber and natural resources or farm products,
by manufacturers, producers and farmers with respect to the goods,
articles and products of their own manufacture, production or growth,
or any privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of
processing byproducts of manufacture or the transportation, loading,
unloading, dumping or storage of such goods, articles, products or
byproducts are exempt from the tax.
A. Gross moneys derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise to the extent that the resale price does not exceed the
trade-in allowance.
138. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it go into effect 30 days after its
adoption and shall be effective for the tax year commencing January 1, 1991, and all tax
years thereafter.
§ 173-5 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-6
160:467
§ 173-7. Partial exemptions.
Where the gross or whole volume of business in its entirety cannot be
subjected to the tax imposed by this ordinance by reason of the provisions
of the Constitution of the United States or any other provision of law, the
collection officer shall establish rules and methods of allocation so that
only that part of the gross volume of business which is taxable shall be
taxed. If any person is liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed
under the Local Tax Enabling Act to the Township and one or more political
subdivisions of the state, the tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as
may be agreed upon by such political subdivisions, but the combined taxes
of both subdivisions shall not exceed the maximum rate of tax.
§ 173-8. Records.
The taxpayer shall keep books and records of his business so as to show
clearly, accurately and separately the amount of sales and services as are
subject to the tax and the amounts of such sales and services which he is
entitled to deduct from the gross volume of business.
§ 173-9. Returns and penalty.
B. Refunds, credits or allowances given on account of defects in goods,
wares or merchandise sold, or on account of goods, wares or
merchandise returned.
C. Any commissions paid by a person to another similar person on account
of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such
other person.
D. Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
federal income taxation purposes.
E. Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or Township of Palmer.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the collection
officer. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness
thereof, under penalties of this ordinance.
B. Every person subject to the tax who commenced his business on or
before January 1 of the calendar year preceding the tax year shall, on or
before the 15th day of April of the tax year, file with the collection
officer a return setting forth his name, business, business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the gross
amount of business transacted by him during the preceding calendar
year and the amount of the tax due according to § 173-4A. The business
privilege tax return so filed shall be accompanied by copies of the
appropriate federal income tax schedules and forms for the relevant tax
year, specifically but not limited to Schedule C, Schedule E, Form 1065,
Form 1120-A, Form 1120 and Form 1120-S. In addition, any person
§ 173-6 PALMER CODE § 173-9
160:468
claiming a partial exemption from this business privilege tax under
§ 173-7 shall file with his return copies of the appropriate
documentation as a basis for the claim of such partial exemption. No
exemption or partial exemption shall be permitted from this business
privilege tax without the simultaneous filing of such appropriate
documentation. [Amended 11-27-1990 by Ord. No. 238139]
C. Every person subject to the tax who commenced his business after
January 1 and in the calendar year preceding the tax year shall, on or
before the 15th day of April of the tax year, file with the collection
officer a return setting forth his name, business, business address and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated
gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated under
§ 173-4B and the amount of tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax who commenced business after the
beginning of any tax year shall, within 100 days from the date of
commencing such business, file a return with the collection officer
setting forth his name, business, business address and such information
as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated or actual gross amount
of business transacted by him as calculated under § 173-4C hereof and
the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the tax who engages in a business which is
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall, at the time
application is made for the business privilege license, file a return with
the collection officer setting forth his name, his business, his business
address and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
estimated gross amount of business to be transacted by him as
calculated in accordance with § 173-4D.
F. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within 30 days
from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the actual
gross volume of business conducted and done by such person during
that tax year in which the person ceased doing business, and pay any
tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the time
of filing the return. If such tax has been previously paid based upon
estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund of
any excess tax paid for the tax year in which business was terminated.
G. The business privilege tax levied pursuant to this ordinance shall be
due and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a
return as set forth above, and if the same is not paid on such date, 5%
shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional
part of a month until paid. The return and tax for the last six months of
1974 shall be due and payable on September 15, 1974; the tax imposed
that one time shall be 1/2 that normally due for the tax year 1974.
139. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it go into effect 30 days after its
adoption and shall be effective for the tax year commencing January 1, 1991, and all tax
years thereafter.
§ 173-9 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-10
160:469
§ 173-10. License and fee. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-332; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-374; 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-446]
Any person conducting, engaging in or carrying on any business, trade,
occupation or business activity, or desiring to conduct or continuing to
conduct any said business, trade, occupation or business activity within the
Township, shall file with the collection officer an application for a business
privilege license and shall pay the appropriate fee, established annually by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for the initial license and for each
renewal thereafter. The fee shall not be prorated by the Township based
upon the date of issuance. All licenses shall be effective for one calendar
year, effective January 1 and expiring on December 31. The license issued
shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which such license
is issued. In cases where more than one place of business is conducted, a
separate license shall be issued for each place of business. Any taxpayer
who is in default in payment of tax due hereunder shall be refused a
license until such tax is paid in full. Licenses may be revoked for Township
ordinance violations.
§ 173-11. Collection officer's duties.
A. The collection officer is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this ordinance. It
shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt. The Board
of Supervisors shall appoint the collection officer and may appoint
deputy collection officers. He or they shall assess and collect the tax.
B. The collection officer and the Board are hereby authorized to prescribe,
adopt and promulgate forms and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
C. If a taxpayer neglects or refuses to make a return, the collection officer
or his duly appointed deputies may assess the person such an amount of
gross volume of business as the collection officer or his deputies deem
reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the collection
officer or his duly appointed deputies shall give the parties assessed a
notice in which shall be stated the amount of tax levied.
D. The collection officer or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine
the books, papers and records of any person subject to the tax in order
to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due. All returns shall be confidential, unless subject to
court proceedings.
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the collection officer shall have
the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
§ 173-10 PALMER CODE § 173-12
160:470
§ 173-12. Collection; suit and penalty.
The collection officer or his duly appointed deputies shall have the power
in the name of the Township to institute proceedings against any and all
persons who violate the provisions of this ordinance. If for any reason the
tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 173-13. Severability.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to authorize the
Township to levy and collect the tax on any person or any business or any
portion of any business not within the taxing power of the Township. The
provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any of its provisions shall
be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance. It
is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors that
this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
§ 173-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
A. Any person who conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses
subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance without having first
secured a business privilege license for the year, or any person who
fails to file a tax return as required by the provisions of this ordinance,
or any person who willfully files a false return, shall, upon summary
conviction before any Justice of the Peace in the County of
Northampton, be fined not more than $600 for any one offense,
recoverable with costs, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, if the
amount of the fine and costs are not paid.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 173-12 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-14
160:471

ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-350140; amended in its
entirety 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-397]
§ 173-15. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth therein,
except as modified below. The following terms shall have the meanings set
forth herein:
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future, including any regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
thereunder.
TAX OFFICER — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax in the TCD.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this ordinance or the
Local Tax Enabling Act to file a return of an income tax or to pay an income
tax.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the tax officer, and approved by the
TCC, for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or required to
be withheld, remitted, or reported under this ordinance or the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — The Northampton Tax Collection District, or any future tax collection
district, to which the Township of Palmer or any part of the Township of
Palmer is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 173-16. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Township of Palmer hereby imposes
a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the Township of Palmer.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Township of Palmer
also imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on
earned income and net profits derived by an individual nonresident
140. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also replaced and repealed former Art. II, Earned Income
Tax, adopted 12-19-1966 by Ord. No. 83, with the expressed purpose of ensuring "proper,
logical and accurate notice of regulations pertaining to earned income taxes."
§ 173-15 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-16
160:473
§ 173-17. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 173-18. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act and the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the TCC
and the tax officer. A taxpayer is required to file a return even if no tax
payment is due and owing.
§ 173-19. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and tax officer.
§ 173-20. Tax officer.
from any work, business, profession, or activity of any kind engaged in
within the boundaries of the Township of Palmer.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this ordinance is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
ordinance. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this ordinance upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment to this
ordinance, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures.
(1) The tax shall be collected and administered in accordance with:
(a) All applicable laws and regulations; and
(b) Rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the
TCC or by the tax officer in conformity with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
(2) This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1937.
A. Collection of tax. The tax will be collected from individuals and
employers by the tax officer. The tax officer is authorized to file an
§ 173-16 PALMER CODE § 173-20
160:474
§ 173-21. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs of collection
imposed by the tax officer in accordance with authorization by the TCC.
The tax officer may retain reasonable costs of collection in accordance with
Local Tax Enabling Act and as approved by the TCC.
§ 173-22. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance. It is
declared to be the intention of the governing body of the Township of
Palmer that this ordinance would have been adopted if such invalid or
unconstitutional provision had not been included.
§ 173-23. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
action in the name of the Township of Palmer for the recovery of income
taxes due to the Township of Palmer and unpaid. Nothing in this section
shall affect the authority of the Township of Palmer to file an action
in its own name for collection of income taxes under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
B. Criminal complaints for violations. The tax officer is authorized to file
criminal complaints on behalf of the Township of Palmer for violation of
this ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling Act. Nothing in this section
shall affect the authority of the Township of Palmer to file a criminal
complaint on its own behalf for violation of this ordinance or the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
A. The primary purpose of this ordinance is to confirm the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed pursuant to the Local Tax
Enabling Act, as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so
within the time frame required by Act 32.
B. Any prior ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any ordinance in force immediately prior to
adoption of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance are intended
as a continuation of such prior ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If
this ordinance is declared invalid, any prior ordinance levying a similar
tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any
manner by adoption of this ordinance. The provisions of this ordinance
shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such
provision affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to
enforce any right or penalty or to punish offenses under the authority of
any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this ordinance. Subject to
the foregoing provisions of this section, this ordinance shall supersede
§ 173-20 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-23
160:475
§ 173-24. Construal of provisions.
This ordinance is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling Act
and to include all necessary authorizations to permit the tax officer to take
such tax collection, administration, disbursement, enforcement and other
activities as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, subject to the policies
and procedures of the TCC.
§ 173-25. Effective date; changes in rate of tax.
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2012,
and shall apply to earned income received or earned income and net profits
earned or made by a taxpayer during the calendar year 2012 and each
year thereafter without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is
subsequently changed. Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on
the date specified in the ordinance imposing such change.
§ 173-26. (Reserved)
and repeal on the effective date any ordinance levying a tax on earned
income or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 173-23 PALMER CODE § 173-26
160:476
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-375141]
§ 173-27. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 173-28. Legislative authority.
This ordinance is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act,142 as amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
§ 173-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes; and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 173-30. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township of
Palmer.
COLLECTOR — The person or firm from time to time designated by motion
of the governing body of Palmer Township to collect and administer the
provisions of this ordinance and collect the tax levied by this ordinance.
Until changed by subsequent motion, the collector shall be the same person
or firm last designated to collect the emergency and municipal services tax
for Palmer Township.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"143 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article
V144 (relating to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to individuals on active military service. Employee
business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article III
of the Tax Reform Code of 1971.145 Any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
141. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-367.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
143. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
144. Editor's Note: See 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq.
145. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7301 et seq.
§ 173-27 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-30
160:477
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
sell-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Shall include singular and plural number, and male,
female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdictional limits of Palmer Township whose total earned
income and net profits within Palmer Township are $12,000 or greater per
calendar year.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"146 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart
B, Article V147 (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business,
profession or activity of farming the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the jurisdictional limits of Palmer Township for which
compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages,
commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in this ordinance.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 173-31. Levy of tax.
Palmer Township hereby levies and imposes on every individual engaging
in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of Palmer Township a tax
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
146. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
147. Editor's Note: See 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq.
§ 173-30 PALMER CODE § 173-31
160:478
in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of January 2008,
and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter, until modified or
repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by Palmer Township.
§ 173-32. Restricted use.
§ 173-33. Duty of employer to collect.
A. Palmer Township shall use the revenue derived from this tax for the
following purposes:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F148 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. Palmer Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from
the local services tax for emergency services.
A. Each employer within Palmer Township, and each employer situated
outside Palmer Township who engages in business within Palmer
Township, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from
each of the employees engaged by the employer and performing work
for the employer within Palmer Township. Each person subject to the
tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period
in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar.
C. Employer collections of the local services tax shall be made on a
payroll-period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first
payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
148. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 173-31 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-33
160:479
§ 173-34. Returns.
Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address and social security
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee's place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax
was withheld; and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each
employee.
§ 173-35. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 173-36. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
work in more than one political subdivision during the payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
§ 173-33 PALMER CODE § 173-36
160:480
§ 173-37. Exemptions.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
A. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the local
services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person
from the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied.
C. Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt the
following persons from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve,
United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or The Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the tax for
the political subdivision levying the tax and file a copy of the certificate
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed.
E. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the local services tax.
§ 173-36 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-37
160:481
F. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed
by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision levying the tax the
employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar
year or remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate applies. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption
from the local services tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision that the
person has received earned income and net profits from all sources
within that political subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the
person of earned income within that political subdivision in an amount
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall
withhold the local services tax from the person as follows:
(1) If a person who claimed an exemption from the local services tax
for a given calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder
of that calendar year.
(2) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under the above subsection,
a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld
from the person due to the exemption certificate filed by the
person, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll
period.
(3) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount
withheld for other employees.
(4) In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of
the local services tax under this exception is severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision levying the tax may
pursue collection under this act.
(5) Employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
(6) Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees, and do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates, will be
held responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the
tax had been originally levied against the employer.
G. In the event that an individual should earn less than $12,000 in annual
salary, wages, commissions or other compensation taxable from all
sources under this ordinance, said individual may, on or before April 15
§ 173-37 PALMER CODE § 173-37
160:482
§ 173-38. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes will be billed quarterly for the local services
tax. The full amount of tax must be paid by the date indicated on such
billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a low-income exemption, the taxpayer
may complete the required exemption certificate or make application for a
refund of the tax paid.
§ 173-39. Employees and self-employed individuals residing beyond
limits of Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of
business outside Palmer Township but who engage in any occupation within
Palmer Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this ordinance with the same force and effect as though they were residents
of Palmer Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within Palmer Township and an employee of a nonresident employer may,
for the purpose of this ordinance, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event this tax is not paid, the collector shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for collection of this
tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 173-40. Duty of collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
of each calendar year, apply for and be granted a refund of the local
services tax paid by said individual during the calendar year, forms for
said refund to be provided by the local services tax collector. [Added
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-388]
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
ordinance, including provisions for the examination of the payroll
records of any employer subject to this ordinance; the examination and
correction of any return made in compliance with this ordinance; and
any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the collector shall have the right to appeal
§ 173-37 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-40
160:483
§ 173-41. Suits for collection.
§ 173-42. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this ordinance, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this ordinance, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this ordinance.
§ 173-43. Repealer and severability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable. If any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, that
decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance or of the
Palmer Township Code of Ordinances.
§ 173-44. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective in accordance with applicable law,
with the repeal of previous Occupational Privilege Tax and Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax Ordinances, effective January 1, 2008.
to the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County, as in other cases
provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this ordinance remains due or unpaid
30 days after the due date set forth above, the collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid, together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 10%,
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including but not limited to attorneys' fees.
§ 173-40 PALMER CODE § 173-44
160:484
ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-19-1966 as Ord. No. 84]
§ 173-45. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Real Estate Transfer Tax
Ordinance" and shall be effective for the calendar year 1967 only.149
§ 173-46. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed a tax for general revenue purposes upon the
transfer of all real property lying, being and situated wholly or in part,
within the boundaries of Palmer Township Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, at the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 173-47. Rate of tax.
The tax hereby imposed shall be at the rate of $0.50 for each $100, or
fraction thereof, of five mills of the total consideration or sale price involved
in the transfer of each and every parcel of real property or interest therein,
on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 173-48. Time of payment.
It shall be required that upon the transfer of real property, as soon as
practicable, but in no case more than 60 days thereafter, the deed or other
instrument conveying such interest shall be delivered to the Tax Collector of
Palmer Township for recording in the records of the Township. At the same
time there shall be paid to the Tax Collector of the Township the tax levied
by this ordinance.
§ 173-49. Recording and deposit of moneys. [Amended 2-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-370]
The Tax Collector of the Township shall place or cause to be placed upon
each deed or other instrument, in writing, a notation of the amount of the
tax paid and shall deposit all moneys so collected in the general fund of
the Township. The tax imposed under § 173-47 and all applicable interest
and penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act
of December 31, 1965 (PL. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is
not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township of
Palmer, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72
P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
149. Editor's Note: The Local Tax Enabling Act (Act No. 511 of 1965), in Section 4 (53 PS,
§ 6904), as amended by Act No. 160 of 1967, provides that a tax shall continue in force
without annual reenactment unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 173-45 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-50
160:485
§ 173-50. Compliance; penalties for default.
For compliance with the provisions of § 173-48 of this ordinance, the seller
shall be primarily and the buyer secondarily responsible. Any person failing
to so comply shall be guilty of a summary conviction and, upon conviction
thereof before a Justice of the Peace of the Township of Palmer, shall pay a
fine of not more than double the amount of the tax levied by this resolution
and, in default of the payment of such fines and costs of prosecution, shall
be imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days.
§ 173-51. Effective date.
The effective date of this resolution shall be January 1, 1967, and the
aforesaid tax will be levied for the fiscal year 1967 of the Township.
§ 173-52. Severability.
It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors that each separate provision
of this resolution shall be independent of all other provisions herein; and it
is further intended that if any of the provisions of this resolution be declared
to be invalid, all other provisions herein shall remain invalid and in full force
and effect.
§ 173-53. Authorization of tax.
The imposition of this tax is authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 511, as amended. Said tax is necessary for general
Township purposes.
§ 173-54. Interest on unpaid tax. [Added 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-370150
Any tax imposed under § 173-49 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
150. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that "all other terms, conditions and
provisions of the aforesaid Palmer Township Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance remain in full
force and effect; provided, however, that any provision in any prior ordinance making
reference to or regulating the realty transfer tax in any manner inconsistent with the
aforesaid amendments shall be considered repealed with respect to such reference and/or
inconsistency."
§ 173-50 PALMER CODE § 173-54
160:486
ARTICLE V
Real Property Tax
[A copy of the resolution establishing the current rate of the tax
levied annually on the assessed valuation of real property within the
Township is kept on file in the office of the Township Secretary for
examination and inspection by the public. See also § 1-16F and G,
regarding imposition of attorneys' fees, added 10-25-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-402.]
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 173-54
160:487
Chapter 180
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minibikes and similar vehicles — See Ch. 109.
Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks — See Ch.
109.
Spillage and odors from vehicles — See Ch.
109.
Blowing of horns — See Ch. 109.
Street as proving ground — See Ch. 109.
Parking vehicles to peddle wares — See Ch.
118.
Refuse disposal — See Ch. 138.
Clearance of visual obstructions at
intersections — See Ch. 186.
§ 173-54 PALMER CODE § 173-54
160:488
ARTICLE I
Emergencies: Powers, Authority, Procedures
[Adopted 12-4-1961 by Ord. No. 41]
§ 180-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or as
hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include
the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 180-2. Special powers of Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-3. Authority of police officers.
Police officers, designated and appointed by the Board of Supervisors, are
hereby authorized, subject to the supervision and control of the Board,
to direct traffic on the highways and Township roads in the Township
and at the intersections of said highways and Township roads, and to
enforce the ordinances of the Township of Palmer and the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 180-4. (Reserved)151
§ 180-5. Authority to impound vehicles.
A. The Board of Supervisors is hereby granted power to regulate, restrict
and prohibit traffic and parking in limited areas for limited times on the
right-of-way of any state highway or Township road in Palmer Township:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm, snowstorm or other emergency.
(2) In order to facilitate private or public works.
(3) In order to facilitate processions and public events.
(4) To create play highways whereon sledding and coasting shall be
permitted.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforceable by the
Board of Supervisors and the police of the Township in the same
manner and subject to the same penalties as permanent regulations.
A. The Board of Supervisors may remove from the right-of-way of any state
highway or Township road in the Township any vehicle which is parked
in violation of the provisions of this ordinance when the Board, it its sole
discretion, determines such removal necessary to facilitate the removal
or plowing of snow or for any other lawful purpose.
151. Editor's Note: Former § 180-4, Snow emergencies: parking prohibited, was repealed
8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-434. For current provisions, see Art. V.
§ 180-1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-5
160:489
§ 180-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
B. Such vehicle will be impounded by the Board of Supervisors until the
owner pays to the Board a fine of $25 and the cost of removal of the
vehicle, including towing and storage charges. If payment in full is not
made within 30 days of the date of the said removal, the Board may sell
said vehicle at public sale and apply the proceeds toward payment of
said fine and costs.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance for which no specific penalty is provided
shall, upon conviction before any Justice of the Peace of said Township
in a summary proceeding, be liable to and shall pay a fine or penalty of
not more than $600, plus costs for every violation, for the use of the
Township; and upon default in the payment of such fine or penalty, any
person so convicted may be committed to the county jail for not more
than five days.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 180-5 PALMER CODE § 180-6
160:490
ARTICLE II
Storage of Vehicles; Parking Prohibited for Certain Purposes
[Adopted 2-15-1965 as Ord. No. 67]
§ 180-7. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or as
may hereafter be amended, enacted or reenacted, except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
§ 180-8. Storage on streets and alleys prohibited.
No vehicle shall be stored upon any street or alley in Palmer Township. As
used herein, "stored" shall mean the parking of a motor vehicle in one place
upon a street or alley continuously for over 24 hours.
§ 180-9. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a motor vehicle upon any street or alley in Palmer
Township for any of the following purposes:
§ 180-10. Parking under certain conditions prohibited. [Amended
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 223]
A. Displaying the same for sale.
B. Greasing or repairing.
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle or trailer on any street or alley or
on private property where the same is in public view, which vehicle:
(1) Does not have a current license plate;
(2) Does not have a current inspection sticker;
(3) Is not in operating condition; or
(4) Is a junked vehicle.
B. For the purpose of applicability of this section, no attempted
concealment, in whole or in part, of the vehicle or trailer in question
shall be considered as sufficient for the purpose of removing the vehicle
or trailer from public view. Likewise, for the purpose of applicability of
this section, no attempted concealment, in whole or in part, of a missing
or expired Pennsylvania registration plate or Pennsylvania inspection
sticker on the vehicle or trailer in question shall be considered as
sufficient for the purpose of removing the same from public view.
§ 180-7 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-11
160:491
§ 180-11. Nonapplicability to new and used car dealers.
The provisions of § 180-10A(1) shall not apply to new and used car dealers
who shall park or display new or used motor vehicles on private land zoned
for this purpose.
§ 180-12. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this ordinance is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, sections, clauses or parts of this ordinance. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Supervisors of Palmer Township that
this ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 180-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
223]
A. Any property owner, tenant or any other person violating any of the
provisions of this Article II, as amended, shall, upon summary
conviction before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine in
accordance with the following schedule and the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the
Northampton County prison for a period of not more than five days:
(1) For the first offense, a fine not in excess of $100 per vehicle.
(2) For the second offense, a fine not in excess of $200 per vehicle.
(3) For the third offense, a fine not in excess of $300 per vehicle.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis. [Added 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 227]
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 180-11 PALMER CODE § 180-13
160:492
ARTICLE III
Handicapped-Parking Zones and Curb Cuts
[Adopted 3-27-1979 as Ord. No. 177]
§ 180-14. Curb cuts.
§ 180-15. Parking for the handicapped.
It shall be lawful for the owners of commercial establishments to designate,
on parking lots provided for the benefit of the general public, an area or
areas to be used solely for handicapped individuals. When signs are erected
lawfully giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
in an area designated for handicapped persons, unless that person is a
handicapped driver or disabled veteran, or unless said vehicle is being
operated for the transportation of the handicapped person or disabled
veteran.
§ 180-16. Enforcement.
Any township police officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions
of § 180-15 of this ordinance, provided that the property owner shall have
written to the township requesting that any area or areas so designated by
him be included within the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 180-17. Presumption of evidence.
Vehicles bearing a special township permit or official handicapped or
disabled veteran license tags of this or any other state shall be presumed
to be operated by or used for transportation of handicapped persons or
disabled veterans unless proven otherwise. Vehicles not equipped with such
permit or tags shall be presumed to have been parked by the owner of
such vehicle and further presumed not to have been operated by or used
for transportation of handicapped persons or disabled veterans. Operators
of out-of-state vehicles which would qualify for such license tags if they
were Pennsylvania residents may apply to the Palmer Township Police
A. It shall be the duty of all developers and all owners of property abutting
a public street or highway within the Township of Palmer to construct
concrete ramps, where feasible, and crosswalks when new installations
of sidewalk and/or curb are made or when a replacement of an existing
sidewalk and/or curb is made so as to make the transition from street to
sidewalk easily negotiable for handicapped persons in wheelchairs and
for other persons who may have difficulty in making the required step
up or down from curb level to street level.
B. All such ramps shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the
designs and specifications therefor prepared by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. The cost for such installation shall be
borne by the abutting property owner or developer. The abutting
property owners shall also keep the same in good repair.
§ 180-14 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-17
160:493
Department for a special permit, which shall be displayed in the window of
a vehicle while it is parked in any such parking area.
§ 180-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 227]
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
in any way violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or who parks
any vehicle in violation of this ordinance shall be liable, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding before any Alderman, District Magistrate or
Justice of the Peace, to pay a fine or penalty to the Township of Palmer,
and for the use of said township, in an amount not less than $2 nor more
than $600 or to be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by law. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 180-17 PALMER CODE § 180-18
160:494
ARTICLE IV
Vehicle Regulations
[Adopted 12-4-1978 as Ord. No. 175]
§ 180-19. Title; applicability. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 239]
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Code Vehicle Regulations," and is supplementary and in addition to prior
ordinances of Palmer Township establishing vehicle regulations.
§ 180-20. Engineering studies. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord. No.
239]
The regulations of this ordinance have been fully reviewed, studied,
approved and found necessary by an engineering and traffic investigation
by the Township Engineer, private traffic engineers retained by Palmer
Township and by the Palmer Township Chief of Police. All regulations herein
are established by authority of the law and the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code.152 All devices and signs used hereunder shall be of and are of a type
and kind and have been and are installed in a manner approved by the
aforesaid law and by the aforesaid code.
§ 180-21. Traffic signals. [Amended in its entirety 8-23-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-398]
The following Township streets shall be equipped with and controlled by
traffic control signal lights:
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On 27th Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On private driveway (intersection
at 27th Street) at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On Birch Street (Driveway C) at
South 25th Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On Birch Street (Driveway C) at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Corporate Drive at
Northampton Street
Southwest corner Facing north
On Crest Boulevard at Route 248 Southeast corner Facing west
On EASD parking lot at South
25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue at 27th
Street
Northwest corner Facing east
152. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 180-19 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-21
160:495
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On Freemansburg Avenue at 27th
Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue east of
Fire Station #1
Overhead Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue west of
Fire Station #1
Overhead Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue west of
Fire Station #1
Overhead Facing west/east
On Freemansburg Avenue at
Greenwood Avenue
Northwest Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue at
Greenwood Avenue
Southeast Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue at Mine
Lane Road
Northwest corner Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue at Mine
Lane Road
Southeast corner Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue at
South 25th Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue at
South 25th Street
Northwest corner Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Freemansburg Avenue at
Stones Crossing Road
Northwest corner Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue at
Stones Crossing Road
Overhead Facing east
On Freemansburg Avenue at
Stones Crossing Road
Overhead Facing west
On Greenwood Avenue at
Freemansburg Avenue
Northeast Facing south
On Greenwood Avenue at
Freemansburg Avenue
Southwest Facing north/
south
On Greenwood Avenue at
Northampton Street
Northeast corner Facing south
On Greenwood Avenue at
Northampton Street
Southwest corner Facing north
On Greenwood Avenue at William
Penn Highway
Northeast corner Facing south
On Greenwood Avenue at William
Penn Highway
Southwest corner Facing north
§ 180-21 PALMER CODE § 180-21
160:496
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On Hackett Avenue at Tatamy
Road
Northwest corner Facing east
On Hackett Avenue at Tatamy
Road
Southeast corner Facing west
On Kingwood Street at William
Penn Highway
Northeast corner Facing south
On Kingwood Street at William
Penn Highway
Northwest corner Facing south
On Kingwood Street at William
Penn Highway
Southwest corner Facing north
On Lawnherst Avenue at Route
248
Northwest corner Facing east
On Lennox Street (Driveway D) at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Milford Street at William Penn
Highway
Northeast corner Facing south
On Milford Street at William Penn
Highway
Southwest corner Facing north
On Milford Street at William Penn
Highway
Southwest corner Facing south
On Mine Lane Road at
Freemansburg Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On Mine Lane Road at
Freemansburg Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On Nazareth Road at Northwood
Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On Nazareth Road at Northwood
Avenue Extension
Southwest corner Facing north
On Newburg Road at Route 248 Southwest corner Facing west
On Northampton Street at
Corporate Drive
Southeast corner Facing west
On Northampton Street at
Greenwood Avenue
Northwest corner Facing east
On Northampton Street at
Greenwood Avenue
Southeast corner Facing west
On Northampton Street at Sales
Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On Northampton Street at South
25th Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On Northampton Street at South
25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
§ 180-21 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-21
160:497
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On Northgate Boulevard at Route
248
Southeast corner Facing east
On Northgate Boulevard at Route
248
Southwest corner Facing east/west
On Northwood Avenue Extension
at Nazareth Road
Overhead Facing east
On Northwood Avenue Extension
at Nazareth Road
Southeast Facing west
On Northwood Avenue at Tatamy
Road
Overhead Facing east
On Northwood Avenue at Tatamy
Road
Overhead Facing west
On Old Nazareth Road at Route
248
Northwest corner Facing east
On Park Avenue at Route 248 Northwest corner Facing east
On Park Avenue at Route 248 Southeast corner Facing west
On Park Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue
Northwest corner Facing east
On Park Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue
Southeast corner Facing west
On Route 248 at Crest Boulevard Northeast corner Facing south
On Route 248 at Lawnherst
Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On Route 248 at Lawnherst
Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On Route 248 at Newburg Road Northeast corner Facing south
On Route 248 at Newburg Road Southwest corner Facing north
On Route 248 at Old Nazareth
Road
Southwest corner Facing north
On Route 248 at Park Avenue Northeast corner Facing south
On Route 248 at Park Avenue Southwest corner Facing north
On Route 248 at westbound exit of
U.S. Route 22
Overhead Facing north
On Route 248 at westbound exit of
U.S. Route 22
Overhead Facing south
On Sales Street at Northampton
Street
Northeast corner Facing south
On Sales Street at Route 248 Overhead Facing east
On South 25th Street at Birch
Street (Driveway C)
Northeast corner Facing south
§ 180-21 PALMER CODE § 180-21
160:498
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On South 25th Street at Birch
Street (Driveway C)
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at
Freemansburg Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On South 25th Street at
Freemansburg Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at Lennox
Street (Driveway D)
Northeast corner Facing south
On South 25th Street at Lennox
Street (Driveway D)
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at
Northampton Street
Northeast corner Facing south
On South 25th Street at
Northampton Street
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at
eastbound exit of U.S. Route 22
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at William
Penn Highway
Northeast corner Facing south
On South 25th Street at William
Penn Highway
Southwest corner Facing north
On South 25th Street at Wood
Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On Stones Crossing at
Freemansburg Avenue
Overhead Facing north
On Stones Crossing at
Freemansburg Avenue
Overhead Facing south
On Stones Crossing at William
Penn Highway
Southeast corner Facing south
On Stones Crossing at William
Penn Highway
Southwest corner Facing north
On Tatamy Road at Hackett
Avenue
Northwest corner Facing south
On Tatamy Road at Hackett
Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On Tatamy Road at Northwood
Avenue
Overhead Facing north
On Tatamy Road at Northwood
Avenue
Overhead Facing south
On eastbound exit ramp of U.S.
Route 22 at Wood Street
Extension
Northwest corner Facing east
§ 180-21 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-21
160:499
Name of Street Location of Signal Direction
On eastbound exit ramp of U.S.
Route 22 at Wood Street
Extension
Southwest corner Facing east
On westbound exit of U.S. Route
22 at Route 248
Overhead Facing west
On William Penn Highway at
Greenwood Avenue
Northwest corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Greenwood Avenue
Southeast corner Facing west
On William Penn Highway at
Kingwood Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Kingwood Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On William Penn Highway at
Kingwood Street
Southwest corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Milford Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Milford Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On William Penn Highway at
South 25th Street
Northwest corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On William Penn Highway at
Stones Crossing Road
Northeast corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Stones Crossing Road
Southeast corner Facing east
On William Penn Highway at
Stones Crossing Road
Southwest corner Facing west
On Wood Avenue at Northampton
Street
Northeast corner Facing south
On Woodlawn Avenue at Park
Avenue
Northeast corner Facing south
On Woodlawn Avenue at Park
Avenue
Southwest corner Facing north
On Wood Street at South 25th
Street
Southeast corner Facing west
On Wood Street Extension at
South 25th Street
Southeast corner Facing east
§ 180-21 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:500
§ 180-22. Stop and yield streets. [Amended in its entirety 8-23-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-399]
A. The following Township streets are hereby designated as and shall be
stop streets which shall be marked with stop signs:
Location Corner Faces
27th Street at Columbia Street Southeast South
27th Street at William Penn Highway Southeast South
Agnes Street at Shrine Avenue Northeast East
Agnes Street at Shrine Avenue Southwest West
Aicher Drive at Route 248 Northeast East
Allen Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Allen Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Allen Street at Wayne Street Southwest West
Alpine Drive at Fischer Road Northeast East
Alpine Drive at Swanson Street Northwest North
Applewood Drive at Applewood Drive Northwest North
Applewood Drive at Glen Avenue Northeast North
Applewood Drive at Glen Avenue Southeast South
Applewood Drive at Russet Drive Northwest North
Applewood Drive at Russet Drive Southeast South
Applewood Drive at Southwood Drive Northeast North
Applewood Drive at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Arch Street at South Nulton Avenue Northeast East
Arlington Street at Camden Street Northwest North
Arlington Street at Camden Street Southeast South
Arlington Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Ashlee Court at Windrift Court Northwest North
Auburn Avenue at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Audubon Avenue at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Avon Street at Farragut Street Southeast South
Avon Street at William Penn Highway Northwest North
Baldwin Drive at Crescent Drive Northeast East
Baldwin Drive at Jonathon Drive Northeast East
Baldwin Drive at Jonathon Drive Southwest West
Baldwin Drive at Old Orchard Drive Northeast East
Baldwin Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:501
Location Corner Faces
Baldwin Drive at York Place Northeast East
Baldwin Drive at York Place Southwest West
Barberry Lane at Clairmont Avenue Northeast East
Beacon Street at Farmersville Road Northwest North
Beaver Lane at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Berkeley Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Berks Street at Allen Street Northwest North
Berks Street at Allen Street Southeast South
Berks Street at Forks Street Northwest North
Berks Street at Forks Street Southeast South
Berks Street at Freemansburg Avenue Southeast South
Berks Street at Glen Avenue Northwest North
Berks Street at Glen Avenue Southeast South
Berks Street at Jones Boulevard Northwest North
Berks Street at Jones Boulevard Southeast South
Blair Street at Division Street Southeast South
Blair Street at Freemansburg Avenue Northwest North
Blair Street at Glen Avenue Northwest North
Blair Street at Jones Boulevard Northwest North
Blair Street at Jones Boulevard Southeast South
Blair Street at Oregon Street Northwest North
Blair Street at Oregon Street Southeast South
Blenheim Drive at Old Orchard Drive Northeast East
Blenheim Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Blenheim Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Blenheim Drive at Wedgewood Drive Northeast East
Blenheim Drive at Wedgewood Drive Southwest West
Bonnie Lane at Camelot Drive Northeast East
Bonnie Lane at Jeffrey Lane Southeast South
Bonnie Lane at Peggy Street Northwest North
Bonnie Lane at Peggy Street Southeast South
Brendan Road at Howard Lane North Southwest West
Brendan Road at Scotty Drive Northeast East
Brendan Road at Scotty Drive Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:502
Location Corner Faces
Brentwood Avenue at Kingston Road Northwest North
Brentwood Avenue at Kingston Road Southeast South
Brentwood Avenue at Logan Drive Northwest North
Brentwood Avenue at Logan Drive Southeast South
Brentwood Avenue at Newburg Road Northwest North
Brentwood Avenue at Northwood
Avenue Extension
Southeast South
Brentwood Avenue at Plymouth Drive Northwest North
Brentwood Avenue at Plymouth Drive Southeast South
Bridlepath Road at Marc Lane Northwest North
Bridlepath Road at Marc Lane Southeast South
Bridlepath Road at Northgate
Boulevard
Northwest North
Bridlepath Road at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Broad Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Broad Street at Kathryn Street Southeast East
Broad Street at Kathryn Street Southwest West
Broad Street at Phillip Street Northeast East
Broad Street at Phillip Street Southwest West
Broad Street at Sales Street Northeast East
Broad Street at Sales Street Southwest West
Brookwood Lane at Tatamy Road Southwest West
Burrowes Street at 25th Street Southwest West
Burrowes Street at Keane Street Northeast East
Burrowes Street at Keane Street Southwest West
Bushkill Park Drive at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Bushkill Street at Kathryn Street Southwest West
Camden Street at Berkeley Street Northeast East
Camden Street at South Nulton
Avenue
Northeast East
Camden Street at South Nulton
Avenue
Southwest West
Camden Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Camden Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Southwest West
Camelot Drive at Bonnie Lane Northwest North
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:503
Location Corner Faces
Camelot Drive at Bonnie Lane Southeast South
Camelot Drive at Northwood Avenue Northwest North
Canterbury Lane at Corriere Road Northwest North
Canterbury Lane at Corriere Road Southeast South
Carbon Street at Allen Street Northwest North
Carbon Street at Allen Street Southeast South
Carbon Street at Forks Street Northwest North
Carbon Street at Forks Street Southeast South
Carbon Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Carbon Street at Moore Street Northwest North
Carbon Street at Moore Street Southeast South
Carolyn Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Carousel Lane at Central Drive Northeast East
Carousel Lane at Central Drive Southwest West
Carousel Lane at Old Carriage Drive Northeast East
Carousel Lane at Saddle Lane Southeast South
Carrington Drive at Palmetto Drive Southwest West
Central Drive at Carousel Lane Northwest North
Central Drive at Carousel Lane Southeast South
Central Drive at Crest Boulevard Northwest North
Central Drive at Saddle Lane Northwest North
Central Drive at Saddle Lane Southeast South
Chain Dam Road at Greening Drive Northeast East
Chain Dam Road at Southwood Drive Northeast South
Charles Chrin Community Center at
Green Pond Road
Southeast South
Charlotte Avenue at Greenwood
Avenue
Southwest West
Charlotte Avenue at Loomis Street Northeast East
Charlotte Avenue at Loomis Street Southwest West
Chelsea Street at Hackett Avenue Northwest North
Chetwin Terrace at Sheridan Drive
(Bethlehem Township)
Southwest West
Clairmont Avenue at Crest Bouelvard Southeast South
Clayton Street at Shrine Avenue Northeast East
Clayton Street at Shrine Avenue Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:504
Location Corner Faces
Clearview Avenue at Hecktown Road Southeast South
Clover Drive at Rocky Lane Northeast East
Clover Hollow Road at Lower Way
Road
Northwest North
Coach Lane at Bridlepath Road Northeast East
Coach Lane at Rocky Lane Southwest West
Cobblestone Drive at Water Wheel
Lane
Northwest North
Cobblestone Drive at Willow Drive Southeast South
Cog Circle at Toursdale Drive Northeast East
Colmar Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Colmar Street at Greenway Avenue Northwest North
Colonial Court at Jonathon Drive Southeast South
Community Drive at Northampton
Street
Southeast South
Coolidge Avenue at Park Avenue Northwest North
Corporate Drive at Kunkle Drive Northwest North
Corriere Road at Heritage Lane Northeast East
Corriere Road at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Corriere Road at Tatamy Road Southwest West
Corriere Road at Van Buren Road Northeast East
Country Side Court at Mill Race Drive Southwest West
Country Side Court at Water Wheel
Lane
Northwest North
Country Side Court at Water Wheel
Lane
Southeast South
Craigie Street at Columbia Street Northwest North
Craigie Street at William Penn
Highway
Southeast South
Creek View Court at Crest Boulevard Northwest North
Crescent Drive at Sycamore Drive Southeast South
Crest Boulevard at Central Drive Northeast East
Crest Boulevard at Central Drive Southwest West
Crest Boulevard at Clairmont Avenue Southwest West
Crest Boulevard at Rocky Lane Northeast East
Crest Boulevard at Tatamy Road Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:505
Location Corner Faces
Crestview Avenue at Farmersville
Road
Southwest West
Crossing Court at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Dakota Drive at Newlins Mill Road Southeast East
Danberry Drive at Farmhouse Court Northwest North
Danberry Drive at Farmhouse Court Southeast South
Danforth Drive at Tatamy Road Southwest West
Dearborn Street at 25th Street Southwest West
Debbie Lane at Brendan Road Southeast South
Debbie Lane at Lois Lane Northwest North
Devon Drive at John Street Southeast South
Diane Road at Meadow Avenue Northwest North
Division Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Division Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Division Street at Blair Street Northeast East
Division Street at Blair Street Southwest West
Division Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Division Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Division Street at Milford Street Northeast East
Division Street at Milford Street Southwest West
Division Street at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Division Street at Oakwood Street Northeast East
Division Street at Oakwood Street Southwest West
Donald Street at High Point Court Southeast South
Donald Street at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Duke Court at Queen Street Northwest North
Dunkle Street at Division Street Southeast South
Dunkle Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Dunkle Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Dunkle Street at Oregon Street Northwest North
Dunkle Street at Oregon Street Southeast South
Dusty Road at Stonecroft Drive Northeast East
East Lane at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Eastview Terrace at Morningside Drive Northwest North
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:506
Location Corner Faces
Eastview Terrace at Morningside Drive Southeast South
Edamy Street at Nicholas Street Northwest North
Edamy Street at Nicholas Street Southeast South
Edamy Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Edamy Street at William Penn
Highway
Southeast South
Edgewood Avenue at Bushkill Drive Southwest West
Edgewood Avenue at Greenhill Avenue Southwest West
Edie Lane at Merion Avenue Southwest West
Eichlin Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Eldridge Avenue at Martin Street Southwest West
Eldridge Avenue at Old Nazareth Road Southwest West
Eldridge Avenue at Radcliffe Street Northeast East
Eldridge Avenue at Radcliffe Street Southwest West
Elwood Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Embur Terrace at Sheridan Drive
(Bethlehem Township)
Southwest West
Emrick Terrace at Sheridan Drive Southwest West
Eugene Street at Hillview Avenue Northeast East
Eugene Street at Hillview Avenue Southwest West
Fairfield Court at Clairmont Avenue Northwest North
Fairview Avenue at Butternut Lane Northeast East
Fairview Avenue at Butternut Lane Southwest West
Fairview Avenue at Chestnut Lane Northeast East
Fairview Avenue at Chestnut Lane Southwest West
Fairview Avenue at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Fairview Avenue at Whitney Avenue Northeast East
Fairview Avenue at Whitney Avenue Southwest West
Farmersville Road at Fischer Road Southwest West
Farmersville Road at Seip Avenue Southeast South
Farragut Street at Avon Street Northeast East
Filbar Street at Nicholas Street Northwest North
Filbar Street at William Penn Highway Southeast South
Firethorne Drive at Stocker Mill Road Southeast South
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:507
Location Corner Faces
Firmstone Street at 25th Street Northwest North
Fischer Road at Fischer Road Northeast East
Fischer Road at Hecktown Road Northwest North
Fischer Road at Hermitage Avenue Northwest North
Fischer Road at Newburg Road Southeast South
Fischer Road at Val Vista Drive Northwest North
Fischer Road at Val Vista Drive Southeast South
Fleetwood Drive at Kendon Drive Northeast East
Fleetwood Drive at Kendon Drive Southwest West
Fleetwood Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Fleetwood Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Fleetwood Street at Danberry Drive Northeast East
Fleetwood Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Southwest West
Florian Avenue at Berks Street Northeast East
Florian Avenue at Berks Street Southwest West
Florian Avenue at Blair Street Northeast East
Florian Avenue at Blair Street Southwest West
Florian Avenue at Grandview Drive Southwest West
Florian Avenue at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Forest Line Road at Glen Avenue Southeast South
Forks Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Forks Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Forks Street at Carbon Street Northeast East
Forks Street at Carbon Street Southwest West
Forks Street at Wayne Street Southwest West
Fox Hill Road at Camelot Drive Southwest West
Fox Hill Road at Clover Hollow Road Northeast East
Fox Hill Road at Clover Hollow Road Southwest West
Fox Hill Road at Lower Way Road Northeast East
Fox Hill Road at Lower Way Road Southwest West
Fox Hill Road at Ridge Road Northeast East
Fox Hill Road at Ridge Road Southwest West
Fox Hill Road at Van Buren Road Northeast East
Fox Hill Road at Van Buren Road Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:508
Location Corner Faces
Fox Run Soccer Field parking lot at
Van Buren Road
Northeast East
Freedom Terrace at Olde Penn Drive Southeast South
Gary Street at Northwood Avenue Northwest North
Gary Street at Sandy Lane Northwest North
Gary Street at Sandy Lane Southeast East
Glen Avenue at Applewood Drive Northeast East
Glen Avenue at Applewood Drive Southwest West
Glen Avenue at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Glen Avenue at Grandview Drive Southwest West
Glen Avenue at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Glen Avenue at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Glen Avenue at Ridgeline Lane Northeast East
Glen Avenue at Ridgeline Lane Southwest West
Glenfield Court at Clairmont Avenue Northwest North
Glenmoor Court at Corriere Road Southeast South
Gordon Drive at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Gorham Road at South Nulton Avenue Southwest West
Grandview Drive at Florian Avenue Northeast East
Greenhill Avenue at Edgewood Avenue Southeast South
Greenhill Avenue at Hackett Avenue Northwest North
Greening Drive at Sutton Road Northwest North
Greening Drive at Sutton Road Southeast South
Greening Drive at Wedgewood Drive Southeast South
Green Pond Road at Greenwood
Avenue
Southwest West
Greenway Avenue at Colmar Street Southwest West
Greenway Street at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Greenway Street at Whitehall Avenue Northeast East
Greenway Street at Whitehall Avenue Southwest West
Greenway Street at Whitney Avenue Northeast East
Greenway Street at Whitney Avenue Southwest West
Greenwood Avenue at Broad Street Northwest North
Greenwood Avenue at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Greenwood Avenue at Green Pond
Road
Northwest North
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:509
Location Corner Faces
Greenwood Avenue at John Street Northeast East
Greenwood Avenue at John Street Southwest West
Greenwood Avenue at Seip Avenue Southeast South
Grist Mill Lane at Country Side Court Northeast East
Grove Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Grove Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Grove Street at Kingwood Street Northeast East
Grove Street at Kingwood Street Southwest West
Grove Street at Oakwood Street Southwest West
Grove Street at Rosemont Court Northwest North
Grove Street at Rosemont Court Southeast South
Gruver Avenue at Hackett Avenue Northeast East
Gruver Avenue at Hackett Avenue Southwest West
Gruver Avenue at Hillview Avenue Northeast East
Gruver Avenue at Park Avenue Southeast East
Gruver Avenue at Stonecroft Drive Northeast East
Gruver Avenue at Stonecroft Drive Southwest West
Guyton Street at Dunkle Street Northeast East
Guyton Street at Dunkle Street Southwest West
Hackett Avenue at Greenhill Avenue Northeast East
Hackettsview Avenue at Hillview
Avenue
Northeast East
Hackettsview Avenue at Hillview
Avenue
Southwest West
Harding Court at Hunter Street
(Bethlehem Township)
Southwest West
Hartley Avenue at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Hartley Avenue at South Nulton
Avenue
Northeast East
Haupt Street at Stones Crossing Road Northeast East
Haymont Drive at Woodridge Terrace Northwest North
Hecktown Road at Clearview Avenue Southwest West
Hecktown Road at Fischer Road Southwest West
Hermitage Avenue at Fischer Road Northeast East
Hermitage Avenue at Fischer Road Southwest West
Hermitage Avenue at Martin Street Northeast East
Hermitage Avenue at Martin Street Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:510
Location Corner Faces
Hermitage Avenue at Morris Street Northeast East
Hermitage Avenue at Morris Street Southwest West
Hermitage Avenue at Old Nazareth
Road
Southwest West
Hickory Lane at Haupt Street Northwest North
Highland Court West at Corriere Road Northwest North
Highland Drive at Clairmont Avenue Southwest West
Highland Drive at Crest Boulevard Northwest North
Highland Drive at Crest Boulevard Southeast South
Highland Drive at Northgate
Boulevard
Southeast South
High Point Court at Pine Grove Drive Southwest West
Hillcrest Drive at Greenhill Avenue Northeast East
Hilltop Circle at Mountain View
Avenue
Southeast South
Hobson Street at Division Street Northwest North
Hobson Street at Division Street Southeast South
Hobson Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Hobson Street at Tamlynn Lane Northwest North
Hobson Street at Tamlynn Court Southeast South
Hollo Road at Van Buren Road Southwest West
Howard Lane North at Corriere Road Southeast South
Huegel Avenue at Kendon Drive Northeast East
Huegel Avenue at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Hunter Street at Farmersville Road Northwest North
Hunter Street at Farmersville Road
(Bethlehem Township)
Southeast South
Ivy Court at Applewood Drive Southwest West
James Place at Scotty Drive Southeast South
James Place at Stephanie Drive Northwest North
Jeffrey Lane at Bonnie Lane Northwest North
Jeffrey Lane at Howard Lane South Southwest West
Jeremy Court at Howard Lane Southwest West
Jewel Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Jewel Street at John Street Northeast East
Jewel Street at John Street Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:511
Location Corner Faces
Jewel Street at Mary Street Northeast East
Jewel Street at Mary Street Southwest West
Jewel Street at Route 248 Southwest West
John Street at Broad Street Northwest North
John Street at Farmersville Road Northeast East
John Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
John Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
John Street at Jewel Street Northwest North
John Street at Jewel Street Southeast South
John Street at Kathryn Street Northwest North
John Street at Kathryn Street Southeast South
John Street at Phillip Street Northwest North
John Street at Shrine Avenue Northeast East
John Street at Shrine Avenue Southwest West
Jonathon Drive at Baldwin Drive Northwest North
Jonathon Drive at Baldwin Drive Southeast South
Jonathon Drive at Florian Avenue Northwest North
Jonathon Drive at McIntosh Drive Northeast East
Jonathon Drive at McIntosh Drive Southwest West
Jonathon Drive at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Jonathon Drive at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Jonathon Drive at Timberlane Drive Northwest North
Jones Boulevard at Berks Street Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Berks Street Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Blair Street Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Blair Street Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Dunkle Street Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Dunkle Street Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Hobson Street Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Milford Street Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Milford Street Southwest West
Jones Boulevard at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Oakwood Street Northeast East
Jones Boulevard at Oakwood Street Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:512
Location Corner Faces
Joseph Court at Brendan Road Southeast South
Joseph Court at Stephanie Drive Northwest North
Juniper Avenue at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Kathryn Street at Broad Street Northeast East
Kathryn Street at Broad Street Southeast South
Kathryn Street at Northampton Street Northwest North
Kathryn Street at Northampton Street Southeast South
Kathryn Street at Route 248 Southwest West
Kathryn Street at Stephens Street Northeast East
Kathryn Street at Stephens Street Southwest West
Keane Street at Burrowes Street Northwest North
Keane Street at Freemansburg Avenue Southeast South
Kendon Drive at Greenway Avenue Northwest North
Kendon Drive at Greenway Avenue Southeast South
Kendon Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Kendon Drive at Schaeffer Avenue Northwest North
Kendon Drive at Schaeffer Avenue Southeast South
Kendon Drive at Sycamore Drive Northwest North
Kings Avenue at Hillview Avenue Northeast East
Kings Avenue at Hillview Avenue Southwest West
Kingston Road at Route 248 Northeast East
Kingston Road at Route 248 Southwest West
Kingston Road at Van Buren Road Southwest West
Kingwood Street at Grove Street Southeast South
Lagond Street at Camelot Drive Southeast South
Lagond Street at Jeffrey Lane Northwest North
Lantern Place (E) at Toursdale Drive Northeast East
Lantern Place (W) at Toursdale Drive Southwest West
Lawnherst Avenue at Whitefield Street Northeast East
Lawnherst Avenue at Whitefield Street Southwest West
Leeman Street at Burrowes Street Northwest North
Leeman Street at Burrowes Street Southeast South
Leeman Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Lehigh Drive at 25th Street Southeast South
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:513
Location Corner Faces
Lewis Circle at Stocker Mill Road Northwest North
Lewis Street at Stocker Mill Road Southeast South
Liberty Street at Broad Street Southwest West
Liberty Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Liberty Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Liberty Street at Kathryn Street Northeast East
Liberty Street at Kathryn Street Southwest West
Liberty Street at Phillip Street Northeast East
Liberty Street at Phillip Street Southwest West
Lieberman Terrace at 25th Street Southwest West
Lions Pool Road at Farmersville Road Southwest West
Logan Drive at Brentwood Avenue Northeast East
Logan Drive at Van Buren Road Southeast South
Lois Lane at Scotty Drive Southwest West
Loomis Street at Hartley Avenue Northwest North
Loomis Street at Hartley Avenue Southeast South
Loomis Street at Norton Avenue Northwest North
Loomis Street at Norton Avenue Southeast South
Louise Street at Pine Grove Drive Northeast East
Lower Way Road at Fox Hill Road Northwest North
Lower Way Road at Fox Hill Road Southeast South
Lower Way Road at Ridge Road Northeast East
Lower Way Road at Ridge Road Southwest West
Lower Way Road at Van Buren Road Northeast East
Ludlow Street at Gruver Avenue Northwest North
Ludlow Street at Hackett Avenue Southeast South
Lynnwood Avenue at Oakdale Avenue Northwest North
Maplecroft Avenue at Old Nazareth
Road
Northwest North
Maple Lane at Haupt Street Northwest North
Martin Street at Seip Avenue Northwest North
Marwood Lane at Newburg Road Northwest North
Mary Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Mary Street at Jewel Street Northwest North
Mary Street at Jewel Street Southeast South
Mary Street at Kathryn Street Northwest North
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:514
Location Corner Faces
Maywood Street at Greenhill Avenue Northeast East
Maywood Street at Hillcrest Drive Southwest West
McFadden Road at Commerce Lane Southeast South
McFadden Road at Danforth Drive Northwest North
McFadden Road at Danforth Drive Southeast South
McFadden Road at Newlins Mill Road Northwest North
McIntosh Drive at Baldwin Drive Northwest North
McIntosh Drive at Jonathon Drive Southeast South
Melanie Street at Bonnie Lane Southwest West
Melanie Street at Peggy Street Northwest North
Melissa Drive at Brendan Road Southeast South
Melissa Drive at Howard Lane North Southwest West
Melissa Drive at Jeremy Court Northwest North
Melissa Drive at Jeremy Court Southeast South
Merion Avenue at Greenway Street Northwest North
Merion Avenue at Greenway Street Southeast South
Merion Avenue at Mine Lane Road Southeast South
Merion Avenue at Wilden Drive South Northwest North
Middle Court at Edie Lane Northwest North
Middle Place at East Lane Southwest West
Midland Drive at Clairmont Avenue Northwest North
Milford Street at Division Street Northwest North
Milford Street at Division Street Southeast South
Milford Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Milford Street at Jones Boulevard Northwest North
Milford Street at Jones Boulevard Southeast South
Milford Street at Oregon Street Northwest North
Milford Street at Oregon Street Southeast South
Milford Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Milford Street at William Penn
Highway
Southeast South
Mill Brook Court at Mill Race Drive Northeast East
Mill Race Drive at Country Side Court Northwest North
Mill Race Drive at Country Side Court Southeast South
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:515
Location Corner Faces
Mill Race Drive at Newlins Mill Road Northwest North
Mill Race Drive at Water Wheel Lane Northwest North
Mill Race Drive at Water Wheel Lane Southeast South
Mill Race Park at Newlins Mill Road Northeast East
Mine Lane Road at Glen Avenue Northwest North
Mine Lane Road at Glen Avenue Southeast South
Mine Lane Road at Greenway Street Northwest North
Mine Lane Road at Greenway Street Southeast South
Mine Lane Road at Southwood Drive Northwest North
Mine Lane Road at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Moore Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Moore Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Moore Street at Grandview Drive Southwest West
Moravian Avenue at Seip Avenue Southeast South
Morningside Drive at Clairmont
Avenue
Northeast East
Morningside Drive at Clairmont
Avenue
Southeast South
Morris Street at Eldridge Avenue Southeast South
Moss Court at Mill Brook Court Southeast South
Mountain View Avenue at Stones
Crossing Road
Northeast East
Mountain View Avenue at Stones
Crossing Road
Southwest West
Mountain View Avenue at Toursdale
Drive
Northeast East
Mountain View Avenue at Wedgewood
Drive
Southwest West
Movie Court at Starlite Drive Northwest North
Newlins Mill Road at Bushkill Drive Northwest North
Newlins Mill Road at Mill Race Drive Northeast East
Newlins Mill Road at Mill Race Drive Southwest West
Newlins Mill Road at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Newlins Mill Road at Tatamy Road Southwest West
Newlins Mill Road at Van Buren Road Northeast East
Newlins Mill Road at Willow Drive Northwest North
Newlins Mill Road at Willow Drive Southeast South
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:516
Location Corner Faces
Nicholas Street at Edamy Street Northeast East
Nicholas Street at Edamy Street Southwest West
Nicholas Street at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Nicholas Street at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Nicholas Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Nicholas Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Southwest West
Nicole Place at Sheridan Drive Northeast East
Nightingale Road at Kingston Road
(private)
Southeast South
Nightingale Road at Van Buren Road
(private)
Southwest West
Northampton Street at Watson Street Northeast East
Northampton Street at Watson Street Southwest West
Northgate Boulevard at Bridlepath
Road
Southwest West
Northgate Boulevard at Winding Way Northeast East
Northgate Boulevard at Winding Way Southwest West
North Nulton Avenue at Farmersville
Road
Southeast South
North Nulton Avenue at Green Pond
Road
Northwest North
North Ridge Court at Northwood
Avenue
Southeast South
North Street at William Penn Highway Southeast South
Northview Avenue at Clover Drive Northeast East
Northview Avenue at Clover Drive Southwest West
Northview Avenue at Rocky Lane Northeast East
Northview Avenue at Rocky Lane Southwest West
Northwood Avenue at Bushkill Drive Southwest West
Northwood Avenue at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Northwood Avenue at Tatamy Road Southwest West
Northwood Avenue at Van Buren Road Northeast East
Northwood Avenue at Van Buren Road Southwest West
Northwood Avenue Extension at Van
Buren Road
Southwest West
Norton Avenue at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:517
Location Corner Faces
Norton Avenue at Watson Street Northeast East
Norwood Avenue at Lynnwood Avenue Northeast East
Norwood Avenue at Lynnwood Avenue Southwest West
Norwood Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue Northeast East
Norwood Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue Southwest West
Nulton Avenue at Farmersville Road Southeast South
Nulton Avenue North at Green Pond
Road
Northeast South
Nulton Avenue South at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Oakwood Street at Division Street Southeast South
Oakwood Street at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Oakwood Street at Grove Street Northwest North
Oakwood Street at Jones Boulevard Northwest North
Oakwood Street at Jones Boulevard Southeast South
Oakwood Street at Oregon Street Northwest North
Oakwood Street at Oregon Street Southeast South
Oakwood Street at William Penn
Highway
Southeast South
Old Carriage Drive at Central Drive Northeast East
Old Carriage Drive at Central Drive Southwest West
Old Carriage Drive at Saddle Lane Northwest North
Old Carriage Drive at Saddle Lane Southeast South
Olde Penn Drive at Freedom Terrace Northwest North
Olde Penn Drive at Heritage Lane Northeast East
Olde Penn Drive at Penn's Grant Drive Northeast East
Olde Penn Drive at Penn's Grant Drive Southwest West
Old Nazareth Road at Carolyn Street Southeast South
Old Nazareth Road at Park Avenue Southeast South
Old Nazareth Road at Seip Avenue Northwest North
Old Nazareth Road at Swanson Street Northwest North
Old Nazareth Road at Swanson Street Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Baldwin Drive Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Baldwin Drive Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Blenheim Drive Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Crescent Drive Northeast East
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:518
Location Corner Faces
Old Orchard Drive at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Greenway
Avenue
Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Greenway
Avenue
Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Mountain View
Avenue
Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Schaeffer
Avenue
Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Schaeffer
Avenue
Southeast South
Old Orchard Drive at Southwood Drive Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Wedgewood
Drive
Northwest North
Orchid Court at Water Wheel Lane Southeast South
Oregon Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Oregon Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Oregon Street at Blair Street Northeast East
Oregon Street at Blair Street Southwest West
Oregon Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Oregon Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Oregon Street at Hobson Street Southwest West
Oregon Street at Milford Street Northeast East
Oregon Street at Milford Street Southwest West
Palmer Municpal Building parking lot
at Newburg Road
Southeast South
Park Road at Hackett Avenue Northeast East
Paul Street at Freemansburg Avenue Northwest North
Paul Street at Virginia Street Southeast South
Peggy Street at Howard Lane South Southwest West
Peggy Street at Jeffrey Lane Northeast East
Penn Pump Park at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Penn's Grant Drive at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Phillip Street at Broad Street Northeast East
Phillip Street at Broad Street Southeast South
Phillip Street at Liberty Street Northwest North
Phillip Street at Liberty Street Southeast South
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:519
Location Corner Faces
Phillip Street at Northampton Street Northwest North
Phillip Street at Route 248 Southwest West
Pike Street at Allen Street Northwest North
Pike Street at Allen Street Southeast South
Pike Street at Forks Street Northwest North
Pike Street at Forks Street Southeast South
Pike Street at Grandview Drive Southeast South
Pine Grove Drive at High Point Court Northwest North
Pine Grove Drive at High Point Court Southeast South
Pine Grove Drive at Northwood
Avenue
Northwest North
Pine Grove Drive at Stocker Mill Road Southeast South
Prince Street at Queen Street Northwest North
Prince Street at Swanson Street Southeast South
Queen Street at Fischer Road Northeast East
Queen Street at Swanson Street Southeast South
Quincy Avenue at Hillview Avenue Northeast East
Quincy Avenue at Hillview Avenue Southwest West
Radcliffe Street at Fischer Road Southeast South
Rau Lane at Stones Crossing Road Southwest West
Ridgeline Lane at Glen Avenue Southeast South
Ridge Road at Fox Hill Road Northwest North
Ridge Road at Fox Hill Road Southeast South
Ridge Road at Lower Way Road Northwest North
Ridge Road at Lower Way Road Southeast South
Ridge Road at Upper Way Road Southeast South
Ridgewood Road at Green Pond Road Northwest North
Riverview Circle at Sutton Road Southeast South
Riverview Park at Lehigh Drive Southeast South
Rocky Lane at Coach Lane Northwest North
Rocky Lane at Coach Lane Southeast South
Rocky Lane at Crest Boulevard Northwest North
Rocky Lane at Northview Avenue Northwest North
Rocky Lane at Northview Avenue Southeast South
Rocky Lane at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Rosemont Court at Grove Street Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:520
Location Corner Faces
Russet Drive at Applewood Drive Northeast East
Russet Drive at Applewood Drive Southwest West
Russet Drive at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Russet Drive at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Saddle Lane at Central Drive Northeast East
Saddle Lane at Central Drive Southwest West
Saddle Lane at Rocky Lane Northeast East
Sandy Lane at Camelot Drive Northeast East
Scotty Drive at Corriere Road Southeast South
Scotty Drive at Lois Lane Northwest North
Scotty Drive at Lois Lane Southeast South
Seip Avenue at Old Nazareth Road Southwest West
Seip Avenue at Shrine Avenue Northeast East
Seip Avenue at Shrine Avenue Southwest West
Sheridan Drive at Embur Terrace Northwest North
Sheridan Drive at Embur Terrace Southeast South
Sheridan Drive at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Sheridan Drive at Winfield Terrace
(Bethlehem Township)
Northwest North
Sheridan Drive at Winfield Terrace
(Bethlehem Township)
Southeast South
Shrine Avenue at Agnes Street Northwest North
Shrine Avenue at Agnes Street Southeast South
Shrine Avenue at Clayton Street Southeast East
Shrine Avenue at Seip Avenue Southeast South
Sonesta Lane at Palmetto Drive Northeast East
Sonesta Lane at Springfield Way Southwest West
South Watson Street at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Southwood Drive at Applewood Drive Northeast East
Southwood Drive at Applewood Drive Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Southwood Drive at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Old Orchard Drive Northeast East
Southwood Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Southwood Drive Northwest North
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:521
Location Corner Faces
Southwood Drive at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Southwood Drive at Southwood Drive Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Southwood Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Toursdale Drive Northeast East
Southwood Drive at Toursdale Drive Southwest West
Southwood Drive at Wedgewood Drive Northeast East
Southwood Drive at Wedgewood Drive Southwest West
Springfield Way at Camden Street Northwest North
Springfield Way at Camden Street Southeast South
Springfield Way at Gorham Road Northwest North
Springfield Way at Gorham Road Southeast South
Springfield Way at Palmetto Drive Northeast East
Spring Garden Street at Greenwood
Avenue
Northeast East
Spring Garden Street at Kathryn
Street
Northeast East
Spring Garden Street at Kathryn
Street
Southwest West
Spring Garden Street at Phillip Street Southwest West
Starlite Drive at Ashlee Court Southwest West
Starlite Drive at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Stephanie Drive at Howard Lane
North
Southwest West
Stephanie Drive at Melissa Drive Northeast East
Stephanie Drive at Melissa Drive Southwest West
Stephens Street at Broad Street Northwest North
Stephens Street at Carolyn Street Southeast South
Stephens Street at Jewel Street Northwest North
Stephens Street at Jewel Street Southeast South
Stephens Street at Kathryn Street Northwest North
Stephens Street at Kathryn Street Southeast South
Stephens Street at Phillip Street Northwest North
Stephens Street at Phillip Street Southeast South
Stocker Mill Road at Bushkill Drive Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:522
Location Corner Faces
Stocker Mill Road at Tatamy Road Northeast East
Stone Creek Court at Willow Drive Southeast South
Stonecroft Drive at Dusty Road Northeast East
Stonecroft Drive at Gruver Avenue Southeast South
Stonecroft Drive at Stonecroft Drive Southeast South
Stonecroft Drive at Stonecroft Drive Southwest West
Stones Crossing Road at Blenheim
Drive
Northwest North
Stones Crossing Road at Blenheim
Drive
Southeast South
Stones Crossing Road at Camden
Street
Southeast South
Stones Crossing Road at Fleetwood
Drive
Northwest North
Stones Crossing Road at Fleetwood
Drive
Southeast South
Stones Crossing Road at Mountain
View Avenue
Northwest North
Stones Crossing Road at Mountain
View Avenue
Southeast South
Surrey Drive at Central Drive Northeast East
Surrey Drive at Central Drive Southwest West
Surrey Drive at Old Carriage Drive Northeast East
Surrey Drive at Saddle Lane Southeast South
Sutton Road at Stones Crossing Road Northeast East
Sutton Road at Stones Crossing Road Southwest West
Swanson Street at Alpine Drive Northeast East
Swanson Street at Alpine Drive Southwest West
Swanson Street at Old Nazareth Road Northeast East
Swanson Street at Old Nazareth Road Southwest West
Swanson Street at Prince Street Northeast East
Swanson Street at Prince Street Southwest West
Swanson Street at Queen Street Northeast East
Swanson Street at Queen Street Southwest West
Sycamore Drive at Old Orchard Drive Southwest West
Sycamore Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Tamlynn Court at Hobson Street Northeast East
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:523
Location Corner Faces
Tamlynn Lane at Hobson Street Southwest West
Tamlynn Lane at Milford Street Northeast East
Tatamy Road at Northwood Avenue Northwest North
Tatamy Road at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Timberlane Drive at Baldwin Drive Southeast South
Timberlane Drive at Southwood Drive Northwest North
Timberlane Drive at Wedgewood Drive Northeast East
Timberlane Drive at Wedgewood Drive Southwest West
Timber Ridge Drive at Woodside Drive Northeast East
Toursdale Drive at Mountain View
Avenue
Northwest North
Toursdale Drive at Mountain View
Avenue
Southeast South
Toursdale Drive at Rau Lane Southeast South
Toursdale Drive at Southwood Drive Northwest North
Toursdale Drive at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Toursdale Drive at Sutton Road Northwest North
Towpath Circle East at Toursdale
Drive
Northeast East
Towpath Circle West at Toursdale
Drive
Southwest West
Tulip Court at Country Side Court Southeast South
Upper Way Road at Clover Hollow
Road
Northeast East
Upper Way Road at Lower Way Road Southwest West
Upper Way Road at Ridge Road Southwest West
Val Vista Drive at Fischer Road Southwest West
Van Buren Road at Brentwood Avenue Northeast East
Van Buren Road at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Van Buren Road at Corriere Road Northwest North
Van Buren Road at Corriere Road Southeast South
Van Buren Road at Logan Drive Northeast East
Van Buren Road at Logan Drive Southwest West
Van Buren Road at Main Street-
Tatamy Road
Northwest North
Van Buren Road at Main Street-
Tatamy Road
Southeast South
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:524
Location Corner Faces
Van Buren Road at Newlins Mill Road Northwest North
Van Buren Road at Newlins Mill Road Southeast South
Van Buren Road at Northwood Avenue Northwest North
Van Buren Road at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Van Buren Road at Route 248 Northeast East
Van Buren Road at Route 248 Southwest West
Vera Circle at Heritage Lane Northeast East
Vermont Street at Berks Street Northeast East
Vermont Street at Berks Street Southwest West
Vermont Street at Blair Street Northeast East
Vermont Street at Blair Street Southwest West
Vermont Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Vermont Street at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Vermont Street at Milford Street Southwest West
Vermont Street at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Vermont Street at Oakwood Street Northeast East
Vermont Street at Oakwood Street Southwest West
Victoria Lane at Hobson Street Southwest West
Victoria Lane at Milford Street Northeast East
Virginia Street at Blair Street Northeast East
Virginia Street at Blair Street Southwest West
Virginia Street at Butternut Lane Northeast East
Virginia Street at Butternut Lane Southwest West
Virginia Street at Chestnut Lane Northeast East
Virginia Street at Chestnut Lane Southwest West
Virginia Street at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Virginia Street at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
Virginia Street at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Walter Avenue at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Washington Street at Greenwood
Avenue
Northeast East
Washington Street at Kathryn Street Northeast East
Washington Street at Kathryn Street Southwest West
Washington Street at Watson Street Northeast East
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:525
Location Corner Faces
Water Wheel Lane at Country Side
Court
Northeast East
Water Wheel Lane at Country Side
Court
Southwest West
Water Wheel Lane at Mill Race Drive Northeast East
Water Wheel Lane at Mill Race Drive Southwest West
Water Wheel Lane at Willow Drive Northeast East
Water Wheel Lane at Willow Drive Southwest West
Watson Street South at Charlotte
Avenue
Southeast South
Watson Street South at Hartley
Avenue
Northwest North
Watson Street South at William Penn
Highway
Northwest North
Wayne Street at Allen Street Northwest North
Wayne Street at Allen Street Southeast South
Wayne Street at Forks Street Northwest North
Wayne Street at Forks Street Southeast South
Wayne Street at Grandview Drive Southeast South
Wayne Street at Timber Ridge Drive Northwest North
Wedgewood Drive at Old Orchard
Drive
Northeast East
Wedgewood Drive at Old Orchard
Drive
Southwest West
Wedgewood Drive at Southwood Drive Northwest North
Wedgewood Drive at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Weller Place at Newburg Road Southeast South
Westgate Avenue at Old Nazareth
Road
Northeast East
West Lane at Northview Avenue Northwest North
West Lane at Northwood Avenue Southeast South
Whitefield Street at Edgemore Avenue Northwest North
Whitefield Street at Edgemore Avenue Southeast South
Whitehall Avenue at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Whitehall Avenue at Greenway Street Northwest North
Whitehall Avenue at Wilmore Street Northwest North
Whitehall Avenue at Wilmore Street Southeast South
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:526
Location Corner Faces
Whitney Avenue at Fairview Avenue Southeast South
Whitney Avenue at Freemansburg
Avenue
Northwest North
Whitney Avenue at Freemansburg
Avenue
Southeast South
Whitney Avenue at Greenway Street Northwest North
Whitney Avenue at Greenway Street Southeast South
Whitney Avenue at Virginia Street Northwest North
Whitney Avenue at Virginia Street Southeast South
Whitney Avenue at Wilden Drive West Northwest North
Whitney Avenue at Wilmore Street Northwest North
Whitney Avenue at Wilmore Street Southeast South
Wilden Drive South at Edie Lane Northeast East
Wilden Drive South at Edie Lane Southwest West
Wilden Drive South at Merion Avenue Northeast East
Wilden Drive South at Merion Avenue Southwest West
Wilden Drive West at Whitney Avenue Northeast East
Wilden Drive West at Whitney Avenue Southwest West
Williamson Street at 25th Street Northwest North
Willow Drive at Mill Race Drive Northeast East
Willow Drive at Newlins Mill Road Northeast East
Willow Drive at Water Wheel Lane Northwest North
Willow Drive at Water Wheel Lane Southeast South
Wilmore Street at Merion Avenue Southwest West
Winding Way at Northgate Boulevard Southeast South
Windrift Court at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Winfield Terrace at Sheridan Drive
(Bethlehem Township)
Northeast East
Winfield Terrace at Sheridan Drive
(Bethlehem Township)
Southwest West
Winfield Terrace at Stones Crossing
Road
Southwest West
Woodlawn Avenue at Oakdale Avenue Northwest North
Woodridge Terrace at Whitefield
Street
Northeast East
Woodridge Terrace at Whitefield
Street
Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:527
Location Corner Faces
Woodside Drive at Florian Avenue Northwest North
B. The following Township streets are hereby designated as and shall be
yield streets which shall be marked with yield signs:
Location Corner Faces
27th Street at Columbia Street Southeast South
Agnes Street at Clayton Street Northeast East
Agnes Street at Moravian Avenue Southwest West
Anna-Marie Street at Guyton Street Southeast South
Applewood Drive at Chain Dam Road Northwest North
Applewood Drive at Jonathon Drive Southeast South
Auburn Avenue at Oxford Drive Northeast East
Audubon Avenue at Applewood Drive Southwest West
Baldwin Drive at Southwood Drive Southwest West
Beacon Street at Summit Avenue Southeast South
Beaver Lane at Van Buren Road Southeast South
Bedford Road at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Bedford Road at Oxford Drive Northeast East
Blair Street at Allen Street Northwest North
Blair Street at Allen Street Southeast South
Brentwood Avenue at Brentwood
Avenue
Northeast East
Brookwood Lane at Babbling Brook
Road
Northeast East
Bushkill Street at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Carolyn Street at Old Nazareth Road Southwest West
Charles Court at Camelot Drive Northwest North
Chestnut Lane at Haupt Street Northwest North
Cibby Street at Emrick Terrace Northwest North
Clayton Street at Moravian Avenue Southwest West
Courtney Court at Southwood Drive Southeast South
Crescent Drive at Mountain View
Avenue
Northwest North
Cresmont Avenue at Brentwood
Avenue
Southwest West
Cresmont Avenue at Plymouth Drive Southeast South
Crest Boulevard at Clairmont Avenue Southwest West
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:528
Location Corner Faces
Crestview Avenue at Newton Street Northeast East
Devon Drive at Farmersville Road Southeast South
Diane Road at Lions Pool Road Southeast South
Edgemore Avenue at Haymont Drive Southwest West
Edgemore Avenue at Woodridge
Terrace
Southeast South
Eldridge Avenue at Clearview Avenue Northeast East
Eldridge Avenue at Fischer Road Northeast East
Eldridge Avenue at Fischer Road Southwest West
Farragut Street at Berkeley Street Southwest West
Forest Line Road at Grandview Drive Southeast South
Franklin Lane at Olde Penn Drive Northwest North
Freemansburg Avenue at 25th Street Southwest East/West
George Court at Swanson Street Southeast South
Gordon Drive at Applewood Drive Southwest West
Grandview Drive at Forest Line Road Northeast East
Grandview Drive at Forest Line Road Southwest North
Haupt Street at Whitney Avenue Southwest West
Hawthorne Court at Van Buren Road Southeast South
Hay Terrace at Kathryn Street Southwest West
Heritage Lane at Corriere Road Northwest North
Heritage Lane at Penns Grant Drive Southeast South
Hickory Lane at Virginia Street Northwest North
Hickory Lane at Virginia Street Southeast South
Highland Drive at Northgate
Boulevard
Northwest North
Hillview Avenue at Gruver Avenue Southeast South
Howard Lane South at Sandy Lane Northwest North
Howie Place at Mountain View Avenue Northwest North
John Street at Moravian Avenue Northwest North
Juniper Avenue at Tamarack Path Southwest West
Kaywood Drive at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Kingston Road at Oxford Drive Northeast East
Kings View Avenue at Danberry Drive Southwest West
Leeman Street at Anna Marie Street Northwest North
Lilac Lane at Washington Street Southeast South
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:529
Location Corner Faces
Lord Court at Swanson Street Southeast South
Louise Street at Firethorne Drive Southwest West
Lynnwood Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue
Northeast East
Maple Lane at Fairview Avenue Southeast South
Maple Lane at Virginia Street Northwest North
Maple Lane at Virginia Street Southeast South
Martin Street at Eldridge Avenue Southeast South
Meadow Avenue at Crestview Avenue Northwest North
Middle Place at West Lane Northeast East
Moravian Avenue at John Street Northwest North
Old Nazareth Road at Park Avenue Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Timberlane Drive Northwest North
Old Orchard Drive at Timberlane Drive Southeast South
Oregon Street at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Oxford Drive at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Plymouth Drive at Brentwood Avenue Southwest West
Plymouth Drive at Oxford Drive Northeast East
Ridgewood Road at Hunter Street Northeast East
Ridgewood Road at Nulton Avenue
North
Northeast East
Ridgewood Road at Nulton Avenue
North
Southwest West
Robin Road at Cresmont Avenue Southeast East
Robin Road at Van Buren Road Northwest North
Route 248 at Old Nazareth Road Northwest North
Route 248 at Old Nazareth Road Southeast South
Sherwood Road at Northgate
Boulevard
Northwest North
Southwood Drive at Southwood Drive Median South
Summit Avenue at Crestview Avenue Southeast South
Swanson Street at Fischer Road Northeast East
Swanson Street at Fischer Road Southwest West
Vaughn Street at Sheridan Drive Northeast East
Watson Street North at Hay Terrace Northwest North
Watson Street North at Liberty Street Southeast South
Wedgewood Drive at Baldwin Drive Southeast South
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-22
160:530
Location Corner Faces
Wedgewood Drive at Stones Crossing
Road
Northeast East
Whitney Avenue at Haupt Street Northeast East
Wilden Drive West at Merion Avenue Northeast East
Wilden Drive West at Merion Avenue Southwest West
William Penn Highway at Greenwood
Avenue
Northeast East
Wilmore Street at Colmar Street Northeast East
Windsor Street at Alpine Drive Southwest West
Windsor Street at Fischer Road Northeast East
Woodlawn Avenue at Lawnherst
Avenue
Northwest North
Woodridge Terrace at Haymont Drive Southwest West
C. The following Township bike paths are hereby designated as and shall
be marked with stop signs at said intersection locations:
Location Corner Faces
Bike path at 25th Street (near EASD
parking lot)
Southwest West
Bike path at Bushkill Drive Southeast South
Bike path at Corriere Road Southeast West
Bike path at Freemansburg Avenue Northwest North
Bike path at Freemansburg Avenue Southeast South
Bike path at Greenwood Avenue Northeast East
Bike path at Greenwood Avenue Southwest West
Bike path at Hackett Avenue Southeast South
Bike path at Hackett Avenue Southwest South
Bike path at Howard Lane North Southwest South
Bike path at Howard Lane South Median North
Bike path at Lehigh Drive Northwest South
Bike path at Lehigh Drive Southeast North
Bike path at Milford Street Northeast East
Bike path at Milford Street Southwest West
Bike path at Mill Race Park Northwest North
Bike path at Mill Race Park Southeast South
Bike path at Mine Lane Road Northeast East
Bike path at Mine Lane Road Southwest West
§ 180-22 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-22
160:531
§ 180-23. Other signs. [Amended in its entirety 8-23-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-399]
The Township is hereby designated as an Urban District. The following
Township streets are hereby restricted and designated as indicated below,
which restrictions and designations shall be marked with appropriate signs:
25th Street
A. Speed limit signs shall be posted between Freemansburg Avenue and
William Penn Highway in accordance with Exhibit A attached hereto
denoting said speed limit for said road as 35 miles per hour.153
AGNES STREET
A. On north side of Agnes: watch children sign.
AICHER DRIVE
A. At Route 248: no-outlet sign.
ALLEN STREET
A. At Blair Street: no-outlet sign.
ANNA MARIE STREET
A. At Leeman Street: no-outlet sign.
ANTHONY COURT
A. At 2642 Anthony Court: reserved handicapped parking sign.
ARCH STREET
A. At Arch Street: no-outlet sign.
ARLINGTON STREET
A. At Camden Street: no-outlet sign.
AVON STREET
A. At Farragut Street: no-outlet sign.
Location Corner Faces
Bike path at Newlins Mill Road Northeast East
Bike path at Newlins Mill Road Southwest West
Bike path at Stocker Mill Road Northwest North
Bike path at Stocker Mill Road Southeast South
Bike path at Stones Crossing Road Northeast East
Bike path at Stones Crossing Road Southwest West
Bike path at Tamlynn Court Northeast East
Bike path at William Penn Highway Northwest North
Bike path at William Penn Highway Southeast South
153. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 180-22 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:532
BAYARD STREET
A. At Edamy Street: no-outlet sign.
BERKELEY STREET
A. No-parking signs on both sides of Berkeley Street designating an area
along both sides of said Berkeley Street as a no-parking zone,
commencing at the intersection of Berkeley Street with William Penn
Highway and proceeding therefrom in a northerly direction along both
sides of Berkeley Street to the private driveways connected to said
Berkeley Street, a distance of approximately 100 feet as follows:
(1) One sign on the east side of Berkeley Street facing south.
(2) One sign on the west side of Berkeley Street facing north.
B. At Erie Street: no outlet sign.
BERKS STREET
A. At 307 Berks Street facing north: a handicapped sign.
B. At 56-58 Berks Street facing south: a reserved handicapped parking
sign.
C. At Oregon Street: no-outlet sign.
D. At Freemansburg Avenue facing east: no-left-hand-turn sign.
E. On the west side of Berks, north of Moore, facing north: watch children
sign.
F. One-way signs:
(1) At 56-58 Berks Street facing west: one sign.
(2) At Moore Street facing east: two signs.
(3) At Moore Street facing west: two signs.
G. Do not enter signs.
(1) At 56-58 and 51 Berks Street facing south: two signs.
(2) At Moore Street facing south: two signs.
BLAIR STREET
A. At Glen Avenue: no-outlet sign.
B. No-parking signs on east side of Blair Street north of Freemansburg
Avenue designating an area along the municipal fire station as a noparking
zone.
(1) Three signs on east side of Blair Street facing south.
BLENHEIM DRIVE
A. At 2 Blenheim Drive: no-parking sign.
BRENTWOOD AVENUE
A. No-parking-here-to-corner signs.
(1) East side of the street facing south: one sign.
B. On the east side of Brentwood, north of Cresmont: watch children sign.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:533
BROAD STREET
A. On north side of Broad, at intersection of Broad and Stephens: watch
children sign.
BROOKWOOD LANE
A. At Tatamy Road: no-thru-street sign.
BURROWES STREET
A. On north side of Burrowes, east of Williamson: watch children sign.
B. On north side of Burrowes, west of Leeman: watch children sign.
CAMDEN STREET
A. At Arlington Street: no-outlet sign.
CARBON STREET
A. On Carbon Street at Freemansburg Avenue: no-left-turn sign.
CAROLYN STREET
A. No-trucks signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
B. No-parking signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
(2) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
C. Do not enter signs.
(1) At Old Nazareth Road facing west: two signs.
D. One-way signs.
(1) At Old Nazareth Road facing east: one sign.
CAROUSEL LANE
A. One-way signs.
(1) At Central Drive facing east: one sign.
(2) At Central Drive facing west: one sign.
CENTRAL DRIVE
A. One-way signs.
(1) At Carousel Lane facing south: one sign.
(2) At Carousel Lane facing north: one sign.
(3) At Saddle Lane facing south: one sign.
(4) At Saddle Lane facing north: one sign.
CHAIN DAM ROAD
A. One-way signs designating Chain Dam Road for a total distance in
Palmer Township of 7,715 feet from Audubon Avenue to Stones
Crossing and Sutton Road as a one-way street for vehicular traffic in a
westerly direction only as follows:
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:534
(1) Three signs on the south side of Chain Dam Road facing north at
the intersections of Chain Dam Road and Audubon Avenue, Chain
Dam Road and Gordon Drive, Chain Dam Road and Southwood
Drive, and Chain Dam Road and Greening Drive.
B. Do-not-enter signs designating Chain Dam Road for a total distance
in Palmer Township of 7,715 feet from Audubon Avenue to Stones
Crossing and Sutton Road as a one-way street for vehicular traffic in a
westerly direction only as follows:
(1) One sign on the south side of Chain Dam Road facing north at
the intersections of Chain Dam Road and Audubon Avenue, Chain
Dam Road and Glen Avenue, the east side of Stones Crossing and
Sutton Road, and the west side of Stones Crossing and Sutton
Road.
C. No-parking signs on the south side of Chain Dam Road designating an
area along the south side of Chain Dam Road as a no-parking zone,
commencing at the intersection of Chain Dam Road and Applewood
Drive and proceeding therefrom a distance of 50 feet east and 100 feet
west as follows:
(1) Two signs on the south side of Chain Dam Road facing east.
CHARLES COURT
A. At Camelot Drive: no-outlet sign.
CHARLOTTE AVENUE
A. At Watson Street South: no-outlet sign.
B. No-parking signs on both sides of Charlotte Avenue designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Charlotte Avenue and
Greenwood Avenue and proceeding in a westerly direction along both
sides of Charlotte Avenue, a distance of approximately 175 feet as
follows:
(1) One sign on the north side of Charlotte Avenue facing east.
(2) One sign on the south side of Charlotte Avenue facing west.
C. Between 2900 and 2914 Charlotte Avenue facing west: a reserved
parking sign.
CHELSEA STREET
A. At Hackett Avenue: no-outlet sign.
CLOVER HOLLOW ROAD
A. At Upper Way Road: watch children sign.
COLONIAL COURT
A. At Jonathon Drive: no-outlet sign.
COLUMBIA STREET
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:535
A. No-parking signs on both sides of Columbia Street designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Columbia Street and
27th Street and proceeding in a westerly direction along both sides of
Columbia Street, a distance of approximately 300 feet as follows:
(1) Two signs on the north side of Columbia Street facing east.
(2) One sign on the north side of Columbia Street facing east: permit
only, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(3) One sign on the south side of Columbia Street facing east: permit
only, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
COMMERCE LANE
A. No-parking-on-this-side signs on south side of Commerce Lane
designating a no-parking zone, commencing at the intersection of
Commerce Lane and McFadden Road and proceeding in a westerly
direction, a distance of approximately 400 feet, and an easterly
direction, a distance of approximately 500 feet as follows:
(1) One sign on the south side of Commerce Lane facing east.
(2) Three signs on the south side of Commerce Lane facing west.
COMMUNITY DRIVE
A. At Northampton Street: no-outlet sign.
COOLIDGE STREET
A. No-outlet signs on the northeast corner of Park Avenue and Coolidge
Street facing south and on the northwest corner of Park Avenue and
Coolidge Street facing south.
CORPORATE DRIVE
A. At Northampton Street: no-thru-street sign.
CORRIERE ROAD
A. The maximum speed limit between Van Buren Road and Tatamy Road
shall be 35 miles per hour.
B. Truck traffic shall be prohibited between Tatamy Road and Van Buren
Road except for vehicles making local deliveries and pickups. The
Township shall erect signs designating alternate routes and informing
drivers of the prohibition of truck traffic in accordance with 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(d) and (e).
C. At Heritage Lane: no-outlet sign.
D. No-parking signs at bike path entrance.
(1) North side of street facing south: two signs.
E. At Van Buren Road: large double-arrow sign.
COUNTRY SIDE COURT
A. At Water Wheel Lane: no-outlet sign.
COURTNEY COURT
A. At Southwood Drive: no-outlet sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:536
CRAIGIE STREET
A. No-parking signs on both sides of Craigie Street designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Craigie Street and
Columbia Street and proceeding in a northerly direction along both
sides of Craigie Street, a distance of approximately 450 feet as follows:
(1) One sign on the west side of Craigie Street facing south: permit
only, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(2) Three signs on the east side of Craigie Street facing north: permit
only, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
B. At 75 Craigie Street facing north: reserved handicapped parking sign.
CREST BOULEVARD
A. Do not enter signs.
(1) Two signs prohibiting traffic traveling westward to enter
eastbound lane at Clairmont Avenue.
(2) Two signs prohibiting traffic traveling eastward to enter
westbound lane at Clairmont Avenue.
(3) Two signs prohibiting traffic traveling eastward to enter
westbound lane at Creek View Court.
(4) One sign prohibiting traffic traveling westward to enter
eastbound lane at Creek View Court.
CRESTVIEW AVENUE
A. On the north side of Crestview, west of Meadow: watch children sign.
CROSSING COURT
A. At Stones Crossing Road: no-outlet sign.
DAKOTA DRIVE
A. At Newlins Mill Road: no-outlet sign.
DANBERRY DRIVE
A. At Farmhouse Court: no-outlet sign.
DIVISION STREET
A. At Hobson Street: large double-arrow sign.
DUKE COURT
A. At Queen Street: no-outlet sign.
DUNKLE STREET
A. At Guyton Street: no-outlet sign.
B. On east side of Dunkle, south of Guyton: watch children sign.
C. No-parking signs on west side of Dunkle Street designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Dunkle Street and
Oregon Street and proceeding in a southerly direction along a distance
of approximately 250 feet as follows:
(1) Two signs on the west side of Dunkle Street facing north.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:537
D. No-parking signs on west side of Dunkle Street designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Dunkle Street and
Freemansburg Avenue and proceeding in a southerly direction along a
distance of approximately 350 feet as follows:
(1) Two signs on the west side of Dunkle Street facing north
EDAMY STREET
A. At William Penn Highway: no-outlet sign.
EDGEWOOD AVENUE
A. No-parking signs.
(1) Two signs on south side of Edgewood Avenue facing west.
B. Pedestrian signs.
(1) One sign on south side of Edgewood Avenue facing west:
pedestrian ahead sign.
(2) One sign on north side of Edgewood Avenue facing east:
pedestrian ahead sign.
(3) One sign on south side of Edgewood Avenue facing west: yield
here to pedestrian.
(4) One sign on north side of Edgewood Avenue facing east: yield
here to pedestrian.
EDIE LANE
A. At Middle Court: no-outlet sign.
ELWOOD STREET
A. On east side of Elwood, north of William Penn: watch children sign.
FAIRFIELD COURT
A. At Clairmont Avenue: no-outlet sign.
FAIRVIEW AVENUE
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: eight signs.
B. No-parking 6:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: five signs.
FARMERS VILLE ROAD – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 0.4 mile.
A. Snow emergency signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
(2) North side of the street facing west: one sign.
(3) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
B. On Farmersville Road at Crestview and Devon: park area sign.
C. On the east side of Farmersville, north of John: watch children sign.
D. No-truck sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:538
(1) On south side of Farmersville Road facing west: one sign.
E. Offset side road signs.
(1) On south side of Farmersville Road facing west: one sign.
(2) On north side of Farmersville Road facing east: one sign.
FIRETHORNE DRIVE
A. At Louise Street: no-outlet sign.
FISCHER ROAD
A. At Queen Street: large double-arrow sign.
B. On west side of Fischer, north of Eldridge: stop ahead sign.
FLORIAN AVENUE
A. Watch children signs.
(1) On the north side of Florian, facing east: one sign.
(2) On the south side of Florian, west of Woodside, facing west: one
sign.
FORKS STREET
A. At Blair Street: large single-arrow sign.
FOX HILL ROAD
A. At Van Buren Road: no-outlet sign.
FREEDOM TERRACE
A. At 90 Freedom Terrace facing west: a handicapped sign.
B. At Olde Penn Drive: no-outlet sign.
FREEMANSBURG AVENUE – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 1.6
miles.
A. Speed limit signs (40 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: four signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: three signs.
B. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
C. No-passing-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: nine signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: eight signs.
D. No-parking signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: three signs.
(a) From 3240 Freemansburg Avenue to Carbon Street.
(b) In front of 2722 Freemansburg Avenue.
(2) North side of the street facing east: three signs.
(a) In front of 2722 Freemansburg Avenue.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:539
E. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) No left turn.
(a) At intersection of Freemansburg Avenue and Carbon Street on
the north side of the street facing east.
(b) At intersection of Freemansburg Avenue and Berks Street on
the north side of the street facing east.
(2) No right turn.
(a) At intersection of Freemansburg Avenue and Carbon Street on
the south side of the street facing west.
(3) Stop here on red.
(a) At intersection of Freemansburg Avenue and Mine Lane Road
on the south side of the street facing west.
(4) Bicycle warning.
(a) On south side of street facing west.
(b) On north side of street facing east.
GARY STREET
A. At Sandy Lane: no-outlet sign.
GEORGE COURT
A. At Swanson Street: no-outlet sign.
GLEN AVENUE
A. On Glen Avenue: watch children sign.
GLENFIELD COURT
A. At Clairmont Avenue: no-outlet sign.
GREENHILL AVENUE
A. Southbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Edgewood intersection from
right: intersection sign.
B. Southbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Hillcrest intersection from
left: T-intersection sign.
C. Southbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Maywood intersection from
left: key-intersection sign.
D. Northbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Maywood intersection from
right: T-intersection sign.
E. Northbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Hillcrest intersection from
right: intersection sign.
F. Northbound on Greenhill Avenue, showing Edgewood intersection from
left: curb sign.
GREENPOND ROAD – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 0.7 mile.
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: five signs.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:540
(2) South side of the street facing west: six signs.
(3) One 35-mph sign on the north side of the street facing west.
B. Snow emergency signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: three signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
GREENWAY STREET
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: four signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: four signs.
GREENWOOD AVENUE
A. Speed limit signs designating Greenwood Avenue for a total mileage
in Palmer Township of 0.6 mile from William Penn Highway to
Northampton Street as a thirty-five-mile-per-hour speed limit zone as
follows:
(1) Three signs on the east side of Greenwood Avenue facing south.
(2) Four signs on the west side of Greenwood Avenue facing north.
GROVE STREET
A. At Oakwood Street: no-outlet sign.
B. On north side of Grove, west of Kingwood: watch children sign/left
reverse turn sign
GRUVER AVENUE
A. Speed limit signs designating Gruver Avenue for a total mileage in
Palmer Township of 0.6 mile from Hackett Avenue to Park Avenue as a
twenty-five-mile-per-hour speed limit zone as follows:
(1) Six signs on the north side of Gruver Avenue facing east.
(2) Five signs on the south side of Gruver Avenue facing west.
(3) One sign on the south side of Gruver Avenue facing east.
B. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Slippery when wet.
(a) On south side of street facing west.
(2) Hidden driveway.
(a) On north side of street facing east.
GUYTON STREET
A. At Anna Marie Street: no-outlet sign.
HACKETT AVENUE
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:541
B. On both sides of Hackett Avenue from Tatamy Road to Greenhill Road:
no-parking sign.
C. On east side of Hackett, north of Gruver: stop ahead sign.
D. On south side of Hackett, west from Tatamy: do not pass sign.
E. On south side of Hackett, east from Ludlow: right turn with side road
left sign.
HARTLEY AVENUE
A. At Hartley Avenue and Greenwood Avenue: T-intersection sign.
B. On south side of Hartley Avenue from area of Chrin driveway east to
Greenwood Avenue: no-parking sign.
HAUPT STREET
A. On south side of Haupt, west of Stones Crossing: watch children sign.
HAWTHORNE COURT
A. At Van Buren Road: no-outlet sign.
HAYMONT DRIVE
A. At Gruver Avenue: no-outlet sign.
B. At Lawnherst Avenue: large single-arrow sign.
HAY TERRACE
A. At Watson Street: no-outlet sign.
HECKTOWN ROAD
A. Speed limit signs designating Hecktown Road from the Palmer
Township/Lower Nazareth Township boundary line in an easterly
direction to Fischer Road as a thirty-five-mile-per-hour speed limit zone
as follows: a sign located 100 feet east of the intersection of Hecktown
Road and Clearview Street facing west and a sign 100 feet west of the
intersection of Hecktown Road and Clearview Street facing west.
HERMITAGE AVENUE
A. Watch children signs.
(1) On south side of Hermitage, east of Fischer: one sign.
(2) On north side of Hermitage, east of Martin: one sign.
HIGHLAND DRIVE
A. At Northgate Boulevard: no-outlet sign.
B. End-of-roadway signs.
(1) End of street facing south: two signs.
HIGH POINT COURT
A. At Donald Street: no-outlet sign.
HILLCREST DRIVE
A. At Greenhill Avenue: no-outlet sign.
B. At Park Road: large single-arrow sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:542
C. On west side of Hillcrest, south of Maywood: right turn sign.
HILLVIEW AVENUE
A. At Gruver Avenue: no-thru-street sign.
B. At Kings Avenue: large double-arrow sign.
C. On west side of Hillview, south of Eugene: no-outlet sign.
D. On west side of Hillview, north of Hackettsview: watch children sign.
HOBSON STREET
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) West side of the street facing north: four signs.
(2) West side of the street facing south: two signs.
(3) East side of the street facing south: three signs.
B. Three handicapped parking signs on the east side of Hobson Street
designating an area along the said east side of Hobson Street as
a handicapped parking zone, commencing near the intersection of
Hobson Street and Oregon Street and extending for a total distance of
75 feet.
C. At Tamlynn Lane: no-outlet sign.
HOWARD LANE
A. At Melissa Drive: no-outlet sign.
B. On west side of street facing north: no-parking sign.
IVY COURT
A. At Applewood Drive: no-outlet sign.
JEREMY COURT
A. At Melissa Drive: no-outlet sign.
JEWEL STREET
A. No-left-turn signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
JOHN STREET
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
JONES BOULEVARD
A. One-hour parking, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., weekdays.
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: three signs.
JUNIPHER
A. At Stones Crossing and Junipher: watch children sign.
KATHRYN STREET
A. At Washington Street: no-thru-street sign.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:543
KEANE STREET
A. At Wentworth Place: no-outlet sign.
KINGSTON STREET
A. At Nazareth Road: watch children sign.
KINGWOOD STREET
A. At Grove Street: no-outlet sign.
B. No-parking signs on both sides of Kingwood Street designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Kingwood Street and
William Penn Highway and proceeding in a southerly direction along a
distance of approximately 100 feet as follows:
(1) Two signs on the east side of Kingwood Street facing south.
(2) One sign on the west side of Kingwood Street facing north.
C. On west side of Kingwood, south of William Penn: watch children sign.
LAUBACH LANE
A. On south side of street facing west: right curve sign.
LAWNHERST AVENUE
A. At Haymont Drive: large single-arrow sign.
LEEMAN STREET
A. On east side of Leeman, south of Freemansburg: watch children sign.
LEHIGH DRIVE
A. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Bridge may be icy sign.
(a) On south side of Lehigh, west of 25th Street: one sign.
(2) Right curve sign.
(a) On east side of Lehigh facing south: one sign.
(3) Stop ahead sign.
(a) On south side of Lehigh, west of 25th Street: one sign.
(4) Left curve signs.
(a) On east side of Lehigh facing north: two signs.
(5) Park entrance sign.
(a) On east side of Lehigh west of 25th Street: one sign.
LIBERTY STREET
A. At Watson Street: no-outlet sign.
B. On north side of Liberty, west of Greenwood: watch children sign.
LIEBERMAN TERRACE
A. At 25th Street: no-outlet sign.
LOGAN DRIVE
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:544
A. At Van Buren Road: no-outlet sign.
LORD COURT
A. At Swanson Street: no-outlet sign.
LOWER WAY ROAD
A. At Upper Way Road: watch children sign.
LUDLOW STREET
A. On east side of Ludlow, north of Gruver: watch children sign.
MAPLECROFT AVENUE
A. At Westgate Avenue: no-outlet sign.
B. On east side of Maplecroft, north of Old Nazareth: watch children sign.
MARISKA LANE
A. At Tatamy Road: no-outlet sign.
B. At Tatamy Road: watch children sign.
MARTIN STREET
A. At Eldridge Avenue: large double-arrow sign.
MARWOOD LANE
A. At Newburg Road: no-outlet sign.
MILFORD STREET
A. Bicycle warning signs.
(1) On west side of Milford facing north: one sign.
(2) On east side of Milford facing south: one sign.
MILL BROOK COURT
A. At Mill Race Drive: no-truck sign except local deliveries.
MILL RACE DRIVE
A. At Mill Brook Court: no-truck sign except local deliveries.
MINE LANE ROAD
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) West side of the street in proximity to LaBarre Park facing north:
three signs.
(2) East side of the street in proximity of LaBarre Park facing south:
one sign.
B. Stop here on red signs.
(1) At Freemansburg Avenue facing north: one sign.
(2) At Freemansburg Avenue facing south: one sign.
C. At Nicholas Street: large double-arrow sign.
D. On west side of Mine Lane south of Nicholas: bicycle warning sign.
MORRIS STREET
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:545
A. At Hermitage Avenue: no-outlet sign.
NEWBURG ROAD
A. Speed limit signs (40 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
(3) South side of the street facing east: one sign.
B. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Signal ahead sign.
(a) On south side of street facing west: one sign.
(2) Do not pass sign.
(a) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
NEWLINS MILL ROAD
A. No-trucks signs.
(1) North and south sides of the street at Tatamy Road facing east.
(2) North and south sides of the street at 2280 Newlins Mill Road
facing west.
(3) North and south sides of the street at McFadden Road facing east.
(4) North and south sides of the street at Van Buren Road facing west.
(5) East side of the street at Bushkill Drive facing west.
(6) West side of the street at Bushkill Drive facing east.
B. Truck Route with left arrow signs.
(1) North side of the street across from 2280 Newlins Mill Road
facing south.
(2) South side of the street across from 2357 Newlins Mill Road
facing north.
(3) South side of the street at McFadden facing west.
C. Truck route with a right arrow sign.
(1) At McFadden Road facing east.
D. No-parking signs on south side of Newlins Mill Road designating a noparking
zone, commencing at the intersection of Newlins Mill Road and
Van Buren Road and proceeding in a easterly direction along a distance
of approximately 420 feet as follows:
(1) Three signs on the south side of Newlins Mill Road facing west.
E. No-parking signs.
(1) On south side of Newlins Mill, west of McFadden facing west: one
sign.
(2) On north side of Newlins Mill, west of McFadden facing east: one
sign.
F. Miscellaneous signs.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:546
(1) Stop ahead signs.
(a) On south side of street, west of Tatamy facing west: one sign.
(b) On west side of street, north of Bushkill facing north: two
signs.
(2) Pedestrian/bicycle warning signs.
(a) On west side of street, north of Bushkill facing south: one sign.
(b) On east side of street, north of Bushkill facing north: one sign.
(3) Lane-use control signs.
(a) On north side of street, east of Van Buren facing east: one
sign.
NICHOLAS STREET
A. On south side of Nicholas, east of Mine Lane: watch children sign/left
reverse turn sign.
NICOLE PLACE
A. At Sheridan Drive: no-outlet sign.
NORTHAMPTON STREET – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 0.6 mile
(Wood Street to Greenwood Avenue).
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: four signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: four signs.
B. Snow emergency signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: three signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: three signs.
C. No-trucks signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
(2) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
D. No-parking signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: four signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
E. Right lane must turn right signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
F. Left lane must turn left signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: two signs.
G. No-thru-street sign.
(1) At Watson Street: one sign.
NORTHGATE BOULEVARD
A. No-parking signs.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:547
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
(2) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
NORTH RIDGE COURT
A. At Northwood Avenue: no-outlet sign.
NORTHVIEW AVENUE
A. At Rocky Lane: no-outlet sign.
NORTHWOOD AVENUE
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: six signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: seven signs.
(3) South side of the street facing east: one sign.
(4) North side of the street facing west: one sign.
B. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Deer crossing sign.
(a) On south side of street, east of Van Buren facing west: one
sign.
(2) Stop ahead signs.
(a) On south side of street facing west: two signs.
(b) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
(3) Watch for ice signs.
(a) On south side of street facing west: one sign.
(b) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
(4) Side road signs.
(a) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
(b) On south side of street facing west: one sign.
(5) Right lane must turn right signs.
(a) On north side of street, east of Nazareth facing east: two
signs.
(6) Do not pass signs.
(a) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
(7) Road narrows signs.
(a) On south side of street, east of North Ridge facing west: one
sign.
(8) Road turns signs.
(a) On south side of street, west of Walter facing west: left turn
sign.
(b) On north side of street, east of Walter facing east: right turn
sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:548
NORWOOD AVENUE
A. At Lynnwood Avenue: no-outlet sign.
NULTON AVENUE
A. On west side of Nulton facing Hartley: two-way-arrow sign.
B. On west side of Nulton, north of William Penn facing north: no-parking
sign.
C. On east side of Nulton, north of Green Pond: watch children sign.
D. On east side on Nulton, north of Hartley facing south: left curve sign.
OAKDALE AVENUE
A. At Lynnwood Avenue: no-outlet sign.
OAKWOOD STREET
A. No-parking sign on the west side of Oakwood Street facing north,
designating an area along the west side of Oakwood Street as a noparking
zone, commencing at the northwest intersection of Oakwood
Street and the first private alley immediately south of William Penn
Highway and extending from that point a distance of 48 feet in a
northerly direction along the west side of said Oakwood Street.
B. End of roadway signs.
(1) End of street facing south: two signs.
OLD CARRIAGE DRIVE
A. At Central Drive: no-outlet sign.
OLD NAZARETH ROAD
A. At Park Avenue: do not enter/no-parking signs.
B. On north side of street, west of Route 248 facing east: no-truck sign.
C. On south side of street, east of Maplecraft facing west: yield ahead
sign.
ORCHID COURT
A. At Water Wheel Lane: no-outlet sign.
OREGON STREET
A. One-hour parking, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., weekdays.
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: three signs.
OXFORD DRIVE
A. At Plymouth Drive: no-outlet sign.
PARK AVENUE
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) South side of the street facing west: five signs.
(2) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:549
B. No-parking signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: four signs.
(2) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
C. No-trucks signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
(2) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
D. Snow emergency signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
E. No-passing-zone signs.
(1) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
(2) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
F. Right lane must turn right signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
G. Left lane must turn left signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
H. No-left-turn signs.
(1) At Old Nazareth Road facing east: one sign.
I. No-outlet signs.
(1) At Tatamy Road: one sign.
J. Watch children signs.
(1) On south side of street, east of Gruver facing east: one sign.
PARK ROAD
A. At Hillcrest Drive: large single-arrow sign.
B. On south side of street facing west: left turn sign.
PINE GROVE DRIVE
A. On east side of street, north of Northwood: watch children sign.
PRINCE STREET
A. At Queen Street facing south: watch children sign.
QUEEN STREET
A. On south side of street, east of Duke: watch children sign.
RIDGEWOOD ROAD
A. On north side of street, west of Nulton facing east: left turn sign.
ROSEMONT COURT
A. At Grove Street: no-outlet sign.
SADDLE LANE
A. One-way signs.
(1) At Central Drive facing east: one sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:550
(2) At Central Drive facing west: one sign.
SALES STREET
A. No-trucks signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
SANDY LANE
A. At Howard Lane: no-outlet sign.
SCHAEFFER AVENUE
A. At Schaeffer and Tamarack: watch children sign.
SEIP AVENUE – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 0.3 mile.
A. Speed limit signs (25 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: four signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
B. Snow emergency signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: three signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
C. No-trucks signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
D. No-parking signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
SHERWOOD ROAD
A. At Marc Lane: no-outlet sign.
SHRINE AVENUE
A. On east side of street, north of Agnes: watch children sign.
SPRING GARDEN STREET
A. On south side of street, east of Greenwood: watch children sign.
STEPHENS STREET
A. On west side of street, south of Carolyn: watch children sign.
STOCKER MILL ROAD
A. Pedestrian signs.
(1) On south side of street facing west: one sign.
(2) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
B. Bicycle warning signs.
(1) On south side of street facing west: one sign.
(2) On north side of street facing east: one sign.
STONECROFT DRIVE
A. At Gruver Avenue: no-thru-street sign.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:551
STONES CROSSING ROAD – William Penn Highway to end, total mileage:
1.4 miles.
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) West side of the street facing north: two signs.
(2) East side of the street between William Penn Highway and
Freemansburg Avenue facing south: two signs.
(3) East side of the street facing north: one sign.
B. Snow emergency signs.
(1) West side of the street facing north: two signs.
(2) East side of the street facing south: one sign.
C. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) East side of the street facing south: two signs.
D. Speed limit signs (25 miles per hour).
(1) West side of the street between Freemansburg Avenue and Sutton
Place facing north: three signs.
(2) East side of the street between Freemansburg Avenue and Sutton
Place facing south: two signs.
E. At Stones Crossing and Juniper: watch children sign.
F. Watch children signs.
(1) On east side of street, north of William Penn: one sign.
(2) On west side of street, south of Camden: one sign.
G. On west side of street, south of Haupt: signal ahead sign.
H. At Freemansburg Avenue: stop here on red sign.
SWANSON STREET
A. At Old Nazareth Road: no-outlet sign.
TAMARACK PATH
A. At Juniper Avenue: no-outlet sign.
TAMLYNN COURT
A. At Hobson Street: no-outlet sign.
TATAMY ROAD – Total mileage in Palmer Township: three miles.
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) East side of the street facing south: six signs.
(2) West side of the street facing north: eight signs.
B. Speed limit signs (55 miles per hour).
(1) West side of the street facing north: one sign.
C. No-passing-zone signs.
(1) East side of the street facing south: six signs.
(2) West side of the street facing north: 10 signs.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:552
D. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) East side of the street facing south: three signs.
(2) West side of the street facing north: seven signs.
E. End-no-passing-zone signs.
(1) East side of the street facing south: one sign.
F. Begin-no-passing-zone signs.
(1) West side of the street facing north: one sign.
(2) East side of the street facing north: two signs.
G. No-passing-zone-ahead signs.
(1) West side of the street facing north: one sign.
(2) East side of the street facing north: two signs.
H. Truck-no-left-turn sign.
(1) East side facing south at Newlins Mill Road.
I. Truck-no-right-turn sign.
(1) West side facing north at Newlins Mill Road.
J. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) Directing traffic northbound and southbound on Tatamy Road to
Danforth Drive (for MCS Industries and Hess Wood Recycling).
(2) At Mariska Lane: no-outlet sign.
(3) At Walter Avenue: one-way sign.
(4) On west side of street, south of Walter: end reduced gear zone
sign.
(5) On east side of street, south of Walter: left turn sign.
(6) On west side of street, south of Stocker Mill facing north: hill sign.
(7) On west side of street, north of Hackett facing north: no-truck
sign.
(8) At Bushkill Creek: open-grate bridge sign.
(9) On east side of street, north of Danforth facing south: bump sign.
(10) On west side of street, south of Northampton: right curve sign.
K. Watch children signs.
(1) On east side of street, north of Walter: one sign.
(2) On west side of road, north of Park Avenue: one sign.
L. Cross road signs.
(1) On east side of street, south of Newlins Mill facing south: one
sign.
(2) On west side of street, north of Newlins Mill facing north: one
sign.
M. School panel signs.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:553
(1) On both sides of street near Tracy Elementary School: two signs.
N. Side road signs.
(1) On east side of street, south of Stocker Mill facing south: one sign.
(2) On west side of street, north of Stocker Mill facing north: one
sign.
O. Stop ahead signs.
(1) On west side of street, north of Northwood facing north: one sign.
(2) On east side of street, south of Northwood facing south: one sign.
P. End school zone signs.
(1) On west side of street, south of Tracy Elementary School: one
sign.
(2) On east side of street, north of Tracy Elementary School: one sign.
VAN BUREN ROAD
A. Between Van Buren Road and Northwood Avenue: 35 miles per hour
speed limit sign.
B. Truck-no-left-turn sign.
(1) West side of street facing north at Newlins Mill Road.
C. Palmer Industrial Park sign with an arrow directing traffic north.
(1) At Van Buren Road directing traffic north to Main Street.
D. On east side of Van Buren facing Hollo: large double-arrow sign.
E. Stop ahead signs.
(1) On west side of street, south of Northwood facing north: one sign.
(2) On west side of street, south of Hollo facing north: one sign.
F. No-right-turn signs.
(1) At Newlins Mill Road facing north: one sign.
(2) At Newlins Mill Road facing south: one sign.
G. Miscellaneous signs.
(1) At Newlins Mill Road: do not enter sign.
(2) On east side of street, north of Nazareth: do not pass sign.
(3) On south side of street, east of Brentwood: watch children sign.
(4) On west side of street, south of Hollo facing north: left lane must
turn left sign.
(5) On east side of street facing south, by Fox Run Park: six noparking
signs.
VAUGHN STREET
A. At Sheridan Drive: no-outlet sign.
VERA CIRCLE
A. At Heritage Lane: no-outlet sign.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23
160:554
VIRGINIA STREET
A. On north side of street, east of Blair: no-outlet sign.
WALTER AVENUE
A. Do not enter signs.
(1) At Northwood Avenue facing north: two signs
(2) On north side of street, south of Northwood: one sign.
B. One-way signs.
(1) At Tatamy Road facing west: one sign.
C. Stop ahead signs.
(1) On south side of street, south of Northwood: one sign.
WASHINGTON STREET
A. End of roadway signs.
(1) End of street facing west: two signs.
B. At Kathryn Street: no-thru-street sign.
C. At Lilac Lane: no-outlet sign.
WATER WHEEL LANE
A. Impaired child signs,
(1) On south side of street, east of Orchid: one sign.
(2) On north side of street, east of Cobblestone: one sign.
WATSON STREET
A. On west side of street, north of Washington: watch children sign.
WESTGATE AVENUE
A. On south side of street, east of Old Nazareth: watch children sign.
WEST LANE
A. On west side of street, south of Northwood: watch children sign.
WHITEHALL AVENUE
A. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) West side of the street facing north: one sign.
WHITNEY AVENUE
A. On east side of street, north of Freemansburg: watch children sign.
WILLIAM PENN HIGHWAY – Total mileage in Palmer Township: 1.6 miles.
A. Speed limit signs (35 miles per hour).
(1) North side of the street facing east: two signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: four signs.
B. No-passing-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: 11 signs.
(2) South side of the street facing west: nine signs.
§ 180-23 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23
160:555
C. No-parking-zone signs.
(1) North side of the street facing east: one sign.
(a) At 3100 William Penn Highway.
(2) South side of the street facing west: one sign.
(a) At 3100 William Penn Highway.
D. At William Penn Highway in area of Easton Area High School: school
zone sign.
E. Left lane must turn left signs.
(1) At Kingwood Street: one sign.
(2) On south side of street, east of Oakwood: one sign.
F. At Stones Crossing Road: no-turn-on-red sign.
G. On south side of street, east of Stones Crossing: left curve sign.
H. On south side of street, east of Stones Crossing: watch children sign.
WILLIAMSON STREET
A. Do not enter signs.
(1) At 25th Street facing south: two signs.
B. At Burrowes Street: one-way sign.
C. On west side of street, south of Burrowes: watch children sign.
WOODLAWN AVENUE
A. No-thru-street signs.
(1) At Park Avenue: one sign.
(2) At Woodridge Terrace: one sign.
B. End of roadway signs.
(1) End of street facing south: two signs.
§ 180-23.1. Parking fines. [Added 3-26-1991 by Ord. No. 239]
The following fines shall be in effect for all parking violations within the
Township of Palmer:
A. Parking in a prohibited zone: $10.00.
B. Parking in a fire zone: $15.00.
C. Parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant: $15.00.
D. Parked within 20 feet of an intersection: $10.00.
E. Parked within 30 feet of a stop or yield sign: $10.00.
F. Parked on a sidewalk: $10.00.
G. Parked on a crosswalk: $10.00.
§ 180-23 PALMER CODE § 180-23.1
160:556
§ 180-23.2. Speed limits. [Added 5-7-2001 by Ord. No. 307]
H. Blocking a driveway: $10.00.
I. Blocking a fire station: $15.00.
J. Facing against traffic movement: $10.00.
K. Blocking snow removal equipment: $15.00.
L. Parked on school property: $10.00.
M. Parked in a handicap zone: $15.00.
N. All and any other miscellaneous parking violations: $10.00.
A. The maximum speed limit for the local roads under the control and
supervision of the Township of Palmer and listed below shall be 25 miles
per hour.
B. Signs notifying drivers of the newly established speed limit shall be
posted in the manner prescribed in Pa.C.S.A. § 3362 (b).
Name of Street Limits
Agnes Street Entire length
Aicher Drive Entire length
Allen Street Entire length
Alpine Drive Entire length
Anna Marie Street Entire length
Applewood Drive Entire length
Arch Street Entire length
Arlington Street Entire length
Atkins Street Entire length
Auburn Avenue Entire length
Audubon Avenue From Applewood Drive to Chain Dam
Road
Avon Street Entire length
Babbling Brook Road Entire length
Baldwin Drive Entire length
Barberry Lane Entire length
Bayard Street From Township line east to dead end
Beacon Street Entire length
Beaver Lane Entire length
Bedford Road Entire length
Berkeley Street Entire length
§ 180-23.1 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23.2
160:557
Name of Street Limits
Berks Street Entire length
Blair Street Entire length
Blenheim Drive Entire length
Bonnie Lane Entire length
Brendan Road Entire length
Brentwood Avenue Entire length
Bridlepath Road Entire length
Broad Street Entire length
Brookwood Lane Entire length
Brynwood Drive Entire length
Burrowes Street Entire length
Bushkill Street Entire length
Butternut Lane Entire length
Camden Street Entire length
Camelot Drive Entire length
Carbon Street Entire length
Carolyn Street Entire length
Carousel Lane From Old Carriage Drive to Central
Drive
Carter Street Entire length
Cedar Street [Repealed
3-23-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-348]
Central Drive From Saddle Lane to Surrey Drive
Chain Dam Road Entire length
Charles Court Entire length
Charlotte Avenue Entire length
Chelsea Street Entire length
Chestnut Lane Entire length
Clairmont Avenue From Crest Boulevard to Glenfield Court
Clayton Street Entire length
Clearview Avenue Entire length
Clover Drive Entire length
Coach Lane Entire length
Colmar Street Entire length
Colonial Court Entire length
§ 180-23.2 PALMER CODE § 180-23.2
160:558
Name of Street Limits
Columbia Street Entire length
Corriere Road From Tatamy Road east to end of cul-desac
Craigie Street Entire length
Crescent Drive Entire length
Cresmont Avenue Entire length
Crestview Avenue Entire length
Crest Boulevard From Rt. 248 to Rocky Lane
Dalton Street Entire length
Danberry Street From Township line to cul-de-sac
Debbie Lane Entire length
Devon Drive Entire length
Diane Road Entire length
Division Street Entire length
Donald Street Entire length
Duke Court Entire length
Dunkle Street Entire length
Dusty Road Entire length
East Lane Entire length
Edamy Street Entire length
Edgemore Avenue Entire length
Edgewood Avenue Entire length
Edie Lane Entire length
Eichlin Street Entire length
Eldridge Avenue Entire length
Elwood Street Entire length
Erie Street Entire length
Eugene Street Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Farragut Street Entire length
Fayette Court Entire length
Firethorne Drive Entire length
Fischer Road From Hecktown Road to Seip Avenue
Fleetwood Drive Entire length
Fleetwood Street Entire length
§ 180-23.2 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23.2
160:559
Name of Street Limits
Fleetwood Street [Added
3-28-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-317]
Stones Crossing to the existing
Fleetwood Street
Florian Avenue Entire length
Forks Street Entire length
Francis Street Entire length
Freedom Terrace Entire length
Gary Street Entire length
George Court Entire length
Glen Avenue Entire length
Glenfield Court [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-310]
Entire length
Gordon Drive Entire length
Greenhill Avenue Entire length
Greening Drive Entire length
Greenway Street Entire length
Greenway Avenue Entire length
Grove Street Entire length
Guyton Street Entire length
Hackettsview Avenue Entire length
Haupt Street Entire length
Hawthorne Court Entire length
Hay Terrace Entire length
Haymont Drive Entire length
Heritage Lane Entire length
Hermitage Avenue Entire length
High Point Court Entire length
Highland Drive Entire length
Hillcrest Drive Entire length
Hillview Avenue Entire length
Hobson Street Entire length
Howard Lane Entire length
Howie Place Entire length
Huegel Avenue Entire length
Hunter Street Entire length
Ivy Court Entire length
§ 180-23.2 PALMER CODE § 180-23.2
160:560
Name of Street Limits
Jeffrey Lane Entire length
Jeremy Court Entire length
Jewel Street Entire length
John Street Entire length
Jonathon Drive Entire length
Jones Boulevard Entire length
Joseph Court Entire length
Juniper Avenue Entire length
Kathryn Street Entire length
Kaywood Drive Entire length
Keane Street Entire length
Kendon Drive Entire length
Kings Avenue Entire length
Kingwood Street Entire length
Lagond Street Entire length
Lawnherst Avenue Entire length
Lewis Street Entire length
Liberty Street Entire length
Lieberman Terrace Entire length
Lilac Lane Entire length
Lions Pool Road Entire length
Logan Drive Entire length
Lois Lane [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-310]
Entire length
Loomis Street Entire length
Lord Court Entire length
Louise Street Entire length
Ludlow Street Entire length
Lynnwood Avenue Entire length
Maple Lane Entire length
Maplecroft Avenue Entire length
Marc Lane Entire length
Martin Street Entire length
Marwood Lane Entire length
Mary Street Entire length
§ 180-23.2 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23.2
160:561
Name of Street Limits
Maywood Street Entire length
McIntosh Drive Entire length
Meadow Avenue Entire length
Melanie Street Entire length
Melissa Drive Entire length
Merion Avenue Entire length
Middle Court Entire length
Middle Place Entire length
Milford Street Entire length
Moore Street Entire length
Moravian Avenue Entire length
Morris Street Entire length
Mountainview Avenue Entire length
Newton Street Entire length
Nicholas Street From Mine Lane Road east to Grove
Street
Nicholas Street From Stones Crossing west to Township
line
Nicole Place Entire length
Northgate Boulevard Entire length
Northview Avenue Entire length
Norton Avenue Entire length
Norwood Avenue Entire length
Nulton Avenue North Entire length
Oak Lane Entire length
Oakdale Avenue Entire length
Oakwood Street Entire length
Old Carriage Drive From Saddle Lane to Saddle Lane
Old Nazareth Road Entire length
Old Orchard Drive Entire length
Olde Penn Drive Entire length
Oregon Street Entire length
Oxford Drive Entire length
Park Ridge Road Entire length
Park Road Entire length
Paul Street Entire length
§ 180-23.2 PALMER CODE § 180-23.2
160:562
Name of Street Limits
Peggy Street Entire length
Penns Grant Drive Entire length
Philip Street Entire length
Pike Street Entire length
Plymouth Drive Entire length
Prince Street Entire length
Queen Street Entire length
Quincy Avenue Entire length
Radcliffe Street Entire length
Ridgeline Lane Entire length
Ridgewood Road Entire length
Riverview Circle Entire length
Robin Road Entire length
Rocky Lane Entire length
Rosemont Court Entire length
Russet Drive Entire length
Saddle Lane From Rocky Lane to Central Drive
Sales Street Entire length
Sandy Lane Entire length
Schaffer Avenue Entire length
Scotty Drive [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-310]
Entire length
Sheridan Drive From Freemansburg Avenue to Township
line
Sherwood Road Entire length
Shrine Avenue Entire length
Spring Garden Street Entire length
Stephanie Drive Entire length
Stephens Street Entire length
Stocker Mill Road Entire length
Stonecroft Drive Entire length
Summit Avenue Entire length
Suray Drive From Old Carriage Drive to Central
Drive
Sutton Place Entire length
Sutton Road From Greening Drive to Township line
§ 180-23.2 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-23.2
160:563
Name of Street Limits
Swanson Street Entire length
Sycamore Drive Entire length
Tamarack Path Entire length
Tamlynn Lane Entire length
Timberlane Drive Entire length
Timber Ridge Drive Entire length
Twenty-seventh Street Entire length
Val Vista Drive Entire length
Vaughn Street Entire length
Vera Circle Entire length
Vermont Street Entire length
Victoria Lane Entire length
Virginia Street Entire length
Walter Avenue Entire length
Washington Street Entire length
Watson Street North Entire length
Watson Street South Entire length
Wayne Street Entire length
Wedgewood Drive Entire length
West Lane Entire length
Westgate Avenue Entire length
Whitehall Avenue Entire length
Whitfield Street Entire length
Whitney Avenue Entire length
Wilden Drive East Entire length
Wilden Drive South Entire length
Wilden Drive North Entire length
Wilden Drive West Entire length
Williamson Street Entire length
Wilmore Street Entire length
Winding Way Entire length
Windsor Street Entire length
Winfield Terrace From Stones Crossing to Township line
Woodlawn Avenue Entire length
Woodridge Terrace Entire length
Woodside Drive Entire length
§ 180-23.2 PALMER CODE § 180-23.2
160:564
§ 180-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-26-1991 by Ord. No.
239]
Violations of any of the signals, signs, controls, designations or restrictions
listed herein or in previous ordinances of Palmer Township shall be
prosecuted under the appropriate provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code,154 as amended.
§ 180-25. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and chapter and all parts thereof are
severable, and if any part of this ordinance and chapter or clause or
sentence hereof is for any reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining
provisions of this ordinance or chapter, or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township
that this ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or
invalid section not been included in this ordinance.
§ 180-26. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Name of Street Limits
York Place Entire length
154. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. ~ 101 et seq.
§ 180-23.2 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-26
160:565

ARTICLE V
Snow Emergency and Severe Weather Declarations
[Adopted 1-16-1995 by Ord. No. 258; amended in its entirety
8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-434]
§ 180-27. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Snow Emergency and Severe Weather Ordinance" and is supplementary
and in addition to the prior ordinances of Palmer Township establishing
vehicular regulations.
§ 180-28. Legislative authority.
The regulations for this ordinance have been fully reviewed, studied and
approved and found necessary by an engineering and traffic investigation
by the Palmer Township Public Services Director and the Palmer Township
Chief of Police. All regulations herein are established by the authority of the
laws of Pennsylvania, including the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. All devices
and signs used hereunder shall be of the type and kind and shall be installed
in a manner approved by the aforesaid laws and code.
§ 180-29. Declaration of Snow Emergency Level I; restrictions.
In the event of inclement weather where the snowfall is expected to or
does accumulate more than three inches or severe icing of the roadway is
expected or actually occurs on the roadway, the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors of Palmer Township, or the Vice Chairman in his/her absence,
may declare a Snow Emergency Level I. During this emergency, no vehicles
will be parked or left unattended on any designated snow emergency route,
as so designated by the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors approved
list of snow emergency routes. Any and all vehicles traversing the snow
emergency routes shall be required to have state-approved snow or allweather
tires or tires with chains. Any vehicle standard, disabled or parked
on these snow emergency routes will be towed at the vehicle owner's
expense, who shall pay the appropriate penalties for the violations hereof
and any storage fees as charged by the towing service. Snow Emergency
Level I declarations may be publicized via television, radio, newspaper,
internet, website, Facebook or other social media.
§ 180-30. Declaration of Snow Emergency Level II and severe
weather emergency restrictions.
A. In the event of inclement weather where the snowfall is expected to or
does accumulate more than three inches or severe icing of the roadway
is expected or actually occurs, or to facilitate the plowing and/or
removal of snow or application of antiskid materials or snow-melting
materials, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer
Township, or the Vice Chairman in his/her absence, may declare a Snow
Emergency Level II. Any and all vehicles traversing any Township
§ 180-27 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-30
160:567
§ 180-31. Impoundment of vehicles in violation; fines; nonpayment.
§ 180-32. Snow emergency routes.
The established snow emergency routes in the Township of Palmer are as
follows:
Name of Street Location
Baldwin Drive Jonathan Drive to Crescent Drive
Carolyn Street Greenwood Avenue to Nazareth Road
(Route 248)
Church Road Township line to Nulton Avenue
roads, state highways or cartways shall be required to have stateapproved
snow or all-weather tires or tires with chains. Any vehicle
stranded, disabled or parked on any Township road or property unless
said property has been designated as such parking facility, state
highway or cartway will be towed at the vehicle owner's expense,
who shall pay the appropriate penalties for the violations hereof and
any storage fees as charged by the towing service. Snow Emergency
Level II declarations may be publicized via television, radio, newspaper,
internet, website, Facebook or other social media.
B. In the event of severe weather, including, but not limited to, tornados,
hurricanes, tropical storms, thunder/lightning storms, high winds,
floods, and similar conditions, and in the aftermath of such storms or
conditions, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Palmer
Township, or the Vice Chairman in his/her absence, may declare a
severe weather emergency. Any vehicle stranded, disabled or parked on
any Township road or property, state highway or cartway will be towed
at the vehicle owner's expense, who shall pay the appropriate penalties
for the violations thereof and any storage fees as charged by the towing
service. Severe weather emergency declarations may designate specific
sections of the Township as affected areas and thus only those areas
may be subject to the parking restrictions. Severe weather declarations
may be publicized via television, radio, newspaper, internet, website,
Facebook or other social media, including by personal notification or
directed reverse 911 phone calls.
A. Township police officers, under the authority of the Palmer Township
Board of Supervisors, may remove from the right-of-way of any state
highway, Township road or cartway any vehicle which is stranded,
disabled or parked in violation of the provisions of this ordinance when
it is determined that such removal is necessary to facilitate the plowing
or removing of snow and ice or for any other lawful purpose.
B. Such vehicle will be impounded by the Board of Supervisors and issued
a parking ticket to the owner of the vehicle, which shall be paid in full in
the prescribed period of time or a commonwealth citation shall be
issued to the owner of the vehicle.
§ 180-30 PALMER CODE § 180-32
160:568
Name of Street Location
Corriere Road Township line to Van Buren Road
Corriere Road Van Buren Road to Tatamy Road
Crescent Drive Baldwin Drive to Sycamore Drive
Edgewood Avenue Greenhill Avenue to Township line
Farmersville Road Seip Avenue to Township line
Fischer Road Seip Avenue to Newburg Road
Glen Avenue Mine Lane Road to Grandview Drive
Grandview Drive Glen Avenue to Freemansburg Avenue
Greenhill Avenue Hackett Avenue to Edgewood Avenue
Green Pond Road Greenwood Avenue to Township line
Greenwood Avenue Freemansburg Avenue to Seip Avenue
Hecktown Road Township line to Fischer Road
Jonathan Drive Mine Lane Road to Baldwin Drive
Mine Lane Road Freemansburg Avenue to Chain Dam
Road
Newlins Mill Road Van Buren Road to Tatamy Road
Northampton Street Greenwood Avenue to 25th Street
North Nulton Avenue Farmersville Road to Green Pond Road
Northwood Avenue Van Buren Road to Bushkill Drive
Old Nazareth Road Park Avenue to Route 248
Park Avenue Route 248 to Tatamy Road
Sales Street Northampton Street to Nazareth Road
(Route 248)
Seip Avenue Old Nazareth Road to Fischer Road
Southwood Drive Stones Crossing Road to Mine Lane Road
Stones Crossing Road William Penn Highway to Sutton Place
Sycamore Drive Crescent Drive to Stones Crossing Road
Tatamy Road Park Avenue to Hackett Avenue
Van Buren Road Route 248 to Northwood Avenue
§ 180-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction before a District Justice in a summary
proceeding, be liable to and shall pay a fine of not more than $100 plus costs
for every violation, plus the fees for costs of removal, towing and storage of
said vehicle.
§ 180-32 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 180-34
160:569
§ 180-34. Legislative intent.
The intention of this ordinance is to further establish snow emergency
routes in the Township of Palmer and to be supplementary to the provisions
of previous ordinances in the Township of Palmer pertaining to vehicular
regulations. Only where the provisions of this ordinance are in direct
conflict with provisions of such previous ordinances, such previous
provisions shall be regarded as repealed. In all other instances, such
previous provisions are to remain in full force and effect, supplemented by
the provisions contained herein.
§ 180-35. Emergency exemption pertaining to all Township
employees with a commercial driver's license (CDL).
A. In the event a snow emergency is declared pursuant to § 180-29 or
180-30 of the Palmer Township Vehicle Regulations, and for the
duration of any such snow emergency, all employees with a CDL shall
be granted the following relief from the maximum driving times
specified under USDOT regulations set forth at 49 CFR 395.3, as
provided for by PennDOT pursuant to Pa. Code § 231.7.
B. If, after any twelve-hour period of continuous duty, an employee with a
CDL believes that safe operation of the assigned vehicle is no longer
possible due to fatigue, such employee shall notify an immediate
supervisor. After providing said notice, or upon the belief of the
immediate supervisor of the employee that safe operation of the
assigned vehicle is no longer possible due to fatigue, such employee
shall be granted an off-duty period of a minimum of five hours. The
immediate supervisor shall have the discretion to grant such additional
time as is believed necessary for the rest and revitalization of the
employee with a CDL. After such approved period of rest and
revitalization, the employee with a CDL shall return to duty and notify
an immediate supervisor of his or her return.
§ 180-34 PALMER CODE § 180-35
160:570
Chapter 184
WATER SUPPLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 81.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 124.
Sewer use — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
§ 184-1. Title.
This ordinance may be known and cited as the "Palmer Township Water
Supply Ordinance." The name of the water system established hereunder
shall be the "Palmer Township Municipal Water System."
§ 184-2. Water system established; boundaries.
There is hereby created and established a municipal water supply system
for Palmer Township, Northampton County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter called
the "Township"). Said system shall have the exclusive authorization to serve
the northern area of the Township, bounded on the south by the Shoeneck
Creek, on the west by the Township line, on the east by the Township line
and on the north by the southerly boundary line of the Borough of Tatamy
and the direct westerly extension of said line to the west Township line. The
said water system may also serve portions of the Township beyond the limits
set above, if such portions are unserved by any other public water supply
system.
§ 184-3. Water supply contracts.
The Township Board of Supervisors may contract with the Blue Mountain
Consolidated Water Company or any other company for the supply of water
into said water supply system upon such reasonable terms and conditions
as it shall deem proper. If necessary, wells may also be dug to provide or
supplement said supply of water.
§ 184-4. Physical construction.
The Township Board of Supervisors may contract for engineering, legal
work and construction services and materials to obtain, place and construct
such waterlines, pipes, wells, pumps, valves, meters, hydrants, storage
tanks and other facilities as may be necessary initially and from time to
time to establish, operate, maintain, extend and protect said water supply
system.
§ 180-35 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION § 184-5
160:571
§ 184-5. Appropriation of moneys.
In any one year, the Township Board of Supervisors may appropriate not
more than two mills on the dollar of the existing real property tax for the
purpose of creating and maintaining a revolving fund to be used in financing
the physical construction of the water system as outlined in § 184-4 of this
ordinance. Such revolving fund may also be begun by the issuance of a
general obligation bond in the nature of a note of said Township.
§ 184-6. Water use rates.
The said Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish a uniform
system of water rental use rates which shall be paid when due by all persons
or other entities making use of and drawing water from said water system. A
penalty of 5% shall be charged upon all bills for water use which are unpaid
for 30 or more days, and, after notice, the water supply may be shut off to
all premises for which municipal water bills are more than a total of 60 days
delinquent. In addition, municipal liens may be filed for unpaid bills.
§ 184-7. Connection.
All property owners abutting said water supply system shall, within 90 days
after notice by personal service or registered or certified mail from the
Township Board of Supervisors, connect with and use said system, except
those industries and farms not using water for human consumption which
are exempt by law from such connection. In case any owner shall, after
due notice, refuse or fail to connect to such system within said ninety-day
period, such owner shall be in violation of this ordinance, and in addition,
the Township Board of Supervisors, through its agents, may enter upon
said property and construct said connection and send an itemized bill,
which shall be payable forthwith with interest, to such property owners. In
addition, a municipal lien may be duly filed for such construction costs and
collected as provided by law.
§ 184-8. Administration.
The Township Supervisors may appoint such new or existing Township
personnel and adopt such forms and procedures as may be necessary to
carry out the intent of this ordinance.
§ 184-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1988 by Ord. No.
227]
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
shall in any way directly or indirectly violate or fail to comply with the
terms of this ordinance, or convert water from said system without
paying therefor, or tamper with or abuse or deface any part of the
system without right or duty, shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding before any District Magistrate, Alderman or Justice of the
Peace, be sentenced to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $600 or
§ 184-5 PALMER CODE § 184-9
160:572
§ 184-10. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and, in the event that any
part, section or provision of this ordinance is found by any court of record
to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect, it being the express intent
of the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors to have enacted this ordinance
without such invalid, illegal or unconstitutional provision.
Chapter 186
WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 32.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Vegetation growing in sidewalk area — See
Ch. 109, § 109-3N.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 186-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Right-of-Way and Weed Ordinance."
§ 186-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust or other entity,
including the officers of corporations and partners of partnerships.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any point within the opened or unopened full dedicated
width of a street or road opened to the public as shown on a map, plan or
other instrument.
STREET CURBLINES — The line formed by the edge of the curb or opened
cartway of a street or road opened to the public.
shall be committed to the Northampton County Prison for not more
than 30 days as provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis.
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
D. See also § 1-16F and G, regarding imposition of attorneys’ fees. [Added
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-402]
§ 184-9 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 186-3
186:573
§ 186-3. Clearance on all lots.
No person owning or occupying any lot or tract of ground near or adjoining
any street or road opened to the public shall erect or maintain any fence,
wall, planting or structure more than two feet in height, except a utility
pole, mailbox or sign otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance,155
within 10 feet of the street curblines or within or upon the street right-ofway.
§ 186-4. Clearance on corner lots.
In addition to the requirements of § 186-3, no person owning or occupying
any lot or tract of ground on or near a corner shall erect or maintain any
fence, wall, planting or structure more than two feet in height within 35 feet
of the intersection of the street curblines, except a utility pole.
§ 186-5. Removal by township; responsibility of owner.
Regardless of height or the existence of a variance, any fence, wall, planting
or structure within or upon the street right-of-way shall be subject to
removal by the township at any time to allow for visibility or improvements.
Persons owning or occupying property shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of all portions of an unpaved street right-of-way coincidental
with their lot.
§ 186-6. Noxious vegetation prohibited.
No person owning or occupying any lot or tract of ground shall permit
any noxious vegetation to grow or any grass or weeds or nonornamental
vegetation not grown for use as food for domestic animals or humans to
grow to a height in excess of six inches. Noxious vegetation shall include
but is not limited to the following: ragweed, goldenrod, poison ivy, poison
oak, poison sumac and other similar vegetation.
§ 186-7. Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board may, in cases of unnecessary hardship, grant a
variance from the above provisions of §§ 186-3 and 186-4.
§ 186-8. Notice to remove or trim; action by township.
Any township building, zoning or police or code officer or inspector may
give notice by personal service or certified mail to any person owning or
occupying any land that a violation of this ordinance exists upon said land.
Such notice shall require that such person remove or trim so as to correct
said violation within five days after receipt of such notice. If the violation is
not removed within five days, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance and, in
addition to the penalties of § 186-9, the same may be removed or trimmed
by or for the township and the costs of such removal collected from the
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 186-3 PALMER CODE § 186-8
186:574
person or persons in violation or filed as a municipal claim against the
property in question as provided by law.
§ 186-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-29-1981 by Ord. No.
191]
§ 186-10. Repeated violations.
Once the five-day period set forth in § 186-8 hereof has expired, each and
every additional five-day period a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 186-11. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any part of this
ordinance is found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
remaining provisions of this ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent
of the Board of Supervisors to have enacted this ordinance without such
invalid part.
§ 186-12. Repealer.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after enactment. Ordinance
No. 78 of May 16, 1966, as amended, and Ordinance No. 94 of May 20,
1968, are hereby repealed,156 as well as all ordinances inconsistent
herewith.
Chapter 190
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or who
takes part in any way in such violation shall be liable, upon conviction
before any Alderman, District Magistrate or Justice of the Peace in a
summary proceeding, to pay a fine or penalty to the township, and for
the use of the township, as follows: for a first offense, the cost of the
weed cutting and removal by the township as set forth in § 186-8 or the
sum of $100, whichever is greater; for the second offense, the sum of
$300; for the third and each subsequent offense, the sum of $500,
and,in default thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment in the
Northampton County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days as
provided by law.
B. Each day of violation of the particular code or ordinance applicable
shall be considered a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties
stated herein may be imposed on a daily basis. [Added 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 227]
C. For collection of fines and penalties, see § 1-16E of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. [Added 10-25-1988 by Ord. No. 227]
156. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 94 was formerly Art. I of this chapter, entitled "Weeds, Grass and
Other Vegetation," amended 11-6-1972 by Ord. No. 130, and Ord. No. 78 was formerly Art.
II of this chapter, entitled "Visual Obstructions."
§ 186-8 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 186-12
186:575
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 22.
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board — See
Ch. 27.
Building Code — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 60.
Health Code — See Ch. 87.
Moving permit — See Ch. 102.
Neighborhood improvement districts — See
Ch. 106.
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Unit
Code — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 128.
Real estate — See Ch. 135.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 158.
Street and sidewalk construction — See Ch.
160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
165.
Weeds; visual obstructions — See Ch. 186.
§ 186-12 PALMER CODE § 186-12
186:576
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Title.
An ordinance repealing the pre-existing Palmer Township Zoning Ordinance
of 1987, as amended, and replacing said ordinance with an ordinance
permitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting and determining the uses
of land, watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk,
location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing,
removal and use of structures; the areas and dimensions of land and bodies
of water to be occupied by uses and structures as well as courts, yards
and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and
structures; the density of population and intensity of use; the location and
size of signs; creating zoning districts and establishing the boundaries
thereof; continuing the office of Zoning Officer; continuing a Zoning
Hearing Board; and providing for the administration, amendment and
enforcement of the ordinance, including the imposition of penalties.
§ 190-2. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Palmer Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1994."
§ 190-3. Community development objectives.
This Zoning Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the Palmer
Township Comprehensive Plan of 1986, with consideration for the character
of the municipality, its various parts and the suitability of the various parts
for particular uses and structures and is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
disaster evacuation, airports and national defense facilities, the
provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public
grounds and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography,
soil type and classification and present use.
D. To assist in carrying out the goals and intent of the PA Flood Plain
Management Act, PA Storm Water Management Act,157 PA Department
of Environmental Resources regulations on erosion and sedimentation
157. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 190-1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-3
186:577
§ 190-4. Zoning Hearing Board.
In accordance with the PA Municipalities Planning Code,158 the Palmer
Township Zoning Hearing Board is hereby continued and shall have the
control, PA Department of Transportation regulations on highway
access control and other relevant federal and state laws, regulations,
official policies and relevant court decisions.
E. To carry out all of the goals and objectives of the Township
Comprehensive Plan, which include but are not limited to the following:
(1) To achieve the best use of the land within the Township, ensuring
that various land uses will complement one another and thus
improve the economic and aesthetic character of the community.
(2) To establish realistic population densities in order to ensure
adequate circulation, health standards, privacy and open space and
in order to provide utilities, protection, services and facilities in the
most convenient and efficient manner.
(3) To improve the road system for better internal circulation and
movement of through traffic which will facilitate the efficient and
safe movement of people and goods.
(4) To guide the location of future development and establish
developmental standards in such a way that negative impacts on
the natural environment and natural resources are minimized, and
to minimize existing and future water, air and noise pollution.
(5) To stimulate the local economy by encouraging controlled and
appropriate commercial, industrial, residential and recreational
growth which will provide for local employment, local shopping and
local recreational opportunities and which will strengthen the local
tax base.
(6) To encourage and promote the provision of a reasonable range and
variety of housing types to meet the needs of all Township
residents: newly formed households, growing families and senior
citizens.
(7) To strive for coordination of policies, plans and programs in the
Township and region through cooperation among governing
officials and special interest groups in both the public and private
sectors.
(8) To expand and activate a continuing planning program that will
serve to continually update and revise planning goals and
objectives, and the operational tools necessary for implementation,
in light of new data and conditions.
(9) To provide for the health, safety and general welfare of all
Township residents.
§ 190-3 PALMER CODE § 190-4
186:578
number of members and such powers and authority as set forth in said act
and this ordinance.
§ 190-5. Interpretation.
If two differing Township ordinances or two sections of the same Township
ordinance pertain to the same matter, then the requirement that is the more
restrictive upon the applicant shall apply.
§ 190-6. Uses not specifically regulated.
If a distinct legitimate land use is not addressed in any section of this
ordinance by not being permitted or specifically prohibited in at least one
zoning district, and a valid application is made for such use, the Zoning
Officer shall refer the application to the Zoning Hearing Board. In such
case, the Board shall have the authority to permit the use or deny the use
under the procedures of a special exception (but without the use being
presumed to be a permitted special exception use). The Board shall permit
such use if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board that the use:
§ 190-7. Applicability to Township.
This ordinance shall not apply to uses, buildings or structures built or used
or to be built or used by the Township of Palmer or by authorities created
solely by the Township, provided that the Board of Supervisors authorizes
such use by resolution.
§ 190-8. Violations of other regulations.
No uses shall be permitted in any district which directly violates any
Township ordinances. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that a use
would violate a federal, state or Township regulation, the Zoning Officer
may delay the issuance or suspend the issuance of a permit under this
ordinance until the applicant proves compliance with such regulation.
§ 190-9. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
A. Is similar in character and intensity to permitted uses in the district;
B. Will be compatible with permitted uses in the district; and
C. Will not create nuisances or hazards to the public health and safety.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly
stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-4 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-9
186:579
§ 190-10. Repealer.
All other Township ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof that were
adopted prior to this ordinance and are clearly in direct conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed, including the pre-existing Palmer Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1987, as amended. However, the pre-existing Airport
Approach Zoning Regulations shall not be repealed and shall remain in
effect.
§ 190-11. Enactment; when effective.
Under the authority conferred by the PA Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended,159 following a public hearing, the Board of Supervisors of
Palmer Township hereby enacts and ordains into an ordinance the attached
document this date of April 11, 1994. This ordinance shall become effective
in five days.
provisions of this ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully
effective.
B. The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed this
ordinance and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-9 PALMER CODE § 190-11
186:580
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 190-12. General interpretation.
For the purposes of this ordinance, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 190-13. Terms defined.
When used in this ordinance, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot line, except not
including lots entirely separated by a street or a perennial waterway. See
also the definition of "adjacent."
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied".
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. The singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa.
F. If a word is not defined in this ordinance, but is defined in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance160 (SALDO), the
definition in the SALDO shall apply. If a word is defined in both this
ordinance and another Township ordinance, each definition shall apply
to the provisions of each applicable ordinance.
G. The meaning of any word or term not defined in this ordinance or in the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended,
shall be determined by the Zoning Officer based upon the plain and
common meaning within the context of the section. The Zoning Officer
may base a determination upon a definition in one or more standard
reference dictionaries. An applicant may appeal a Zoning Officer's
determination to the Zoning Hearing Board.
H. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-12 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:581
ACCESS DRIVE or ACCESSWAY — A privately-owned, constructed and
maintained vehicular access roadway accessing more than one dwelling
unit or more than one commercial, institutional or industrial principal use.
See also "driveway."
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building (such as a private garage, private
toolshed, children's playhouse or noncommercial greenhouse) which is
subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and which
is used for purposes that are clearly customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building. A portion of a principal building used for an accessory
use shall not be considered an "accessory building."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, such as a private garage or
private swimming pool, serving a purpose customarily incidental to the
use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the principal
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
ACCESS POINT — One combined entrance/exit point, or one clearly defined
entrance point and one clearly defined exit point, separated in accordance
with the requirements of this ordinance and the Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.161[Amended 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
ACRE — Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ACTIVE ADULT DEVELOPMENT — A residential development that involves
restrictions on the ages of residents as provided more specifically in
§ 190-210B and which involves a unified development under condominium
ownership of private internal streets, landscaped areas, along public
streets, and private on-site recreational facilities.[Added 3-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-315; amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-327]
ADJACENT — Includes contiguous lots that share a common lot line or that
are separated only by a street or waterway.162
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and
assistance primarily to persons who need such assistance primarily because
of old age, developmental disability, physically disability or other limited
physical abilities or Alzheimer's disorder. This use shall not include persons
who need oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent to others.
This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a
residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60
hours per week per person.163
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
162. Editor’s Note: The definition of “adult bookstore,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410.
163. Editor’s Note: The definitions of “adult live entertainment facility,” “adult movie theater,”
and “adult use,” which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:582
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT (or "ADULT USE") — The definition
for this term and for all uses included under this term shall apply as
is provided in Title 68, Part II, Subpart E, Chapter 55, Section 5502 of
the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended.164 Such definitions
in Pennsylvania Statutes are hereby included by reference, including, but
not limited to the definitions for "adult bookstore," "adult entertainment,"
"adult mini-motion-picture theater," "adult motion-picture theater," "sexual
activities," "specified anatomical areas," and "specified sexual
activities."[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
AFTER-HOURS CLUB — A commercial use or membership club that permits
the consumption of alcohol and is routinely open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 4:00 a.m., in addition to any other hours. See State Act 219 of
1990,165 which generally prohibits this use.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products, or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged in by farmers
or are consistent with technological development within the agricultural
industry.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
AGRICULTURE — Shall mean "crop farming," "plant nursery" and "raising
of livestock." See definition of each.
AIRPORT — An area which is designated, used or intended to be used for
the landing and takeoff of motorized aircraft that carry people, and any
related aircraft support facilities such as for maintenance, refueling and
parking.
ALLEY — A right-of-way providing secondary access to the side or rear on
one or more lots which has a maximum right-of-way width of 20 feet.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving
of such structure from one location to another.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving and/or transmitting electronic signals or
PUBLIC AIRPORT — One that does not meet the definition of a "private
airport."
A.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — One that is limited to a maximum total of 15
flights and/or takeoffs in any seven-day period and that is not available
for use by the general public.
B.
164. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5502.
165. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7327.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:583
shortwave or citizens' band radio frequencies. This includes any accessory
supporting structures. This shall not include a satellite antenna, which is
regulated separately.
ANIMAL CEMETERY — Land or buildings used for the interment or burial
of the remains of three or more noncremated nonhuman animals on a lot
of less than 30 acres and 10 or more animals on a lot of 30 or more acres.
Burial of cremated animals or fewer numbers of noncremated animals on a
lot shall be a permitted by right accessory use in all districts.
ANIMAL GROOMING — The trimming of the hair or fur and/or the washing
of animals for commercial purposes.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall have the same meaning as "veterinarian
office."
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — Shall have the same meaning as "raising of
livestock."
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APPLICANT — The person(s), company, partnership, profit or nonprofit
corporation or trust responsible for a particular application for an approval
or permit under this ordinance, and his/her heirs, successors and assigns.
ARTS OR CRAFTS STORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale
of new hobby or craft supplies, artist supplies, sewing supplies, including
fabric, or needlework supplies. The use may include the creation of custom
crafted items or artwork as an accessory use.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-410]
ATTACHED — Physically connected to or within eight inches of.
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
AUDITORIUM, COMMERCIAL — A commercial area or structure involving
indoor or outdoor space for exhibits, meetings, live performances or sports
events, but not a use that meets the definition of a movie theater, adult live
entertainment use or standard or fast-food restaurant.
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — A
building or area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display,
sale or rental of one or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles or boats, or transportable
mobile/manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include
an auto repair garage as an accessory use provided that all requirements
of such use are complied with. This use shall not include a mobile/
manufactured home park or a junkyard.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — A building and/or land where repairs,
improvements and installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles
and/or boats are conducted that involves work that is more intense in
character than work permitted under the definition of "auto service station."
An "auto repair garage" shall include but not be limited to any use that
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:584
involves any of the following work: major mechanical or body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of
transmissions. Any use permitted as part of an auto service station is also
permitted as part of an "auto repair garage." This use shall not include a
use meeting the definition of a "truck stop."
AUTO SERVICE STATION — A building and/or land where gasoline is sold,
and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be conducted
that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and installation
of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories and safety
and emission inspections. This use may include the sale of ready-to-eat
food for consumption off the lot and of common household products as
a clearly accessory use. An accessory use providing only motor fuel to
vehicles operated by that business shall not be considered to be a gasoline
service station. This use shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"truck stop." See storage limits in § 190-210.
BAKERY — An establishment engaged in the preparation and retailing of
fresh breads, baked dessert items and/or other fresh baked goods, for
consumption on or off the premises.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-410]
BANQUET HALL — An establishment which is rented by individuals or
groups to accommodate private functions, including, but not limited to,
banquets, weddings, and other similar events. Such a use may or may not
include:
BASEMENT — An enclosed floor area partly or wholly underground, other
than a building which is completely underground. A "basement" shall be
considered a story if the majority of the basement has a clearance from floor
to ceiling of six feet or greater and the roof of the basement is an average of
four or more feet above the finished grade of the front side of the building
that faces onto a street.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST USE — The use of a single-family detached dwelling
and/or accessory structure which includes the rental of overnight sleeping
accommodations and bathroom access for a maximum of 10 temporary
guests at any one time, and which does not provide any cooking facilities
or provision of meals for guests other than breakfast. This use shall only
include a use renting facilities for a maximum of seven days in any month to
any person(s) and shall be restricted to transient visitors of the area.
BEER, WINE OR LIQUOR STORE — An establishment engaged in the
retail sale of packaged alcoholic beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and
liquor.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
BETTING USE — A use where lawful gambling activities are conducted,
including but not limited to offtrack parimutuel betting. This term shall not
A. Kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food; and
The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only
during scheduled events and not open to the general public. [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
B.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:585
include betting under the state lottery programs or betting under the "small
games of chance" provisions of state law, which shall instead be regulated
under the regulations applicable to the principal use of the property (such
as a membership club).
BIKEWAY — A paved lane specifically established primarily to provide for
travel by non-motorized bicycles.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign with any total sign area greater than
50 square feet.
BLAST or BLASTING — The explosion of dynamite, black powder, fuse,
blasting cap, detonators, electric squibs or other explosives.
BOARD — Unless otherwise referenced, shall mean the Zoning Hearing
Board of Palmer Township.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A residential use in which
individual room(s) are rented that do not meet the definition of a dwelling
unit and are occupied by a total of two or more persons who are not
related to the primary householder of the dwelling or a dwelling unit which
includes greater than the permitted maximum number of unrelated persons.
A "boardinghouse" shall not include a use that meets the definition of
a hotel, dormitory, motel, life care center, personal care center, bed and
breakfast use, group home or nursing home. A college fraternity or sorority
house used as a residence shall be considered a type of "boardinghouse."
A "boardinghouse" may either involve or not involve the providing of meals
to residents. This use shall only involve renting living accommodations for
minimum periods of five consecutive days.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Palmer Township.
BOOKSTORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of new or used
books, not to include an adult bookstore.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-410]
BUFFER YARD — A strip of land that separates one use from another use
or feature and is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or
any use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways. A "buffer
yard" may be a part of the minimum setback distance, but land within an
existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a "buffer
yard" requirement.
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and intended for
the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles,
equipment or materials and that has a total area under roof of greater than
50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including "or part thereof." See
the separate definition of "structure." Any structure involving a permanent
roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that is attached to a principal
building shall be considered to be part of that principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the
maximum horizontal area in square feet of all principal and accessory
buildings and attached structures covered by a permanent roof on a lot by
the total lot area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:586
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal measurement between the two mostdistant
portions, other than portions measured diagonally, of any one
building or of attached buildings.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE — See "setback line."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two structural
walls of one building that are generally parallel, measured in one general
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For a
townhouse or twin homes, this width shall be the width of each dwelling
unit from the center of one party wall to the center of the next party wall or
the outside edge of the exterior wall.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found in
the typical household for some productive reuse, but which does not involve
the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic substances, and
which does not primarily involve the processing of non-recycled solid waste,
unless the use also meets the applicable requirements for a solid waste
transfer facility. This definition shall not include a junkyard.
BULK STORAGE — Storage beyond what is reasonably needed for
customary use on-site. This includes storage of substances intended to be
sold or resold for use off-site.
BUSINESS SERVICES — An establishment engaged in rendering services
to business establishments on a fee or contract basis.[Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
CABARET — See "adult live entertainment use."
CAMPGROUND — A use that is primarily recreational in nature that
involves the use of tents or sites leased for recreational vehicles for
transient and seasonal occupancy by persons recreating or travelers, or
the use of tents or cabins for seasonal occupancy by organized groups of
persons under age 18 and their counselors.
CARPORT — A roofed building intended for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles, but which is not enclosed on all sides by walls or doors.
If any portion of a carport is attached to a principal building, it shall be
considered to be part of that building.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street designed for vehicular traffic and
on-street parking, but not including the shoulder of the street.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof where automobiles are cleaned
mechanically, using a conveyor, sprayer, blower, steam-cleaning equipment
or other device. This use may include wash tunnels, pay stations, vacuums,
drying facilities, and associated paved accessways and parking
stalls.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410; amended 11-29-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-447]
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:587
CEMETERY — Land or buildings used for the burial of deceased humans,
but not animals. The interment or scattering of remains of properly
cremated humans is not regulated by this ordinance.
CHAIRPERSON — Includes Chairman, Chairwoman, Chair and Acting
Chairperson (when applicable).
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS — An establishment engaged in the cashing
of checks by individuals or the deferred deposit of personal checks whereby
the check casher refrains from depositing a personal check written by a
customer until a specific date; or the offering of a loan until a paycheck
would be received by the person receiving the loan. This term shall not
include any of the following:
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM or TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale of trees from November 15 to
December 30 that were produced on the premises.
CLEAR CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees or the vast
majority of all trees from a tract of land or a portion thereof, other than
cutting of trees that is clearly necessary for the development of an approved
use.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure, partially or
wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or retransmitting
electronic signals with an overall height of greater than 20 feet. Towers
of less than 20 feet in height are permitted by right, although additional
regulations apply to satellite dish antenna. "Commercial communications
towers" include but are not limited to antenna used for transmitting
commercial radio or television signals or cellular telephone
communications, but shall not include an amateur radio antenna.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The GC, PC, PO/B and PIC Zoning Districts.
In case of conflict, the PIC District shall be considered to be primarily
industrial, instead of primarily commercial.
COMMERCIAL FORESTRY — See "forestry, commercial."
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION — Any use that has a total
building coverage of less than 15%, is used principally for active or passive
recreation (such as a driving range) and is used for a profit-making purpose.
COMMERCIAL USE — Includes retail sales, offices, personal services, auto
sales, auto repair garages and other uses of a similar nature. The sale of
goods or services from a vehicle on a lot shall also be considered to be a
commercial use.
A state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union,
or industrial loan association; or
A.
A retail store engaged in selling or leasing items to retail customers
and that cashes a check for a fee, not routinely exceeding 1% of the
check amount, as a service to its customers incidental to the retail store
principal use. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
B.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:588
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, other than a permitted
recreation vehicle, having a primary use, including, but not limited to,
making service calls or the transporting of tools, equipment and materials
for business purposes.[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311;
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-395]
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of Palmer.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."
COMMUNITY CENTER — A noncommercial use that exists solely to provide
leisure and educational activities and programs to the general public or
certain age groups. The use also may include the noncommercial
preparation and/or provision of meals to low-income elderly persons. This
shall not include residential uses or a treatment center.
COMPOSTING — The collection and processing of vegetative material to
allow it to biologically decompose under controlled anaerobic or aerobic
conditions to yield a humus-like product.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The document entitled the "Palmer Township
Comprehensive Plan," or any part thereof, adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is allowed or denied by the Board of
Supervisors within the provisions of Article XX, after review by the Planning
Commission.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings, each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which was created under
the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of 1963166 or was/is to be created under
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended. 167
CONFERENCE CENTER or CONVENTION CENTER — An establishment
engaged in holding or hosting conferences, exhibitions, large meetings,
seminars, training sessions, and similar activities. A conference center may
also provide office facilities, business services or kitchen facilities for the
preparation or catering of food, as accessory uses.[Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
CONSTRUCTION — Includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastening in a temporary or permanent position
and/or the demolition of a pre-existing building.
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS OR APPLIANCE STORE — An establishment
engaged in the retail sale or rental of new electronics equipment and
appliances for household use.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries and prepared ready-to-eat foods to the general public, and
166. Editor's Note: The Unit Property Act of 1963 was repealed 1980, July 2, P.L. 286, No. 82,
§ 2. See now 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
167. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:589
that includes a building with a floor area of less than 7,000 square feet.
This use may include an indoor seating area comprising no more than 10%
of the gross floor area and/or an outdoor seating area. This use may also
include the accessory sale of gasoline or other automotive fuels, provided
that the requirements for an auto service station are also met.[Amended
11-29-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-403]
CONVERSION — To change or adapt land or structures to a different use.
COUNTY — The County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Joint Planning Commission,
Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
CROP FARMING — The cultivating, raising and harvesting of products of
the soil and the storage of these products produced on the premises. The
definition of "crop farming" shall also include orchards and Christmas tree
farms, but shall not include animal husbandry, commercial forestry, riding
academies or kennels. If a crop farming lot includes more than 15 acres, it
may also include the keeping of up to 10 additional animals as a permitted
accessory use, in addition to what is permitted under the keeping of pets in
§ 190-211.
CULTURAL CENTER — A building and/or land open to the public which
primarily contains exhibits of clearly artistic or cultural interest, such as
a museum, library, art gallery or indoor nature study area. This shall not
include uses that are primarily commercial in nature.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A proposed zoning amendment made to the
Board of Supervisors by any landowner who desires to challenge on
substantive grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts
the use or development of land in which they have an interest.
DAY-CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home primarily for periods of less than
18 hours during the average day. This use may also include educational
programs that are supplementary to state-required education, including a
nursery school. The following three types of day care are permitted without
regulation by this ordinance: care of children by their own relatives, care
of children within a place of worship during regularly scheduled weekly
religious services and care of one to three children within any dwelling
unit, in addition to children who are relatives of the caregiver. See also the
definition of "adult day-care center."
DAYS — Calendar days.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER, as an accessory use — A type of day-care
use that provides care for six or fewer children at one time who are not
relatives of the caregiver. See § 190-211.
A.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER, as a principal use — A type of day-care use
that provides care for seven or more children at any one time who are
not relatives of the primary operator. See § 190-210.
B.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:590
DELICATESSEN — An establishment engaged in retailing fresh, frozen, or
cured meats and poultry, for consumption on or off the premises.[Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the lot area, unless otherwise stated.
DER — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, or its
successor, and its relevant subparts.
DETACHED BUILDING — A building that is surrounded on all sides by open
yards and that is not attached to any other building.
DEVELOPMENT — Construction, erection or expansion of a structure or
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
The term also includes any activities defined as "land development" under
the Palmer Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 168
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — A specialized building used for the receipt and
temporary storage of products or goods to be redistributed to retailers,
wholesalers, or directly to consumers.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-410]
DISTRICT or ZONING DISTRICT — A land area within the Township within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this ordinance.
DOG KENNEL — See "kennel."
DORMITORY — A principal or accessory building that includes residential
areas occupied exclusively by faculty or full-time students of an accredited
college or university or state-licensed teaching hospital or accredited public
or private primary or secondary school.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a street or access drive to only one dwelling unit, commercial
unit, institutional or industrial principal use. See also "access drive."
DUMP — Any area used for solid waste disposal that does not operate under
a valid solid waste permit issued by the PA DER and that is not a permitted
junkyard under this ordinance.
DWELLING — A building used as non-transient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A "dwelling" may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home." This ordinance categorizes dwellings into the following
types:
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within
an existing building within the standards of Article XX and where
permitted by the zoning district regulations and meeting the floor area
requirements of this ordinance.
A.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development. The definitions of
“distribution” and “distribution use,” which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:591
GARDEN APARTMENTS or LOW-RISE APARTMENTS — Three or more
dwelling units within a building that are separated by only horizontal
floors or by a combination of horizontal floors and vertical walls (see
definition of "townhouses"). This shall include buildings with a
maximum height of 3 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more
restrictive, except where otherwise allowed in this ordinance. The
individual dwelling units may be leased or sold for condominium
ownership. See also below for "two-family semidetached dwelling."
[Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
B.
MID-RISE APARTMENTS — Three or more dwelling units within a
building that is higher than 35 feet or 3 1/2 stories, and less than
72 feet or six stories (whichever is more restrictive). [Amended
1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
C.
SECTIONAL OR MODULAR HOME — A type of dwelling that meets
a definition of single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling, townhouse or garden apartment that is
substantially but not wholly produced in two or more major sections
off the site and then is assembled and completed on the site, and that
does not meet the definition of a "mobile/manufactured home" and
that is supported structurally by its exterior walls and that rests on a
permanent foundation.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open areas on all
sides.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family
detached dwelling that meets all of the following requirements: is
transportable; is designed for permanent occupancy; is contained
in a single piece or two substantial pieces designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing; which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations; is constructed so that it may be used with or without
a permanent foundation; is not a recreation vehicle; and includes
a minimum of 300 square feet of interior floor space. The terms
"mobile home" and "manufactured home" have the same meaning.
See the definition of "sectional or modular home." See standards in
§ 190-210.
(1)
E.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — Two dwelling units,
each accommodating one family, that are attached by an unpierced
vertical fire-resistant wall, with one side yard being adjacent to each
dwelling unit. This use is commonly known as "1/2 of a duplex" or "1/
2 of a twin home." Each unit may or may not be on a separate lot.
[Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
F.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached to two or more
dwelling units, with each dwelling unit being completely separated
G.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:592
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
family. See definition of "family." Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet,
bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities and separate access
to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects to outside
access at ground level. No "dwelling unit" shall include a separate living
area that is completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior
access from the remainder of the living area.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the owner's property.
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. This may
include housing for emergency personnel while on-call.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than tradespersons
temporarily working on physical improvements to the site.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Utility or municipal uses that are necessary
for the preservation of the public health and safety and that are routine,
customary and appropriate to the character of the area in which they are to
be located. Essential services shall not include a central sewage treatment
plant, a solid waste disposal area or facility, commercial communications
towers, a power generating station, septic or sludge disposal, offices,
storage of trucks or equipment or bulk storage of materials. Examples of
essential services include underground or overhead transmission systems,
poles, wires, pipes, cables, hydrants or other similar equipment.
EXERCISE CLUB — A facility that offers indoor or outdoor recreational
facilities, such as the following: weight rooms, exercise equipment,
nonhousehold pool and racquetball courts, typically on a membership
basis.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
from and attached to each other by unpierced vertical fire-resistant
walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own outside access. The units
may be attached along side-by-side or back-to-back. Side yards shall be
adjacent to each end unit. "Townhouses" are also commonly referred to
as "row houses," "single-family attached dwellings" or "quadplexes."
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — Two dwelling units
accommodating one family each, with both dwelling units within a
single building on a single lot, and without the dwelling units being
completely separated by a vertical wall. The building shall have two
side yards.
H.
TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — Four dwelling units,
each accommodating one family, with two of the dwelling units being
located directly above the remaining two dwelling units. The dwellings
shall be within a single building on a single lot, with two side yards, and
without being attached to any other principal building.
I.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:593
FAMILY — One or more persons living in a single dwelling unit and
functioning as a common household unit. A family shall not include more
than four persons who are not related to each other (see definition of
related in this article). See provisions in § 190-210 regarding group homes.
A treatment center shall not be considered a family or a group home.
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or other
materials shall be considered a wall. The terms "fence" and "wall" do
not include hedges, trees or shrubs. The term "wall" does not include
engineered retaining walls, which are permitted uses as needed in all
districts (see "retaining wall, engineered").[Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-420]
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public. This shall include a federal or state-chartered
bank or a savings and loan or a loan agency.
FLOODPLAIN (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR) — See definitions in § 190-154 of
this ordinance entitled "Flood-prone areas."169
FLOOR AREA (FOR A DWELLING UNIT) — The minimum habitable, heated
space intended for human occupancy and routine use and not including
areas shared among dwelling units (such as common hallways, common
stairs and common recreation areas).
FLOOR AREA (FOR USES OTHER THAN A DWELLING UNIT) — The total
horizontal square footage of a building. This shall not include areas such
as unfinished basements, porches that are not fully enclosed and heated,
unfinished attics or other spaces not intended for routine access by humans
or not serving a business purpose. "Floor area" shall include spaces such
as hallways, business storage, equipment rooms and stairs. The total "floor
area" shall be measured between exterior faces of walls. See also separate
definitions in Article XVII for the purposes of calculating parking
requirements.
FLORIST — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of cut flowers,
floral arrangements, and potted plants not grown on the premises. These
establishments usually prepare the arrangements they sell.[Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involved any land development.[Amended
2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
169. Editor's Note: Section 190-154 is new entitled "Floodplain Management."
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:594
FRATERNITY or SORORITY — A type of boardinghouse, regulated as such,
which is occupied by organized groups of higher education students, and
which is officially recognized as a "fraternity or sorority" by such institution.
FRESH FOOD MARKET — An establishment engaged in retailing fresh food
items, such as fruits and vegetables, meat and poultry, or seafood.[Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
FURNITURE OR HOME FURNISHINGS STORE — An establishment
engaged in the retail sale or rental of new furniture, such as household
furniture; outdoor furniture; office furniture (except when sold in
combination with office supplies and equipment); and/or furniture sold
in combination with household appliances, home electronics, home
furnishings, or floor coverings.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
GARAGE, PRIVATE OR HOUSEHOLD — An enclosed building for the
storage of one or more motor vehicles. No business, occupation or service
shall be conducted in a private garage that is accessory to a dwelling,
except as may be allowed as a home occupation. The rental to a person who
does not reside on the property of storage space that would accommodate
more than two cars or for commercial purposes shall be regulated as a
business use.
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale
or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a
closely similar character. See § 190-211.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See definition under "dwelling."
GIFT SHOP — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of new gifts,
novelty merchandise, souvenirs, greeting cards, seasonal and holiday
decorations, and curios.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus.
GOVERNMENT SERVICES AND FACILITIES, APPROPRIATE — Municipal,
county, state or federal government buildings or facilities designed and
intended to be occupied by the government for public purposes, that are
compatible with the neighborhood in which they would be located. This
term shall not include sewage treatment facilities, group homes, prisons,
treatment centers or solid waste facilities. This term shall include post
offices and fire stations unless otherwise provided for.
GRADE — The mean curb level, unless otherwise noted. When a curb level
has not been established, "grade" shall mean the average finished ground
elevation adjoining the buildings.
GROCERY STORE or SUPERMARKET — An establishment engaged in the
retail sale of a general line of food, such as canned and frozen foods;
fresh fruits and vegetables; and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and
poultry.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:595
GROUP HOME — The use of any lawful dwelling unit which meets all of the
following criteria:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Those wastes where significant potential exists
for causing adverse public health or environmental impacts if the waste
is handled, stored, transported, treated or disposed of in a manner
customarily accepted for ordinary solid wastes. This also includes wastes
subject to special state or federal licensing or regulation, including but not
limited to regulations of the DER.
HEALTH SUPPLEMENT STORE — An establishment involved in the retail
sale of health supplement products, such as vitamins, nutrition
supplements, and body-enhancing supplements.[Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the average proposed ground level along the front of the building to the
highest point of a structure. For a building with a roof, such "height" shall
be measured to the highest point of the structural roof. See exemptions for
certain types of structures in § 190-60. For height of signs, see § 190-184.
HELIPORT — An area used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters,
together with any related support facilities such as for maintenance,
refueling and storage. This ordinance is not intended to regulate the
nonroutine emergency landing and takeoff of aircraft to pick up seriously
injured or ill persons.
Involves the care of the maximum number of persons permitted by the
"group home" standards of § 190-210 and meets all other standards of
such section.
A.
B. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
Involves providing non-routine support services and oversight to
persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within an
institution, because of physical disability, old age, mental retardation or
other handicap* as defined by applicable federal law.
C.
D. Does not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
Does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who could
reasonably be considered a threat to the physical safety of others or
are prone to any of the following: psychoactive substance use disorders
resulting from current illegal use of drugs, pedophilia, voyeurism, other
sexual behavior disorders or pyromania.
*NOTE: As of 1992, the Federal Fair Housing Act defined "handicap"
as follows: "a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one or more of such person's major life activities; a record of having
such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment,
but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a
controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21."
E.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:596
HOME GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or
vegetables on a piece of ground adjoining the dwelling, excluding the
keeping of livestock and permitting the sale of produce raised thereon.
HOME OCCUPATION —
PUBLIC HELIPORT — A heliport that does not meet the definition of a
"private heliport."
A.
PRIVATE HELIPORT — A heliport limited to a maximum total of 15
flights or takeoffs in any seven-day period and that is not available for
use by the general public. This is also known as a "helistop."
B.
A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential use conducted
within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its permitted
accessory building that:
(1) Is conducted primarily by a permanent resident of the dwelling;
Meets the definition, standards and limitations of a "general home
occupation" or a "light home occupation" within the following
definitions and § 190-211;
(2)
Only include uses that are clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use;
(3)
Does not include any retail or wholesale sales on the premises
(other than over the phone and through the mail) nor any industrial
use (other than custom crafts and sewing); and
(4)
Specifically does not include the following: hotel, motel, nursing
home, boardinghouse, restaurant, stable, kennel, auto repair, retail
sales, painting of vehicles, tractor repair, lawn mower and engine
repair, manufacturing (other than custom crafts), bulk welding or
animal grooming.
(5)
A.
GENERAL HOME OCCUPATION — A type of "home occupation" that:
Only involves persons working on the premises who are permanent
residents of the dwelling, plus a maximum of one nonresident
working on the premises at any one point in time;
(1)
Does not meet the definition and standards of a "light home
occupation"; and
(2)
Meets the standards of § 190-211.
(NOTE: This use typically requires approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board.)
(3)
B.
LIGHT HOME OCCUPATION — A type of "home occupation" that:
Only involves persons working on the premises or routinely
operating from the premises who are permanent residents of the
dwelling;
(1)
C.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:597
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical or
hospice care of humans that includes but is not limited to care requiring
stays overnight. A medical care use that does not involve stays overnight
shall be considered a "medical office or clinic." A "hospital" may involve
care and rehabilitation for medical, dental or mental health, but shall not
primarily include housing or treatment of the criminally insane or persons
actively serving an official sentence after being convicted of a felony. A
"hospital" may also involve medical research and training for health care
professions.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 30 days shall be considered a boardinghouse and shall meet
the requirements of that use. See also "bed-and-breakfast use." A "hotel"
or "motel" may include a restaurant, nightclub, central kitchen, newsstand,
tavern and/or meeting facilities, provided that such uses are clearly
accessory to the principal use of overnight accommodations. A "hotel" or
"motel" shall not include individual kitchens in individual rental units.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The total area of all impervious surfaces on a
lot (including building coverage) divided by the total lot area.
Does not involve more persons regularly visiting the premises for
business purposes than are permitted by § 190-211, and clearly
involves the vast majority of interactions with clients primarily
occurring at the client's home or business;
(2)
Only involves the self-contained use of the premises for the home
occupation by telephone, mailings and office-type administrative
work, and involves the actual use contained entirely within the
interior confines of the premises;
(3)
Involves the Zoning Officer being the sole determinator of whether
a proposed use meets the criteria for a light or a general home
occupation;
(4)
(5) Meets the standards of § 190-211; and
Does not involve any industrial-type of operations.
(NOTE: This use typically does not require Zoning Hearing Board
approval.)
(6)
PROFESSIONAL HOME OCCUPATION — A type of home occupation
that only involves work of a recognized profession (see definition of
"profession").
D.
Areas being voluntarily dedicated as common open space may be
included in the acreage for determining "impervious coverage" of an
adjoining lot.
A.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:598
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Area covered by roofs, concrete, asphalt or
other man-made cover which has a coefficient of runoff of 0.7 or higher.
The Township Engineer shall decide any dispute over whether an area is
"impervious."
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS — Includes the LI, PIC, PO/IP and HI Districts.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Includes manufacturing, distribution, warehousing
and other operations of an industrial and not primarily of a commercial,
institutional or residential nature.
INFORMATION/DATA PROCESSING — Uses such as, but not limited to,
software publishing; motion-picture and sound recording; radio, television
or internet broadcasting; telecommunications; internet services; data
processing; and information services. Information and data processing uses
shall not include internet-based operations where goods are kept, stored,
handled, sold or offered for sale or transfer with or without charge either at
wholesale or retail (e.g., internet auctions).[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-410]
INTERSECTION — The point of intersecting legal rights-of-way of two
streets.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
JEWELRY STORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of new
jewelry and/or new watches. This use may also include custom jewelry
designs and/or repair services as accessory uses.[Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles, such as the following types: metal, furniture,
appliances, motor vehicle parts, aircraft, glass, plastics, machinery,
equipment, containers and building materials other than materials
permitted actively being used under a valid construction permit. "Junk"
shall not include solid waste that is temporarily stored as is customary in an
appropriate container that is routinely awaiting collection and disposed of
in a manner consistent with state regulations; toxic wastes; grass clippings,
leaves or tree limbs, or items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an
approved recycling use.
JUNK VEHICLE —
The nonimpervious coverage may be partially or wholly met by land
that abuts the use, even if such land is in a different zoning district, an
adjoining municipality and/or an abutting lot, if such land will be deed
restricted as permanent open space and be so clearly stated on official
recorded plans. In such case, such land shall be properly maintained by
the abutting use.
B.
Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following
conditions:
Does not display a license plate with a current registration sticker
and does not have a valid state safety inspection sticker (except for
licensed antique cars not required to have an inspection sticker).
(1)
A.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:599
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs or cats on a lot or
within a dwelling unit beyond that number permitted under the "keeping of
pets" or the "crop farming" provisions of this ordinance. A nonprofit animal
shelter is a type of "kennel."
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease
to exercise the right of the landowner and if such lease is for a remaining
period of at least 12 months), or authorized officers of a partnership or
corporation that is a "landowner" or other person having a proprietary
interest in land. A person who has clearly received formal notarized powers
of attorney relating to a landowner may act in the capacity of the landowner,
if legally authorized.
LIBRARY — See "cultural center."
Cannot be immediately moved under its own power, in regards to a
vehicle designed to move under its own power, other than a vehicle
clearly needing only minor repairs.
(2)
Cannot be immediately towed, in regards to a vehicle designed to
be towed.
(3)
(4) Has been demolished beyond repair.
(5) Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis.
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
(6)
B. See § 190-169.
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) Junk (see definition).
A greater number of junk vehicles than is permitted under
§ 190-169 that are partly or fully visible from an exterior lot line,
dwelling and/or public street. This shall not apply to such vehicles
allowed to be stored within the specific requirements of an auto
repair garage or auto service station.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse and shall be regulated as a
warehouse. See also "recycling collection center."
B.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:600
LIFE CARE CENTER — A residential use designed and operated exclusively
for adults of 55 years of age or older and/or physically handicapped persons
that includes a nursing home and certain limited support facilities intended
specifically to serve the needs of these residents.
LIGHTING, DIFFUSED — Illumination that passes from the source through
a translucent cover or shade.
LIGHTING, DIRECT OR FLOOD — Lighting where the source is visible and
the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be illuminated.
LINE, STREET — The street right-of-way line. This shall be the future street
right-of-way line, if one is required to be established.
LIVESTOCK, RAISING OF or ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and
keeping of livestock, poultry or insects for any commercial purposes or
the keeping of any animals for any reason beyond what is allowed under
the "Keeping of pets" subsection of § 190-211 and beyond what is allowed
within the definition of "crop farming." For the purposes of this ordinance,
the "keeping of livestock" shall have the same meaning as "animal
husbandry." "Animal husbandry" shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a
stockyard used for the housing of animals awaiting slaughter.
LOT — A separate parcel of land that is recorded or that will be recorded
after Township final subdivision approval in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds. A parcel under common ownership that is completely
separated into two parts by a public street shall be considered to be one
tract but two "lots".
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a
lot (measured in acres or square feet). For the purposes of determining
"lot area" of uses other than townhouses and low-rise apartments (which
are regulated by a separate section), "lot area" shall not include any of the
following:
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135º at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a "corner lot" if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135º.
Areas within the "existing" and/or "future" rights-of-way of any
proposed or existing public streets or alleys.
A.
Areas within the cartway or access easement (whichever is most
restrictive) of any proposed or existing private streets that serve more
than one lot.
B.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
open space on a separate lot.
C.
For residential lots only: areas within rights-of-way or easements of
overhead electrical lines of 35 kilovolts or higher capacity.
D.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:601
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines, measured through the approximate center of the lot.
LOT, FLAG — An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated
extension from a street to the principal part of the lot. The flagpole shape of
the lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise landlocked
interior parcel. See § 190-59.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE —
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel
streets, but only has access onto one street.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, the "lot width" shall be measured using a
straight line from end to end.
The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line borders
a public street, the lot line shall be considered to be the existing street
right-of-way.
A.
B. Types.
FRONT LOT LINE (street line) — A lot line separating the lot from the
existing street right-of-way.
C.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. (A three-sided lot has no "rear lot line.")
D.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A "side
street lot line" is a side lot line separating a lot from a street.
E.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:602
MANUFACTURE — The making, with substantial use of machinery, of some
product for sale, and/or associated assembly, fabrication, cleaning, testing,
processing, recycling, packaging, conversion, production, distribution and
repair, with substantial use of machinery, of products for sale. This term
shall not include the following: retail sales, personal services, solid waste
disposal facility or truck terminal.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person's(s) skin other than
the face or neck by another person(s') that is related to certain monetary
compensation, and which does not involve persons who are related to each
other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC — A use involving the treatment and
examination of patients by state-licensed physicians, dentists, or other
health care professionals, including mental health care professionals,
provided that no patients shall be kept overnight on the premises. This
use may involve the testing of tissue, blood or other human materials for
medical or dental purposes. Such use shall include a building or buildings
with multiple offices for one or more health care professionals for
examination or treatment of persons as outpatients and laboratories
incidental thereto.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building routinely used by
a recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
A. Massages are conducted.
The person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional or a licensed massage therapist by the state. (NOTE: If
massages are conducted by a health care professional or a statelicensed
massage therapist, then the use shall be considered a medical
office or a personal service use.)
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor.
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a
permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic program.
E.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:603
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation
that are limited to members and their occasional guests, and persons
specifically invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open
to members of the general public and which is not primarily operated as
a for-profit business. This use shall not include a target range for outdoor
shooting, a boardinghouse, a tavern, a restaurant, retail sales or an
auditorium unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the
requirements of that use are met. See also "after-hours club."
MENTAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Any mental health establishment,
hospital, clinic, institution, center, day-care center, or other organizational
unit, or part thereof, which is devoted primarily to diagnosis, treatment,
care, or rehabilitation of mentally disabled persons, but shall not include the
housing of the criminally insane, nor primarily involve housing or treatment
of persons actively serving an official sentence after being convicted of a
felony. Said use may include, but is not limited to the following:[Added
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
"Mineral extraction" includes but is not limited to the extraction of sand,
gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, coal, clay, shale and iron ore. The
routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during construction shall
not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction. See "open pit mining."
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes but is not limited to limestone and davamite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuge, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
MINI-MARKET — See "convenience store."
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile/manufactured home
park that is improved with the necessary utility connections and other
features necessary for the development thereon of a single mobile/
manufactured home.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See definition under "dwelling."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two
or more mobile/manufactured homes for nontransient residential use. The
individual manufactured homes may be individually owned. A development
of mobile/manufactured homes that is subdivided into individual lots shall
be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of site-built homes and
shall not be considered to be a "mobile home park."
MOTEL — See "hotel."
PSYCHIATRIC CLINIC — A nonresidential treatment setting in which
psychiatric, psychological, social, educational and other related
services are provided under medical supervision.
A.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:604
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — See "trucking company terminal."
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by
Act 170 of 1988, and as may be further amended. 170
NATURE PRESERVE — A noncommercial preservation of land for providing
wildlife habitats, forests or scenic natural features that involves no
buildings other than a nature education and/or study center and customary
maintenance buildings.
NIGHTCLUB — A tavern or bar which frequently charges admission or
cover charges for entertainment or music for dancing and which has a
capacity of more than 250 persons for such entertainment or dancing. See
also "after-hours club."[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board, and which is not abutted by other undeveloped land
owned by the same owner.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable lot area, dimensional
and other provisions in this ordinance, as amended, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or applicable
amendment. Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this ordinance or
amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this ordinance or applicable
amendment.
NURSERY — See "plant nursery."
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully-skilled nursing care of three or more persons.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but
may include business offices, medical or dental offices, clinics or
laboratories.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
OFFICE SUPPLY STORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of
any of the following: new stationery, school supplies, and office supplies;
new office equipment or furniture; and/or new computers.[Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:605
OFFICIAL MAP — Any Official Map that may be adopted or amended by
the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP — The map as adopted by the
Board of Supervisors classifying the streets of the Township.171 See
definition of "street classification." This map may be amended by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map as adopted by the Board of Supervisors
which designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts. 172
OFF-SITE AND ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — See "sewage disposal
system."
OPEN-PIT MINING — Includes all activity which removes from the surface
or beneath the surface of the land some material mineral resources, natural
resource or other element of economic value, by means of mechanical
excavation necessary to separate the desired material from an undesirable
one; or to remove the strata or material which overlies or is above the
desired material in its natural condition and position. "Open-pit mining"
includes but is not limited to the excavation necessary to the extraction of
sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, coal, clay, shale and iron ore.
OPEN SPACE — The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways or parking areas; but includes areas occupied
by walkways, patios, porches without roofs, playgrounds, outdoor
recreation or play apparatus, gardens or trees.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards:
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public.
A.
If not intended to be publicly owned, is covered by a process for
perpetual maintenance.
B.
Will be deeded to the Township and/or deed restricted to permanently
prevent uses of land other than "common open space" and
noncommercial recreation.
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements:
(1) Existing or future street rights-of-way.
(2) Accessways.
Buildings (other than accessory buildings and pools clearly
intended for noncommercial recreation).
(3)
D.
171. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
172. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:606
ORDINANCE — The Palmer Township Zoning Ordinance, including the
Official Zoning Map, Official Street Classification Map,173 and any
amendments enacted by the Board of Supervisors.
OUTPARCEL — A building lot separated or separable from a commercial
development, to be sold and/or developed under separate
ownership.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
PA — Pennsylvania.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicles unless otherwise
stated.
PATIO — An outdoor area that is not covered by a permanent roof and that
is used as an accessory recreation area by the occupants of a building.
PAVED AREA — All areas covered by gravel and/or impervious surfaces,
other than areas covered by buildings, bicycle paths and pedestrian
sidewalks.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper Township authority authorizing
the applicant to undertake certain activities.
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation).
(4)
(5) Any area needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot.
Any area deeded over to an individual property owner for his/her
own use.
(6)
Land with rights-of-way intended eventually for overhead electrical
transmission of 35 kilovolts or greater capacity.
(7)
(8) Any area routinely under water.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit issued indicating that a proposed use,
building or structure is, to the best knowledge of the Township staff,
in accordance with this ordinance and which authorizes an applicant to
proceed with said use, building or structure, within all other applicable
laws and regulations. For the purposes of this ordinance, a "zoning
permit" or "a permit under this ordinance" shall mean the applicable
portions of a construction permit, unless a specific system of zoning
permits has been established.
A.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is, to the best
knowledge of the Township staff, in accordance with the provisions of
the Building Code174 which may be adopted by the Township.
B.
173. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the Township offices.
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:607
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES — Uses that do not have to be approved
as uses by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors. (A site
plan review by the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors is
required for certain permitted by right uses to ensure that the use would
comply with all Township ordinances.) A "nonconforming use" shall not be
considered to be a "permitted use."
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — A residential use providing
residential and support services primarily to persons who are over age 60,
physically handicapped and/or mentally retarded and that is licensed as a
"personal care center" by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve retail
or wholesale sales or services to businesses. "Personal services" include,
but are not limited to, barber- and beauty shops, photography studios,
shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops and other similar
establishments, but shall not include any adult uses.[Amended 6-26-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-410]
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domestic animals that are normally
considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the pleasures of the
resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, birds, gerbils, fish, iguanas,
turtles, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops.
PHARMACY or DRUGSTORE — An establishment engaged in the retail sale
of prescription or nonprescription drugs and medicines. This use may also
include the sale of associated personal care and/or general household items
as an accessory use.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
PICNIC GROVE, PRIVATE — An area of open space and pavilions that is not
publicly owned and which is rented for picnics and outdoor recreation.
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship and that are operated for nonprofit and
noncommercial purposes. A place of worship may include one dwelling unit
as an accessory use. If a religious use is primarily residential in nature, it
shall be regulated under the appropriate dwelling type.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — An area of land under single ownership
containing any combination of two or more principal uses permitted by
right, as a special exception, or as a conditional use in the district in
which the development is proposed, provided that a special exception or
conditional use approval must be obtained for any proposed use so listed in
the regulations of the district in which the development is proposed.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit that may be required by the
Township that is issued upon completion of the construction of a
structure, or change in use of a structure or parcel of land, or
reoccupancy of a structure or land, indicating that the premises, to the
best knowledge of the Building and Zoning Officers, complies with the
provisions of Township ordinances. This shall have the same meaning
as a "certificate of use and occupancy."
C.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:608
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land to be
developed as part of a completely planned and integrated development,
including a variety of housing types, and which is not required to comply
with regulations on lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage
or required open space which apply to a district in the Zoning Ordinance,
provided that the PRD is approved within the regulations of Article XXIV
of this ordinance and relevant provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. 175
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Palmer
Township.
PLANT NURSERY — The indoor and/or outdoor raising of trees, plants,
shrubs or flowers for sale, but not primarily including commercial forestry
for lumber. A "plant nursery" may include the growth of trees for sale for
internal decoration of homes, such as a Christmas tree farm.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resource and Conservation Services
County Soil Survey.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal use of a lot is
conducted. Any building that is physically attached to a principal building
shall be considered part of that principal building.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PRINTING/PUBLISHING ESTABLISHMENT — Includes printing,
publishing, lithographing, photocopying, bookbinding and similar
uses.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
PROFESSION — Includes any occupation or vocation in which a professed
knowledge of some department of science or learning is used by its practical
application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching them
and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art founded on
it. The work implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished
from mere skill and the application of such knowledge to uses for others
as a vocation. It requires knowledge of an advanced type in a given field of
science or instruction and study, and some form of professional certification
by the commonwealth or a professional organization.
PROPERTY LINE — Has the same meaning as "lot line."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the PA Municipalities Planning Code.
PUBLIC UTILITY, APPROPRIATE — This shall include facilities such as
electrical substations, telephone exchange centers and other similar
facilities that are operated by public utility companies. These uses shall
be of such a character that they are compatible with adjacent uses and
neighborhoods. In an LDR, MDR or HDR District, this shall not include
uses of a character such as heavy vehicle storage, business offices or bulk
175. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:609
storage. See also applicable sections of the PA Municipalities Planning Code
relating to Public Utility Commission pre-emption. 176
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Land and/or facilities that are owned
by the Township or another government agency and are available for use by
the general public for leisure and recreation.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — An establishment engaged in providing
amusement, leisure or recreational activities and operated for commercial
purposes.[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
RECREATION, PRIVATE — Noncommercial leisure-time uses that are only
open to members, guests or some specific groups.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is designed primarily to
transport a person for primarily recreational instead of transportation
purposes, or a vehicle that serves as a mobile, temporary dwelling. This may
include a vehicle that is self-propelled, towed or carried by another vehicle,
but shall not include camper cabs that fit over pickup trucks. This term shall
also include the following: watercraft with a hull longer than 15 feet, motor
homes, travel trailers, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AREA — An outdoor area used for the
storage of three or more recreational vehicles. Retail sales or major repair
work shall only be allowed if those uses are permitted in that zoning district.
RECYCLING CENTER, BULK — See "bulk recycling center."
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
and their customary collection, which is a permitted by right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A "recycling collection
center" is also a permitted by right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Township-owned use, an
emergency services station or a college or university.
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are closely related by blood,
marriage, adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the
following relationships: brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first cousin; shall not include
relationships such as second, third or fourth cousins.
RENTAL UNIT — One or more rooms intended to be occupied by one
family as separate living quarters, but does not contain one or more of
the following: sanitary facilities, kitchen facilities or direct access from the
outside or through a common hall.
REPAIR SERVICE — Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns,
bicycles and other household items.
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:610
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT OR TESTING LABORATORY — An
establishment engaged in conducting research and experimental
development or analytical testing services in the physical, engineering,
and life sciences, such as agriculture, electronics, environmental, biology,
biotechnology, botany, computers, chemistry, food, fisheries, forests,
geology, health, mathematics, medicine, oceanography, pharmacy, physics,
veterinary and other related subjects. Testing services may occur in a
laboratory or on site.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or
structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental to a principal
residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that are very
similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court, garage sale,
basketball backboard, household swimming pool, volleyball court, gazebo,
storage shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse and children's play
equipment. For skateboard ramps, see residential accessory structure
standards in § 190-211.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The C-R, RA, LDR, MDR and HDR Zoning
Districts and residential areas of an approved PRD.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that contains an existing
dwelling within 200 feet of such lot line and/or is undeveloped and zoned as
a residential district.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD —
RESTAURANT, STANDARD —
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink, that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food
on the premises and that does not meet the definition of a "standard
restaurant."
A.
A fast-food restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of
the total trade, the requirements of a tavern or nightclub, as applicable,
must be met.
B.
A restaurant shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"nightclub" or an "after-hours club."
C.
An establishment that serves ready-to-consume food or drink for
compensation in which the clear majority of sales involves the
following: the customers order their food from a waiter or waitress
while seated inside a building and then the food is delivered to the
customer's table while the customers are seated and then the food is
consumed at the table.
A.
A "standard restaurant" may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of
the total trade, the requirements of a tavern must be met.
B.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:611
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store or any
restaurant.
RETAINING WALL, ENGINEERED — A professionally engineered structure
designed and constructed to retain the earth on one side at a higher
elevation than the earth on the other side, in such a way that resists the
lateral displacement of soil or other materials, in order to stabilize slopes
and provide usable areas of land at different elevations.[Added 1-29-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-420]
RETIREMENT VILLAGE — A residential development limited exclusively to
persons aged 55 years and older and their spouses.
RIDING ACADEMY — A type of nonhousehold stable.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for the public or others for use as a street
or other purpose. Unless otherwise stated, "right-of-way" shall mean the
existing street right-of-way line.
ROADSIDE PRODUCE MARKET — A market selling only horticultural, dairy
or agricultural products, and where a minimum of 50% of the products
offered for sale were grown or raised on the premises owned or leased by
the operator of the market.
SANITARY LANDFILL or SOLID WASTE LANDFILL — A type of solid waste
disposal area involving the depositing of solid waste on land, compacting
the waste, covering the waste with soil and then compacting the soil, and
which has a permit to operate as a sanitary landfill from the state.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA or SATELLITE ANTENNA — A ground-based
reflector, usually parabolic in shape, that receives electronic signals from a
satellite. This term shall also include any pedestal or attached structure.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
A restaurant shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"nightclub" or an "after-hours club."
C.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The line separating a lot from
the established official street right-of-way that either the Township
or the commonwealth will own after the completion of any proposed
subdivision, land development or development of a use under this
ordinance.
A.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE — Land that is dedicated or is required to be
defined or reserved for future dedication for use as a street and for
related public improvements. The terms "ultimate right-of-way," "rightof-
way reserved for future dedication" and "future right-of-way" shall
have the same meaning. See § 190-196. If a "future right-of-way" is not
required to be defined, then "future right-of-way" shall have the same
meaning as "existing right-of-way."
B.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:612
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include trade schools (such as privately
operated schools of trade, vocation or business).
SCREENING — Year-round plant material of substantial height and density
designed to buffer one use from view or from a less intense use. See
requirements in § 190-194D.
SEASONAL ROADSIDE PRODUCE MARKET — See "roadside produce
market."
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SEPTAGE — Materials pumped from a residential on-lot septic treatment
system that was installed and is maintained in compliance with DER
regulations.
SERVICE STATION — See "auto service station."
SERVICES, ESSENTIAL — See "essential services."
SETBACK LINE —
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system to collect, treat and dispose of
sewage. No such system shall be permitted that does not comply with local,
state and federal requirements.
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
future street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the property is not
abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured at right angles
from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-ofway
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured. See
exceptions for eaves and cornices in § 190-194B.
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such
a street or the defined access easement lines, if a right-of-way or
easement exists. If a private street does not have a right-of-way or
access easement, then setback shall be measured from the edge of the
cartway.
D.
PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE — Service at the time of occupancy of a use
by a central sewage treatment plant that is owned by a municipality or
a municipal or county authority.
A.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:613
SEWAGE SLUDGE or SLUDGE — The treated, conditioned digested
accumulated settled solids deposited as a result of sewage treatment
processes that occur within the requirements of a state or federal
environmental pollution or on-lot septic system permit. This shall only
include substances adequately stabilized so that they are suitable for land
application. See the separate Township ordinance on the land application of
sewage sludge. 177
SHOPPING CENTER — A use involving five or more retail or personal
service uses or establishments that primarily involves retail sales. If two
or more abutting lots each include five or more retail sales uses and are
developed under common or closely related ownership, then those lots shall
together be considered as one shopping center. A shopping center may
also include a mix of permitted personal service, office and/or commercial
recreation use. A mall shall be considered to be a shopping
center.[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
SIGHT DISTANCE — An area required to be kept free of visual obstruction.
See § 190-194D.
SIGN — Any physical device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of attracting attention from the public and that is visible from
beyond an exterior lot line, including all symbols, words, models, displays,
banners, flags, devices or representations. See definitions of types of signs
in Article XVIII. This shall not include displays that only involve symbols
that are clearly and entirely religious in nature, and which do not include
advertising.
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or
between any adjacent elements of the sign. However, such perimeter shall
not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of
such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business
that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot upon
which the sign is located. An "off-premises sign" with a sign area greater
than 50 square feet shall be considered a billboard.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Review of a site plan by the Planning Commission
and/or the Board of Supervisors that is required for certain uses under
Article XIX.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE — A use involving the killing of animals for the
production of food or some other commercial product. A commercial
stockyard or similar facility that primarily involves the bulk storage or
transferring of animals on the way to slaughter shall also be considered a
ON-LOT OR NONPUBLIC SEWER SERVICE — Any form of sewage
service permitted under local, state and federal law that does not meet
the definition of "public sewer service."
B.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Disposal and Storage of Sewage Sludge.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:614
"slaughterhouse." This shall not include a custom "butcher shop" that does
not involve killing of animals (which is a retail sales use).
SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled
by a single landowner to be developed as a single entity for a number
of single-family detached dwellings in compliance with the regulations
contained in Article XXIII.
SLOPE — The vertical change of an area of land divided by the horizontal
distance, measured in percent.
SOLICITOR — Unless otherwise stated, shall mean the appointed Solicitor
to the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors.
SOLID WASTE —
SOLID WASTE FACILITY —
SOLID-WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — A type of solid waste disposal
facility that utilizes waste (such as trash, sludge or any other nonhazardous
commercial, residential or industrial materials) as a fuel to produce usable
energy (such as steam or electricity) in bulk to be marketed for reuse to
offset disposal costs. Also see the definitions of each of these terms in Title
25 of the PA DER regulations.
Any garbage, refuse, sewage sludge or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, institutional, public, household, commercial
or mining activities.
A.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following materials shall not be
considered to be "solid waste":
(1) Portions of trees or shrubs, leaves, mulch and rocks.
Substances legally disposed of into the air or water through a
federal or state pollution discharge permit.
(2)
Customary residual wastes from a permitted mineral extraction
use.
(3)
Materials of a character such as paper, plastic, aluminum and metal
that have been separated from the waste stream for recycling.
(4)
B.
Land or structures where solid waste is processed, incinerated or
disposed of. This shall only include the following facilities, each of
which shall be required to have all permits required by the state in
place prior to initiation of the use: sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer
facility or solid-waste-to-energy facility.
A.
The following uses for the purposes of this ordinance shall not be
considered to be a "solid waste disposal facility": junkyard, recycling
collection center, leaf composting, clean fill or septage or sludge
application.
B.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:615
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — A type of solid waste disposal
facility which receives and temporarily stores solid waste at a location
other than the generation site, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal,
and which may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from solid
waste. Also see the definitions of each of these terms in Title 25 of the PA
DER regulations.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this ordinance, provided that the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this ordinance. See Article XX.
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — An establishment engaged in retailing
miscellaneous specialty foods not for immediate consumption and not made
on the premises.[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
STABLE, NONHOUSEHOLD — Keeping of three or more horses, which may
include a commercial or private riding club. The housing of one or two
horses shall be considered an accessory use under the "keeping of pets"
(see § 190-211).
STADIUM or ARENA — A large open or enclosed structure used for sports
games and major events and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of
seats for spectators. See also "auditorium, commercial."[Added 6-26-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-410]
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STATE PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988 and as may be
further amended. 178
STEEP SLOPE AREA — Those areas having slopes of 15% or more.
STORAGE SHED — An enclosed accessory building maintained primarily for
the convenience of the occupant(s) of the principal building on the lot and
which is not used for the housing of a motor vehicle.
STORY and HALF-STORY — A level of a building routinely accessible to
humans having an average vertical clearance six feet or greater shall be
considered a full "story," except as provided for in the definition of
"basement." Any level of a building having an average vertical clearance
from floor to ceiling of less than six feet shall be considered a "half-story."
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals.
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:616
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of access to abutting lots or that is an expressway, but not including
an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and "road" have the
same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STREET CENTER LINE — The center of the existing street right-of-way or,
where such cannot be determined, the center of the traveled cartway.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The functional classification of streets into
the following types, as shown on the Official Street Classification Map at
the end of this ordinance179 for existing streets and as determined by the
Township Engineer for future streets:
STREET, PROPOSED — A street which is planned in a proposed subdivision
or land development plan or approved within a subdivision or land
development plan, but not yet open to traffic.
STREET, STUB — A street extended to the boundary of the tract being
subdivided or developed to allow for the future continuation of the street
into abutting land.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
EXPRESSWAY or MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET — Designed for large
volumes and high speed traffic with access limited to grade separated
intersections.
A.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREET — Designed to carry a high volume of
fast or moderate-speed traffic from collector and local streets to major
arterial streets.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — Designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic
to intercept local (residential) streets, to provide routes to minor
arterial streets and to community facilities and to provide access to the
abutting properties. Major collector streets typically carry more traffic
than minor collector streets.
C.
LOCAL STREET — Designed to provide access to the abutting
properties, to serve local traffic movement and as a route to collector
streets.
D.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A local street intersecting another street at
one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other.
E.
A "structure" shall include, but not be limited to the following:
buildings, signs, stadiums, platforms, communications towers,
walkways, porches or decks, swimming pools (whether above or below
ground), storage sheds, carports, garages and decks.
A.
Any "structure" shall be subject to the principal or accessory setbacks
of this ordinance, as applicable, unless specifically exempted or unless
B.
179. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:617
SUBDIVISION — See the definition in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. 180
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE or SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE — The Palmer Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended. 181
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — See definition in § 190-154. For the
purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests.
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household"
swimming pool. This includes a semipublic pool that serves only residents
of a development or members of a club and their occasional guests or a
public pool intended to serve the general public. See also the provisions for
"recreational facilities" limited to use by employees of a use or residents of
a development as an accessory use, which may include a swimming pool, at
the end of § 190-19.
TAVERN or BAR — A commercial use that involves the sale of beverages
and food to the public, and in which the sale of alcoholic beverages makes
up more than 50% of the total volume of sales, and which does not meet
the definition of a "nightclub." This use may include a brew pub, which
manufactures its own beer products for on-site and off-site sale. A
commercial use that involves a lower percentage of alcoholic beverage
sales shall be considered a "restaurant."[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-410]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR USE — A structure or use which is not
designed to last or to be used for a specific use for more than one year or
be erected and/or used for a maximum of 30 days in any calendar year.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
a specific setback is established for that particular type of structure by
this ordinance.
See residential accessory structure regulations in § 190-211 and
setback exceptions in § 190-191.
C.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:618
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN — An outdoor area devoted primarily to
the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions to patrons seated
in motor vehicles or outdoors.
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 250 tires on a lot, except
for manufacture or wholesale or retail sales of new tires.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling."
TOWNSHIP — Palmer Township, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
TRACT —
TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that is primarily intended for education of a
work-related skill or craft or a hobby and that does not primarily provide
state-required education to persons under age 16. This shall include a
dancing school, martial arts school or ceramics school.
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a prison or a permitted
accessory use in a hospital) providing housing facilities for persons who
need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling for stays of less than
one year and who need such facilities because of:
In certain zoning districts, the tract is the minimum amount of adjacent
land area within the Township that is required to be approved as part
of an overall preliminary subdivision or land development plan in order
to allow either certain types of uses or to allow the creation of lots
smaller than a certain specified lot area. An area of land shall meet the
following requirements in order to be considered a "tract":
Shall only include lands within an approved preliminary plan that
includes a well-defined internal circulation system, maximum
coordination between lots and carefully limited points of vehicular
access onto streets exterior to the tract; and
(1)
Shall only include lands that at the time of the approval of the
preliminary plan have one landowner (as defined by Article II),
unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that there is a legally binding commitment between two or more
landowners to coordinate the access and development of the tract
as shown in the approved preliminary plan; and
(2)
Shall include each lot being at least partially abutting another
portion of the tract, except that parts of a tract may be separated
by public streets or a waterway.
(3)
A.
It is not required that construction of all streets or structures within an
entire minimum tract occur at one point in time.
B.
Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house or a
treatment/housing center for persons convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol.
A.
B. Addiction to alcohol and/or a controlled substance.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:619
TRUCKING COMPANY TERMINAL — A use involving the handling of a
large variety of materials, including materials owned by numerous entities,
being transported to a site to be loaded primarily from tractor-trailer trucks.
The trucks engaged in this cause are primarily owned by the owner of the
facility. This use does not involve substantial processing or repacking of
the materials. This use may also involve parking, storage, and incidental
repairs and maintenance of primarily tractor-trailers, which are owned by
the facility owner. A trucking company terminal may include as clearly
accessory uses if they are closely related to the principal use: repair,
washing, refueling, and maintenance facilities for trucks using the terminal,
administrative uses for the terminal and rest facilities for truck drivers
using the terminal.[Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
TRUCK STOP — A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel and
other services to tractor-trailer trucks. This use may also involve providing
repair services, sale of gifts and various household items, a restaurant,
showers and a motel.
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — An accessory living area especially
created for and limited to occupancy by a close relative of the permanent
residents of the principal dwelling unit to provide needed care and
supervision to such relative. See definition of relative in this section and
standards in § 190-211.
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a building, activity outside of a building, any structure, recreational vehicle
storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance not required with a specific requirement of the Zoning
Ordinance. Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the
State Municipalities Planning Code. 182
VETERINARIAN OFFICE — A building routinely used for the treatment
of animals and related housing or boarding of sick animals. Treatment of
"small animals" includes only small domestic animals, including but not
limited to dogs, cats, rabbits, birds or fowl. Treatment of "large animals"
includes all types of animals, including horses, cows and pigs. Housing
primarily healthy animals shall be considered a "kennel" and shall meet the
requirements of that use.
WALL — See "fence." See also "retaining wall, engineered."[Amended
1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage of products, goods, and/or materials for further use in
A type of mental illness or other behavior that could cause a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
C.
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:620
manufacturing processes or of finished products ready for shipment, but not
used for retail sales, unless such retail sales use is specifically permitted in
that zoning district.[Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
WATER SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a source
to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state
agencies and the Township.
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
(NOTE: As of 1993, the following was the official U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers' definition of wetlands: "Those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas." "Wetlands" are
technically defined on the basis of types of vegetation and soils and the level
of the water table below the surface. As of 1993, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and DER enforce the wetlands regulations.)
WHOLESALE USE — An establishment or place of business engaged in
selling merchandise to retailers, business users, other wholesalers or their
agents or brokers and not to the general public.[Amended 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-410]
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as the
subject structure or use. Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal
and accessory structures within specified required minimum yards. See
§ 190-194 regarding setbacks from power transmission line rights-of-way
and regarding exceptions to yard requirements.
YARD, FRONT — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered by
buildings between the front lot line (which usually is the future street rightof-
way line) and a line drawn parallel to such front lot line at a distance
specified by the applicable section of this ordinance. Such yard shall extend
the full width of the lot from side lot line to side lot line.
CENTRAL WATER SERVICE — Service by a central water system that is
owned and operated by a municipality, a municipal or county authority
or a water company regulated by the State Public Utility Commission,
and which transmits water from a common source to more than 30
dwellings or principal uses.
A.
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Central water service by a system owned
by a municipality or a municipal or county authority.
B.
ON-LOT OR NON-PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Service by a water
system that does not meet the definition of a "central water service." In
most cases, this would involve an individual well serving an individual
lot, but may also include a common well or another duly approved
system.
C.
§ 190-13 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-13
186:621
YARD, REAR — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered by
buildings between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel to such rear
lot line at a distance specified by the applicable section of this ordinance.
Such "yard" shall extend the full width of the lot from side lot line to side
lot line. (A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in this
ordinance.) See exceptions in § 190-194B(4).
YARD, SIDE — An area required to be open to the sky and not covered by
buildings between each side lot line and a line drawn parallel to each side
lot line at a distance specified by the applicable section of this ordinance.
Such "yard" shall extend the entire length of the lot from the front lot
line to the rear lot line. A structure shall not extend into the applicable
minimum side yard, except as provided for in this ordinance. See exceptions
in § 190-194B(4).
ZONING — Generally shall mean the designation of specified districts
within a municipality, reserving each district for certain uses, together
with limitations on lot area, heights of structures and other stipulated
requirements.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Palmer Township, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania. 183
ZONING OFFICERS — The administrative officers charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or his or her officially
designated assistant(s).
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Palmer Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot.
A.
When a lot abuts onto two or more public streets, the applicant may
choose which is the front yard, unless the Zoning Officer determines
that the front yard should follow the clearly predominant front yard
orientation of the development of abutting lots. See also § 190-194
regarding setbacks on corner lots. If two front yards are required, then
two side yards shall be required but a rear yard is not required.
B.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in § 190-194B(4) or another specific provision
of this ordinance.
C.
183. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-13 PALMER CODE § 190-13
186:622
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 190-14. Districts designated.
§ 190-15. Application of district regulations.
A. For the purpose of this ordinance, the Township of Palmer is hereby
divided into the following types of zoning districts:
RA Rural Agricultural District
LDR Low-Density Residential District
MDR Medium-Density Residential District
HDR High-Density Residential District
HDR-2 High-Density (Limited Residential) Residential District
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
HDR-II High Density Residential II District [Added 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-311]
GC General Commercial District
PC Planned Commercial District
PO/B Planned Office/Business District
LI Light Industrial District
HI Heavy Industrial District
PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District
PO/IP Planned Office/Industrial Park District
FP Floodplain Overlay District
C-R Conservation & Recreation District
NEB North End Business Overlay District [Added 6-26-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-410]
MSC Main Street Commercial Overlay District [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
TI-1 Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
TI-2 Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
B. For the purposes of this ordinance, the zoning districts named in
Subsection A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the Official Zoning Map.184
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically in this ordinance, no
land or building or structure shall be used or occupied except for a use
184. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-14 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-15
186:623
§ 190-16. Zoning Map.
permitted in the zoning district within which the land or building or
structure is located.
B. The regulations set by this ordinance shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this ordinance.
C. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be used or occupied unless it is
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the use and
district in which it is located.
D. No part of yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading
space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard,
open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for
any other building.
E. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by
this ordinance.
F. Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Township shall be
classified as the zoning district of the Township most similar to the
zoning of such territory before annexation (as determined by the
Zoning Hearing Board) until otherwise classified.
G. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on a lot, unless
specifically permitted by this ordinance.
A. A map entitled, "Zoning Map for the Township of Palmer" accompanies
this ordinance and is declared a part of this ordinance.185
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, attested by the Township
Secretary, and shall bear the adoption date of this ordinance and the
seal of the Township under the following words: "This is to certify that
this is the Official Zoning Map adopted __________________ (date) as part
of the Palmer Township Zoning Ordinance of 2000." [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 284]
C. Changes of any nature to the Official Zoning Map shall be made in
conformity with the amendment procedures set forth in this ordinance.
All changes shall be noted by date with a brief description of the nature
of the change.
185. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-15 PALMER CODE § 190-16
186:624
§ 190-17. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on said
map, the following rules shall apply:
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official
Zoning Map shall be located in the Township Office and shall be the
final authority on boundaries and districts. The Zoning Officer shall
have a certified copy of the Official Zoning Map for official use.
E. New map.
(1) If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of changes and additions, the Board of
Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map
which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
(2) The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors
or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall include an amendment thereof.
(3) The new Official Zoning Map shall bear the following words: "The
Official Zoning Map of the Palmer Township Zoning Ordinance of
2000." [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 284]
(4) Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any part or parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
F. The documents and mapping referenced by the floodplain regulations
of this ordinance are hereby incorporated by reference into this
ordinance as if they were fully described within.186
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of existing street rights-of-way, streams and railroads and lot
or property lines as they exist on a recorded deed or plan of record in
the County Recorder of Deeds' office at the time of the adoption of this
ordinance, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions
as shown on the Zoning Map.187
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, and where it does not scale more than
10 feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
186. Editor's Note: See § 190-154, Flood-prone areas.
187. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-16 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-17
186:625
§ 190-18. Interpretation of boundaries.
In case of any uncertainty, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the
location of district boundaries. Applicants for such a hearing shall not be
subject to hearing fees for hearings made necessary by uncertainty on the
part of the Zoning Officer.
§ 190-19. Buffers and setbacks across municipal boundaries.
C. In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions,
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the maps.
D. The Official Township Property Line Maps are hereby specifically
referenced to be used to interpret any zoning district boundary
uncertainty.
E. C-R Districts that relate to an existing cemetery or Township-owned use
include all the abutting land owned by the cemetery or the Township at
the time of adoption of this ordinance.
A. Purpose: to continue the objective of compatible land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. This ordinance requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer
yards when a use would abut an existing dwelling or a residential
zoning district.
C. These same setback and buffer yard provisions shall be provided for
uses locating within Palmer Township if the abutting existing residence
or principally residential zoning district would be located in another
municipality.
§ 190-17 PALMER CODE § 190-19
186:626
ARTICLE IV
RA Rural Agricultural District
§ 190-20. Purpose.
This district is intended to encourage the preservation of agricultural
activities and to avoid sprawled and inefficient development. It also
recognizes the problems of high water table soils and sinkholes throughout
much of this district. This district also recognizes that most of this area
is unlikely to be served by central water and sewer facilities in the near
future. As stated in the Township Comprehensive Plan, in the future, it may
become reasonable to extend public utilities into this area and encourage
light industrial uses, once areas currently zoned for intense uses become
mostly developed. For this reason also, large lot sizes are necessary for
residential uses to buffer against any future industrial uses.
§ 190-21. Permitted by right uses.
The following uses are permitted by right in the RA District, provided that
all other requirements of this ordinance are met:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Individual mobile/manufactured home.*
C. Crop farming and orchard.
D. Raising of livestock.*
E. Nonhousehold stable, horse barn, riding academy or kennel.*
F. Horticultural use related to the raising, propagating and selling of
trees, shrubs, flowers and other vegetative material, and including
greenhouses and nurseries, but not including commercial forestry.
G. Campground, limited to tent sites.
H. Household swimming pool**, golf course or private picnic grove.***
I. Place of worship.*
J. Publicly-owned park, playground and other Township-owned use.
K. Membership club.
L. Nature preserve.*
M. Emergency services station.*
N. Nonhousehold swimming pool.*
O. Conversion of a nonresidential structure to a single-family residential
use, within the lot area and bulk requirements of this district.*
P. Commercial and noncommercial crop storage.*
§ 190-20 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-21
186:627
§ 190-22. Special exception uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
The following is a list of special exception uses within the Rural Agricultural
District, which shall also have to meet the requirements set forth for
particular uses set forth in § 190-210C:
§ 190-23. Conditional uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
The following is a list of conditional uses in a Rural Agricultural District,
which shall be required to meet the requirements set forth for each
particular use set forth in § 190-210B:
Q. Veterinarian office.*
R. Cemetery, including mausoleum.
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
A. Boardinghouse.
B. Commercial outdoor recreation use, other than those listed under
permitted by right uses, except commercial motor vehicle racetrack.
C. Conversion of a single-family detached dwelling into a dwelling with an
accessory apartment.
D. Bed-and-breakfast use.
E. Group home within a lawful dwelling.
F. Gun club/firearm target range.
G. Home occupation, general.
H. Roadside produce market as a principal use.
A. Appropriate governmental facility and service, other than those
permitted by right.
B. Appropriate public utility facility.
C. Commercial communications tower.
D. Junkyard.
E. Mineral extraction, which may include open pit mining.
F. Mobile/manufactured home park.
G. Public or private airport or heliport.
§ 190-21 PALMER CODE § 190-23
186:628
§ 190-24. Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory uses in the RA District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-25. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the RA District shall be as follows for uses
other than mobile home parks (see § 190-210):
H. Recycling collection center.
I. Sanitary landfill, waste to energy plant or solid waste transfer facility.
J. Tank farm or wholesale fuel sales.
K. Treatment center.
L. Adult bookstore, adult movie theaters, adult live entertainment use.
M. Commercial motor vehicle racetrack.
A. Accessory use specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
B. Residential accessory use or structure.**
C. Crop storage.**
D. Heliport as a special exception.**
E. Roadside produce market as an accessory use.*
F. Warehousing and storage in an accessory structure.
G. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customary and incidental
to a permitted principal use.
H. Home occupation, light.**
I. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
A. Minimum lot size: three acres, unless a larger lot area is required by
another section of this ordinance.
B. Lot width: a minimum of 125 feet at the setback line; a minimum of 100
feet at the existing right-of-way line, except a minimum of 250 feet for
any use having direct vehicular access onto a minor arterial street, as
shown on the Official Street Classification Map.188
188. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-23 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-25
186:629
§ 190-26. Additional regulations.
For off-street parking, see Article XVII. For Signs, see Article XVIII. See
§ 190-201, which generally requires a site plan review for every principal
nonresidential use. See § 190-150, which requires a minimum construction
area that does not intrude into specified features. See §§ 190-151 and
190-154, which regulate flood-prone areas.
C. Lot depth: a minimum of 150 feet.
D. Lot coverage: 20% maximum for all principal and accessory buildings,
except that buildings devoted to farm use may have a 40% maximum
building coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not be greater
than 40% of a lot.
E. Front yard setback.
(1) Fronting major arterial street: not permitted.
(2) Fronting minor arterial street: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector street: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local street: 30 feet minimum.
(5) In the case where a property's front yard does not abut a public
street, the front yard setback shall be no less than 35 feet from the
center line of any private street serving more than one dwelling
unit.
F. Side yard setback.
(1) Principal uses. There shall be two side yards with an aggregate
width of not less than 40 feet, and the width of the narrower side
shall not be less than 15 feet.
(2) Accessory uses: 12 feet minimum.
(3) On a corner lot there shall be a side yard equal to the front yard
requirements of Subsection E.
G. Rear yard setback.
(1) Principal uses: 40 feet minimum.
(2) Accessory uses: 12 feet minimum.
H. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet maximum, whichever is more restrictive.
§ 190-25 PALMER CODE § 190-26
186:630
ARTICLE V
LDR Low-Density Residential District
§ 190-27. Purpose.
The purpose of the LDR District is to provide for the orderly expansion
of low density residential development where public services are available
and to exclude uses that are incompatible with such low density residential
development.
§ 190-28. Permitted by right uses.
Permitted by right uses in the LDR District shall be as follows, provided that
all other requirements of this ordinance are satisfied:
§ 190-29. Special exception uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
The following is a list of special exceptions within the Low Density
Residential District, which uses shall also have to meet the requirements set
forth for each particular use in § 190-210C:
A. Crop farming and orchard.
B. Single-family detached dwelling.
C. Publicly-owned park and appropriate Township-owned facility.
D. Household swimming pool.**
E. Nature preserve.*
F. Golf course.
G. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
A. Bed-and-breakfast with a minimum lot area of two acres.
B. Conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling into a
dwelling with an accessory apartment.
C. General home occupation, not including a barbershop or beauty parlor.
D. Group home within any lawful dwelling unit.
E. Nonhousehold swimming pool.
F. Place of worship, with a minimum lot size of two acres located along a
road designated as either a collector or minor arterial.
§ 190-27 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-30
186:631
§ 190-30. Conditional uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
The following is a list of conditional uses in a Low Density Residential
District; said uses must meet the requirements established in § 190-210B.:
§ 190-31. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted accessory uses in the LDR District within the
requirements of § 190-211:
§ 190-32. Specifically prohibited uses.
Uses not specifically provided for or implied in the LDR District are
prohibited. The following additional principal and accessory uses are
specifically and clearly prohibited:
A. Appropriate governmental facility and service, including fire stations.
B. Appropriate public utility facility.
C. Public or privately owned school.
A. Residential accessory structure or use.**
B. Accessory use specifically permitted by § 190-211.
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customary and incidental
to a permitted principal use.
D. Home occupation, light.**
E. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Conversion of a dwelling or residential structure into more than two
total dwelling units, or any conversion not specifically meeting the
requirements of § 190-211.
B. Raising of livestock (other than as a customary accessory use to a
principal crop farming use).
C. Solid waste disposal area or facility.
D. Any use which violates Article XVI, Environmental Preservation.
E. Commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display.
§ 190-30 PALMER CODE § 190-32
186:632
§ 190-33. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the LDR District shall be as follows:
F. Any use not specifically permitted either by right, special exception,
conditional use or accessory use is prohibited. [Added 5-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-316]
A. Density.
(1) Minimum lot area: 21,000 square feet, except where a minimum lot
size of one acre shall be required if the lot would not have approved
public sewage service. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
B. Lot width.
(1) Intent. The intent of this section is to discourage numerous
driveway openings onto major roads and to encourage interior road
systems.
(2) A minimum of 100 feet at the required minimum building setback
line; a minimum of 40 feet at the edge of the existing right-of-way,
except:
(a) A minimum of 200 feet at the edge of the existing right-of-way
for lots having direct vehicular access onto any minor arterial
street, for any lot created after the adoption of this ordinance
(except if the driveway entrance is approved to abut the
driveway of an abutting lot).
(b) A minimum of 130 feet at the edge of the existing right-of-way
for lots having direct vehicular access onto a collector street,
for any lot created after the adoption of this ordinance (except
if the driveway entrance is approved to abut the driveway of an
abutting lot).
C. Lot depth: a minimum of 120 feet.
D. Lot coverage: 20% maximum for all principal and accessory buildings.
Impervious coverage shall not be greater than 35% of a lot. [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
E. Front yard setback. A front yard shall adjoin any public street.
(1) Fronting major arterial roads: not permitted.
(2) Fronting minor arterial roads: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector roads: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local roads: 30 feet minimum.
§ 190-32 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-33
186:633
§ 190-34. (Reserved)189
§ 190-35. Additional regulations.
For off-street parking, see Article XVII. For signs, see Article XVIII. See also
§ 190-201, which generally requires a site plan review for every principal
nonresidential use. See § 190-150, which requires a minimum construction
area that does not intrude into specified features. See §§ 190-151 and
190-154, which regulate flood-prone areas.
(5) In the case where a property's front yard does not abut a public
road, the front yard setback shall be no less than 35 feet from the
center line of any private road serving more than one dwelling unit.
F. Side yard setback.
(1) Principal uses. There shall be two side yards with an aggregate
width of not less than 30 feet, and the width of the narrower side
yard shall not be less than 12 feet.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) On a corner lot there shall be a side yard equal to the front yard
requirements of Subsection E.
G. Rear yard setback.
(1) Principal uses: 35 feet minimum, except as stated in Subsection
G(3) below.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) A raised open primarily wood deck attached to a principal use: 20
feet minimum.
H. Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
I. Number of principal buildings. There shall be no more than one
principal building per lot.
J. Setback from industrial zoning districts. All buildings including one or
more dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the
boundary of any HI, LI, PIC or PO/IP district boundary. If a public street
is the zoning boundary, such setback shall be measured from the center
line of the street. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
189. Editor's Note: Former § 190-34, Single-family detached cluster option, was repealed
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282.
§ 190-33 PALMER CODE § 190-35
186:634
ARTICLE VI
MDR Medium-Density Residential District
§ 190-36. Purpose.
The purpose of the MDR District is to provide for the orderly development
of existing and proposed medium density residential areas where adequate
public services, streets and transportation improvements are or will be
available, and to exclude those uses not compatible with such development.
§ 190-37. Permitted by right uses. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282]
Permitted by right uses in the MDR District shall be as follows, provided
that all other requirements of this ordinance are satisfied:
§ 190-38. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses in the MDR Medium-Density Residential District
shall be as follows:
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Household swimming pool.**
C. Crop farming and orchard.
D. Place of worship, with a two-acre minimum lot area.*
E. Golf course.*
F. Publicly-owned park.
G. Nature preserve.*
H. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
I. Townhouses, subject to the regulations set forth in § 190-43. [Added
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Nonhousehold swimming pool.*
B. Home occupation, general.**
C. Conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling into a
dwelling with an accessory apartment.**
D. (Reserved)190
§ 190-36 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-38
186:635
§ 190-39. Conditional uses. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282;
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
The following is a list of conditional uses in the Medium Density Residential
District; said uses must meet the requirements established in § 190-201B.:
§ 190-40. Specifically prohibited uses.
Uses not specifically provided for or implied in each district are prohibited.
The following additional uses are specifically and clearly prohibited:
§ 190-41. Permitted accessory uses.
The following accessory uses are permitted in the MDR District within the
requirements of § 190-211:
E. Day-care center, child.*
F. Bed-and-breakfast use.*
G. Group home* within a lawful dwelling unit.
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Appropriate government facility or service.
B. Public or privately owned school.
C. Active adult development in compliance with the specific requirements
set forth in § 190-210B. [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-315;
amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-327]
A. Conversion of a single-family detached dwelling into more than two
dwelling units or any residential conversion not meeting the
requirements of § 190-210 or 190-211.
B. Raising of livestock (other than as a customary accessory use to a
principal crop framing use).
C. Solid waste disposal facility or area.
A. Residential accessory structures or uses** (see list of uses included in
this term in § 190-211).
B. Accessory structure or uses specifically permitted by § 190-211.
C. Accessory uses and structures which are clearly customarily incidental
to a permitted principal use.
190. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Public or privately owned school, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-38 PALMER CODE § 190-41
186:636
§ 190-42. Area and bulk regulations for uses other than
townhouses.
Area and bulk regulations in the MDR Medium-Density Residential District
shall be as follows:
D. Home occupation, light.**
E. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Density.
(1) A minimum of 15,000 square feet per lot, except if a large lot area
is required by another section. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282]
(2) A minimum lot size of one acre per dwelling or principal use shall
be required if a lot is not served by approved public sewer service.
B. Lot width: a minimum of 75 feet at the required minimum building
setback line and 40 feet at the existing street right-of-way line, except
that:
(1) Any use having direct individual vehicular access onto a minor
arterial street shall have a minimum lot width at the edge of the
existing right-of-way of 200 feet.
(2) Any use having direct individual vehicle access onto a collector
street shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the edge of the
existing right-of-way.
C. Lot depth: a minimum of 120 feet.
D. Lot coverage: 25% maximum building coverage; maximum impervious
coverage of 50%. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
E. Front yard setback. A front yard shall adjoin any public street.
(1) Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
(2) Fronting minor arterial streets: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector streets: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local streets: 30 feet minimum.
(5) In the case where a property's front yard does not abut a public
street, the front yard setback shall not be less than 35 feet from the
center line of any private street servicing more than one dwelling
unit.
§ 190-41 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-42
186:637
§ 190-43. Area and bulk regulations for townhouses.
Area and bulk regulations for townhouses shall be as follows:
(6) To allow variety in layout of a development, up to 50% of the
residential buildings in each phase of construction may be located
up to five feet forward of the building front yard setback line, if an
equal or greater number of residential buildings are at least five
feet behind the building front yard setback line.
F. Side yard setback.
(1) Principal uses. There shall be two side yards with an aggregate
width of not less than 25 feet, and the width of the narrower side
shall not be less than 10 feet, except that a single-family
semidetached dwelling shall only be required to have one side yard
with a width of 10 feet.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) On a corner lot there shall be a side yard equivalent to the
standards of Subsection E.
G. Rear yard setback.
(1) Principal uses: 30 feet minimum, except as provided in Subsection
G(3) below.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) Raised open wood deck attached to principal use: 20 feet minimum.
H. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet maximum, whichever is more restrictive;
however, no dwelling shall be less than one story in height (see Article
XIX).
I. Number of buildings. There shall be no more than one principal
building per lot.
J. Setback from industrial zoning districts. All buildings including one or
more dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the
boundary of any HI, LI, PIC or PO/IP district boundary. If a public street
is the zoning boundary, such setback shall be measured from the center
line of the street. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
A. Purposes: to allow for very-well-planned triplexes and quadplexes with
standards designed to ensure compatibility with adjacent single-family
detached dwellings and to allow houses to be clustered on the most
suitable portions of a tract with the bulk of the tract in open space. The
overall density is generally intended to not be significantly higher than
that allowed with single-family detached dwellings or twin dwellings.
B. Minimum tract area: four acres. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282]
§ 190-42 PALMER CODE § 190-43
186:638
§ 190-44. Additional regulations.
For off-street parking, see Article XVII. For signs, see Article XVIII. For
uses other than townhouses, see the "construction area" regulations of
§ 190-150. For flood-prone areas, see §§ 190-151 and 190-154.
§ 190-45. (Reserved)192
§ 190-46. Site plan review.
A site plan is generally required for certain principal nonresidential uses.
See § 190-201.
C. Townhouse standards. All of the requirements of § 190-54 shall also
apply to townhouses in the MDR District, except for regulations of this
section that specifically differ, such as the minimum average buildable
area per dwelling unit.
D. Density for townhouses.
(1) Density for townhouses in the MDR District shall be based upon
average "buildable" lot area per dwelling unit. Land is not required
to be subdivided into individual lots for individual townhouses. See
§ 190-54 regarding the method to calculate the maximum density.
(2) The tract shall include an average minimum of 10,000 square feet
of "buildable" lot area per townhouse dwelling unit. No single acre
of land within a tract shall include more than six townhouses.
[Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
E. Number of attached units. No more than four townhouse dwelling units
shall be attached in any form. Note, this number may be increased to a
maximum of six attached units upon review by the Planning
Commission and approval of the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use. As part of this request, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
proposed units meet the intent of the design examples contained in
Appendix 1191 and will result in a development with architectural detail,
not limited to articulation in the facade, variety in construction
materials and textures, variation in roofline/pitch, the incorporation of
dormers, porches, and off-street parking options that are not the focal
point of the structure or streetscape. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 282]
191. Editor's Note: Said Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
192. Editor's Note: Former § 190-45, Single-family detached cluster option, was repealed
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282.
§ 190-43 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-46
186:639

ARTICLE VII
HDR High-Density Residential District
§ 190-47. Purpose. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
The purpose of this district is to prevent the overcrowding of land and
yet encourage well-planned and well-designed higher-density residential
uses in those areas where central water and sewerage services are most
available, and to provide for the public convenience and avoid congestion
of the streets. This district is intended to promote development that is
compatible with adjacent development and that incorporates natural
features and open space into overall site design.
§ 190-48. Permitted by right uses. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282]
A. The following uses in the HDR District shall be permitted with or
without central water and sewer services, within the requirements of
Article XX:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Crop farming and orchard.
(3) Nature preserve.
(4) Golf course.*
(5) Publicly owned recreation or Township-owned facility.
(6) Place of worship,* with a minimum lot area of two acres.
(7) Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
B. In addition to Subsection A, permitted uses in the HDR District shall be
as follows, provided that each dwelling unit will be served by both
public water and public sewer service prior to occupancy, and within
the requirements of Article XX:
(1) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(2) Two-family detached dwelling.
(3) Townhouse.
(4) Low-rise apartment.
(5) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
§ 190-47 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-49
186:641
§ 190-49. Special exception uses. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282]
Special exception uses in the HDR District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-50. Specifically prohibited accessory and principal uses.
Specifically prohibited accessory and principal uses shall be as follows:
A. Nonhousehold swimming pool.*
B. (Reserved)193
C. Home occupation, general.**
D. (Reserved)194
E. Boardinghouses.*
F. (Reserved)195
G. (Reserved)196
H. Day-care center, child, as a principal use.*
I. (Reserved)197
J. Group home within a lawful dwelling.*
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
A. Raising of livestock.
B. Solid waste disposal area or facility.
C. Any use which violates Article XVI.
D. Commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display.
193. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Medical and dental office, etc., was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
194. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Mid-rise apartment, was repealed 1-29-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-420.
195. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Business office building, was repealed 5-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-316.
196. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Publicly or privately owned school, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
197. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, Appropriate public utility facility, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-49 PALMER CODE § 190-50
186:642
§ 190-51. Conditional uses. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282;
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
The following is a list of conditional uses in the High Density Residential
District which must meet the general and specific standards governing
conditional uses in this ordinance:
§ 190-52. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
E. Apartments of seven or more stories, because of fire safety concerns
and incompatibility with the character of the HDR District and the
Township.
A. Life care center.
B. Personal care home.
C. Retirement village.
D. Cemetery.
E. Nursing home.
F. Appropriate governmental facilities and services other than those listed
as permitted by right.
G. Appropriate public utility facilities.
H. Public or privately owned school.
I. Mid-rise apartment. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
A. Accessory use specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
B. Residential accessory use or structure** (see list of uses included in this
term in § 190-211).
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customarily incidental to
a permitted principal use.**
D. Accessory outdoor and indoor recreational facility that is clearly
intended to be used predominantly and almost exclusively by residents
of the development within which it is integrated.
E. Home occupation, light.**
F. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
§ 190-50 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-53
186:643
§ 190-53. Area and bulk regulations for uses other than
townhouses, low-rise (garden) apartments, mid-rise apartments, life
care centers and offices as principal uses.
Area and bulk regulations for uses other than townhouses, low-rise (garden)
apartments, mid-rise apartments, life care centers and offices as principal
uses shall be as follows:
A. Density, lot width and lot depth.
Minimum Lot Width 2
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Tract
Size per
Building
(sq. ft.)
At
Setback
Line
(feet)
At Edge
of
Existing
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwelling and
individual
mobile homes
With public
sewer
service
[Amended
2-15-2000
by Ord. No.
282]
12,000 12,000 601 401 100
Without
public sewer
service
43,5601 43,5601 1001 401 200
Single-family
semidetached
dwelling,
two-family
detached
dwelling or
two-family
semidetached
dwelling
6,0001 12,000 451 401 100
§ 190-53 PALMER CODE § 190-53
186:644
Minimum Lot Width 2
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Tract
Size per
Building
(sq. ft.)
At
Setback
Line
(feet)
At Edge
of
Existing
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
All other
principal
uses (unless
larger lot
requirements
stated
elsewhere)
15,000 15,000 60 40 100
NOTES:
1 Per dwelling unit.
2 Except as required by § 190-53H.
B. Lot coverage: 30% maximum for all buildings and 70% maximum
impervious coverage. A minimum of 30% of the lot area shall be
landscaped.
C. Front yard setback.
(1) Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
(2) Fronting minor arterial streets: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector streets: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local streets: 30 feet minimum.
(5) In the case where a property's front yard does not abut a public
street, the front yard setback shall be no less than 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback.
(1) Principal uses. There shall be two side yards with an aggregate
width of not less than 16 feet and the width of the narrower side
yard shall be not less than eight feet.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet.
(3) Corner lot. See § 190-194.
E. Rear yard setback.
(1) Principal uses: 30 feet minimum, except as provided in Subsection
E(3) below.
§ 190-53 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-53
186:645
§ 190-54. Area and bulk regulations for townhouse and low-rise
(garden) apartment dwellings.
Area and bulk regulations for townhouse and low-rise (garden) apartment
dwellings shall be as follows:
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) Raised open wood deck attached to principal use: 20 feet minimum.
F. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive, except as
is specifically permitted for mid-rise apartments.
G. Building setback from major arterial streets (expressways).
(1) Buildings including one or more dwelling units shall be setback a
minimum of 150 feet from the existing right-of-way line of any
major arterial street, except as below.
(2) As a special exception use, if a use including one or more dwelling
units includes a landscaped earth berm of appropriate height and
design to deflect noise from the highway, and if such berm will be
located between the major arterial street and the principal
structure, then the minimum building setback shall be reduced to
60 feet from the existing right-of-way of the major arterial street.
(3) Major arterial streets include U.S. Route 22 and PA Route 33.
H. Lot widths along minor arterial and major collector streets. The
following shall be required for any lot created or resubdivided after the
adoption of this ordinance:
(1) Any use or uses on a lot created after the adoption of this ordinance
having its own direct vehicular access onto a minor arterial street
shall have a minimum lot width of 200 feet at the edge of the
existing right-of-way.
(2) Any use or uses on a lot created after the adoption of this ordinance
having its own direct vehicular access onto a major collector street
shall have a minimum lot width of 130 feet at the edge of the
existing right-of-way.
A. Terms. For the purpose of this section, the term "apartments" shall
refer to low-rise apartment uses.
B. Minimum tract area. Townhouses and low-rise apartments shall have a
minimum tract area of 21,000 square feet.
C. Vehicular parking setback. See § 190-168G. Off-street parking shall not
be permitted within the front yard area of a lot and shall be located to
the rear or side of the principal structure. No off-street parking areas
shall be permitted between the principal structure and the public
street. However, where the applicant can demonstrate, upon review by
§ 190-53 PALMER CODE § 190-54
186:646
the Planning Commission and approval as a conditional use by the
Board of Supervisors, that garages and parking oriented to the front
of the unit or structure will not extend beyond the width of the garage
doors or become a prominent portion of the front yard, such parking
may be permitted. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
D. Principal building separation. All principal buildings shall be separated
from any other principal building by a minimum of 30 feet and a
minimum average of 40 feet. A building may include multiple dwelling
units.
E. Maximum density.
(1) Site capacity calculation. The maximum total density of a
townhouse or a low-rise (garden) apartment development shall be
determined as follows. If an area of land would have more than one
characteristic stated in Subsection E(1)(b) through (g) below, it
shall only be deleted once. All land areas shall be stated in
hundredths of an acre. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-420]
(a) The total lot area of all lots within the tract, not including
existing rights-of-way of existing public streets.
= _______ acres
(b) Delete future rights-of-way abutting existing public streets that
are required to be dedicated.
- _______ acres
Areas voluntarily dedicated for an improvement to a public
street that are not required by PennDOT or the Township
but that the Board of Supervisors determines will serve a
substantial public need are not required to be deleted from
the buildable area of the tract.
Rights-of-way of proposed streets are not required to be
deleted from the buildable area of the tract, except as
specified above.
(c) Delete areas of more than 1,000 square feet with existing
natural slopes of 15% or greater.
- _______ acres
(d) Delete areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain, according
to official FEMA/FIA maps or a detailed study using accepted
hydraulic modeling techniques which meets all requirements
listed in § 190-154H(4).
- _______ acres
§ 190-54 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-54
186:647
(e) Delete areas proposed to be used for any principal uses other
than low-rise (garden) apartments, townhouses or common
open space.
- _______ acres
(f) Delete areas to be dedicated to the Township as public open
space.
- _______ acres
(g) Delete areas within existing surface utility or stormwater
rights-of-way or casements, such as overhead electric
transmission rights-of-way, existing stormwater management
facilities and/or drainage swales. Existing underground utility
and drainage easements are not required to be deleted from
the buildable area of the tract.
- _______ acres
____________________
(h) Equals the "buildable area of the tract."
= _______ acres
(i) To determine the maximum total permitted number of new and
existing townhouse or low-rise (garden) apartment dwelling
units permitted within the tract, multiply the buildable area of
the tract by the following:
[1] Low-rise (garden) apartment density: nine dwelling units
per acre of buildable area of the tract.
= _________
permitted dwelling units
[2] Townhouse density: six dwelling units per acre of buildable
area of the tract
= _________
permitted dwelling units
(2) Flexibility in placement. The total number of dwelling units allowed
on the tract may be placed at any appropriate locations within the
buildable area of the tract within the setback and other provisions
of this ordinance. However, no single acre of land shall include
more than 12 dwelling units, once streets and dedicated common
open space are deleted from the lot area.
(3) In calculating the allowable overall density, land which is capable of
further development or subdivision for additional dwellings shall
§ 190-54 PALMER CODE § 190-54
186:648
not be counted unless the possibility of such development or
subdivision is precluded by one of the following methods:
(a) Deed restriction or agreement in form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor and duly recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County.
(b) Transfer of development rights to the Township.
(c) Dedication for public purposes or permanent open space to
serve the development.
(4) Condominiums and lots. The division of land into individual lots is
not required. This allows the development of condominium garden
apartments and townhouses. However, any condominium
development or conversion to condominium ownership shall follow
the requirements and processes of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
(5) Condominiums and streets. In any development of or conversion to
condominiums, the Township shall reserve the right to require all
roads and major driveways to be constructed or improved to
Township standards and dedicated to the Township. The
responsibility of maintaining interior roads and major driveways
should not be given to a homeowner association, unless there are
adequate safeguards.
F. Maximum height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet or 2.5
stories, whichever is more restrictive, except that as a conditional use
the Board of Supervisors may allow up to 3.5 stories or 48 feet for lowrise/
garden apartments to allow excellence in architectural design or to
make an allowance for unusual topography. Pitched roofs with a slope
of five inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal or greater and
variations in rooflines of structures are strongly encouraged for the
purpose of variety. [Amended 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-389]
G. Buffer yard. A buffer yard with screening shall be required, as
described in § 190-194D, between any townhouse or low-rise apartment
principal building and any abutting existing single-family detached
dwelling that would be within 120 feet of a low-rise apartment or
townhouse building. The buffer yard shall be the responsibility of the
developer of the townhouses or low-rise apartments.
H. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) The accessory use provisions of §§ 190-52 and 190-211 shall apply.
(2) The intent is to carefully avoid incompatible structures in a high
density environment.
(3) Garages or carports for the storage of private automobiles are a
permitted by right accessory use, provided that such structures are
architecturally compatible with the principal buildings.
§ 190-54 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-54
186:649
(4) The developer shall state whether any deed restrictions or similar
restrictions will be established to control the design of any
detached accessory buildings and fences. Such controls are
strongly encouraged.
(5) Accessory structures may be placed a minimum of one foot from
the lot line along which dwellings are attached. Fences may be
located on a lot line.
I. Homeowners' and/or condominium agreements. If any dwelling units
are to be sold under homeowners' and/or condominium agreements,
such agreements or documents shall be reviewed by the Township
Solicitor and approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to recording
and filed with the subdivision or land development plan. It is strongly
recommended that any such agreements include restrictions requiring
any fencing or garages to be compatible with the overall design.
J. Maximum impervious coverage shall be 70%, based upon the entire
tract. For the purpose of this section, active recreational facilities such
as tennis or basketball courts shall not be limited by the maximum
impervious coverage regulation. However, such areas shall still be
considered impervious for the purposes of managing stormwater runoff.
K. Maximum length of building. The maximum length of a townhouse or
low-rise apartment building shall be 160 feet, with no more than four
dwelling units attached. As used in this section, "building length"
means the horizontal measurement of any building length from any one
end to any other end, without regard to offsets but without including
diagonal measurements. As a conditional use, upon review by the
Planning Commission and approval by the Board of Supervisors, the
maximum length of the building may be extended to accommodate up to
eight units attached, provided the applicant demonstrates excellence in
design. At a minimum, factors to be incorporated into design include
articulation in roofline and pitch, the use of dormers or other similar
features, and alternating facade materials (e.g., stone, brick, and
wood). Also, a minimum of 50% of all dwellings shall have a front
entrance articulated with a covered porch entry. The size of the front
porch shall be a minimum of five feet deep from the front wall of the
dwelling to the enclosing porch rail and ten feet long. The applicant
may provide an alternative design as part of the conditional use
application that meets the intent of this standard. [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
L. Changes in facade. No more than two adjacent townhouses in any
townhouse building shall have the same front wall plane. The minimum
variation or offset of the front wall plane shall be two feet. A visual
structural break in the roofline or front facade shall be provided
between every two townhouse units. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 282; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-389]
§ 190-54 PALMER CODE § 190-54
186:650
M. External property line building setback. Townhouse and low-rise
apartment buildings and their permitted accessory structures shall be
setback from all exterior lot lines of a tract a minimum distance of 30
feet, except a minimum distance of 80 feet shall be required from the lot
line of an existing single-family detached dwelling.
N. Building setback from public or private streets. All principal and
accessory buildings and carports of townhouse and low-rise apartment
buildings shall have a minimum of 10 feet setback from the street rightof-
way line of proposed and existing streets where parking is located to
the rear or side of the principal structure. Where parking is proposed to
be located to the front of the principal building, the front yard setback
shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the street right-of-way line of
proposed and existing streets. If right-of-way is not established for a
street, then setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
[Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
O. Minimum width of townhouses. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall
have a minimum width of 20 feet, except that a minimum width of 26
feet shall apply if garage doors for two or more vehicles open onto the
front of a townhouse.
P. Minimum private area. For each townhouse, there shall be a yard
immediately adjacent to the front and back of the unit and including the
side for end units. Each dwelling shall be provided an area of not less
than 200 square feet for the exclusive use of the occupants of that
dwelling. Within the yard area described above, a balcony, patio, porch,
deck or other similar outdoor area shall be provided for each dwelling.
If a development is subdivided into lots, the same private area
requirement shall apply in determining the minimum size of the lot;
however, the minimum lot area shall not be less than 3,000 square feet.
Design measures shall be used to seek an appropriate level of privacy in
any rear yards. Such measures might include landscaped screening,
compatible fencing and earth berming. The intent is to avoid the
placement of incompatible fencing by individual lot owners in the
future. If a townhouse includes an individual fee-simple lot of over
1,200 square feet, then such private area is not required to be
specifically designated on plans. Apartments shall provide a terrace,
recessed inside the exterior building wall of the dwelling, for units
above the first level. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
Q. Minimum recreation and open space land. See Article X of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
R. Open space maintenance. See Article X of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
S. Private streets. All interior streets and accessways serving more than
five dwelling units but not including parking courts shall be built to
Township construction standards for public streets, regardless of
whether the streets or accessways will be dedicated to the Township.
§ 190-54 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-54
186:651
However, the Board of Supervisors may allow widths of a cartway and
a right-of-way of any private street or accessway to be narrower than
is required for a public street, provided that a private street providing
direct or indirect access to 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum
width of 24 feet and garages, carports or parking areas are located to
the side or rear of the principal structure. [Amended 2-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 282]
T. Architectural renderings required. Preliminary architectural
renderings shall be required of the front facades of any low-rise
apartment or townhouse development of more than 10 units.
[Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
U. Preservation of natural buffers. See § 190-194D(3)(c).
V. Architectural variety. A variety of complimentary designs are
encouraged among clusters of buildings within larger developments.
Extreme changes of facades among attached townhouse units are
discouraged.
W. Garages. Any townhouses shall be designed so that garages and/or
carports are not an overly prominent part of the view from public
streets. For this reason, parking courts and combined garage or carport
structures are encouraged instead of individual garages, especially for
narrow townhouse units. If garages are provided, they should be
located to the rear of the structures, with a common driveway system,
provided that adequate provision is made for maintenance through a
homeowners' association. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282;
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
X. Mailboxes. Due to the density and compact design of apartment and
townhouse developments, mailboxes should be located either on the
facade of the dwelling unit (where permitted by the United States
Postal Service) or within a common kiosk or enclosed structure.
Individual freestanding mailboxes at the curbside are discouraged.
[Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
Y. Trash bins. Common trash receptacles shall be provided in locations
that are convenient for residents and for collection. Trash dumpsters
and similar facilities shall he completely enclosed within a decorative
masonry or wood fence, at least six feet in height, on three sides,
maintaining 100% visual blockage on three sides and a self-closing gate
on the fourth side. These areas shall be screened from view of streets
and dwellings. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
Z. Access. Vehicular access points onto all minor arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest number possible.
AA. Visitor/overflow parking areas. [Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
282198]
§ 190-54 PALMER CODE § 190-54
186:652
(1) Design. Off-street parking area(s) shall be provided at a rate of 0.25
space per dwelling unit. The off-street parking area(s) shall be
provided in addition to the minimum off-street parking spaces
required for each individual dwelling unit. The visitor/overflow
parking areas shall be located not greater than 300 feet from any
given dwelling. Off-street parking areas shall not be located
between the public street and the principal building. Such parking
areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure
and in pods of not more than 20 spaces. Each parking area shall be
screened from view from the public right-of-way with a four-foot
decorative masonry fence or evergreen hedgerow, or a combination
of both. The parking areas shall contain internal landscaping. At a
minimum, terminal islands shall be installed at both ends of a
single unbroken row of parking. Terminal islands shall be a
minimum of 15 feet in length and minimum of 10 feet in width.
Each terminal island shall be landscaped with a minimum of one
shade tree, and grass or a vegetative ground cover. In addition, a
landscaped divider strip shall be provided to connect the terminal
islands. The divider strip shall be a minimum of seven feet in width
and be planted with a minimum of one shade tree every 30 feet on
center and grass or a vegetative ground cover. These areas shall
not be used to meet the standard parking requirements.
(2) Use. Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall
be prohibited from said parking areas.
BB. Setback from industrial zoning districts. All buildings including one or
more dwelling units shall have a minimum setback of 100 feet from the
boundary of any HI, LI, PIC or PO/IP District boundary. If a public street
is the zoning boundary, such setback shall be measured from the center
line of the street. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261;
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311; 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-420]
(1) In the case of a conditional use application for a traditional village
(pursuant to § 190-224 et seq.), the Board of Supervisors may
consider allowing, as an additional conditional use, the minimum
setback to be reduced to 50 feet, provided that a minimum fortyfoot-
wide buffer yard with screening, as described in § 190-194D,
shall be required between any newly developed townhouse, lowrise/
garden apartment and/or mid-rise apartment principal use and
any abutting industrial zoning district or existing principal
industrial use.
CC. Front yard landscaping. All townhouse dwelling units shall have a
clearly defined front yard using landscaping, hedging, fencing or a
brick or stone wall, none of which shall exceed three feet in height.
Front yards of low-rise apartments, attached duplexes or townhouses
198. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection AA,
Density bonuses.
§ 190-54 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-54
186:653
§ 190-55. Area and bulk regulations for offices as principal uses.
Area and bulk regulations for offices as principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-56. Area and bulk regulations for mid-rise apartment
buildings.
Area and bulk regulations for a mid-rise apartment building shall be as
follows:
may be unified into one common yard treated as a single yard for the
entire building. [Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
A. Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
B. Lot width: a minimum of 120 feet at the building setback line, except a
minimum of 200 feet for any use having direct individual vehicular
access onto a minor arterial road.
C. Lot depth: a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Lot coverage: a maximum of 25% for buildings and 65% total
impervious coverage.
E. Front yard setback.
(1) Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
(2) Fronting minor arterial streets: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector streets: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local streets: 30 feet minimum.
F. Side yard setback. There shall be two side yards, each with a minimum
width of 25 feet.
G. Rear yard setback: a minimum of 50 feet.
H. Parking lot setback. All parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from all buildings, except for garage or carport entrances and
buildings raised to allow parking beneath the structure.
I. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
J. Parking. Wherever reasonable, especially in conversions of residences
to offices, the bulk of off-street parking shall be located to the rear of
the structure. Wherever reasonable in conversions of residences to
offices, the front yard shall maintain a residential appearance.
K. Maximum square footage. No office use or building within an HDR
District shall have a total floor area of greater than 4,000 square feet.
L. Location: shall be located abutting a street designated as a collector or
minor arterial street.
§ 190-54 PALMER CODE § 190-56
186:654
§ 190-57. Additional regulations.
For off-street parking, see Article XVII. For signs, see Article XVIII. For uses
other than townhouses, see the construction area regulations of § 190-150.
For flood-prone areas, see §§ 190-151 and 190-154.
§ 190-58. Site plan review.
See § 190-201 regarding whether a zoning site plan submittal is required.
A. Height: a maximum of six stories or 72 feet, whichever is more
restrictive.
B. Minimum tract area: 10 acres.
C. Building setback. The minimum principal building setback shall be:
(1) Three hundred feet from all lot lines of existing single-family
detached dwellings or single-family semidetached dwellings or lot
lines of less than one acre approved for such dwellings.
(2) One hundred feet from any future right-of-way of an existing street.
(3) Seventy-five feet from any other lot lines.
D. Maximum density: a maximum density of nine dwelling units per acre.
[Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
E. Additional standards. The following sections shall also apply to a midrise
apartment building: § 190-54G, I, J, Q, R, S, T, U, Y, Z, AA and BB.
[Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
§ 190-56 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58
186:655

ARTICLE VIIB
HDR-2 High-Density (Limited Residential) Residential District
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282199]
§ 190-58.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to prevent the overcrowding of land and
yet encourage well-planned and well-designed higher density limited
residential uses in those areas where central water and sewerage services
are most available, and to provide for the public convenience and avoid
congestion of the streets. This district is intended to promote development
that is compatible with adjacent development and that incorporates natural
features and open space into overall site design.
§ 190-58.2. Permitted by right uses.
A. The following uses in the HDR-2 District shall be permitted with or
without central water and sewer services, within the requirements of
Article XX:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Crop farming and orchard.
(3) Nature preserve.
(4) Golf course.*
(5) Publicly owned recreation or Township-owned facility.
(6) Place of worship,* with a minimum lot area of two acres.
(7) Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
B. In addition to Subsection A, permitted uses in the HDR-2 District shall
be as follows, provided that each dwelling unit will be served by both
public water and public sewer service prior to occupancy, and within
the requirements of Article XX:
(1) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(2) Two-family detached dwelling.
(3) Townhouse.
(4) Two-family semidetached dwelling.
199. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2002-326, adopted 11-26-2002, provided the authority for
the numbering of the sections in this article.
§ 190-58.1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.3
186:657
§ 190-58.3. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses in the HDR-2 District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-58.4. Specifically prohibited accessory and principal uses.
Specifically prohibited accessory and principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-58.5. Conditional uses.
The following shall be conditional uses in the HDR-2 District, within the
requirements of Article XX:
A. Nonhousehold swimming pool.*
B. Home occupation, general.**
C. (Reserved)200
D. Day-care center, child, as a principal use.*
E. (Reserved)201
F. Group home within a lawful dwelling.*
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
A. Raising of livestock.
B. Solid waste disposal area or facility.
C. Any use which violates Article XVI.
D. Commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display.
E. Apartments except as may be permitted under § 190-58.5H.
F. Any use not permitted either by right, special exception, conditional use
or accessory use is prohibited. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
A. Life care center.*
B. Personal care home.*
C. Retirement village.*
200. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Publicly or privately owned school, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Appropriate public utility facility, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-58.3 PALMER CODE § 190-58.5
186:658
§ 190-58.6. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-58.7. Area and bulk regulations for uses other than
townhouses and life care centers as principal uses. [Amended
4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-392]
Area and bulk regulations for uses other than townhouses, life care centers
and offices as principal uses shall be as follows:
D. Cemetery.*
E. Nursing home.*
F. Appropriate governmental facilities and services,* other than those
listed as permitted by right.
G. Bed-and-breakfast use.*
H. Conversion of a building to a residential use or into an additional
number of dwelling units, within § 190-202.*
I. Appropriate public utility facility. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
J. Publicly or privately owned school. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
A. Accessory use specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
B. Residential accessory use or structure** (see list of uses included in this
term in § 190-211).
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customarily incidental to
a permitted principal use.**
D. Accessory outdoor and indoor recreational facility that is clearly
intended to be used predominantly and almost exclusively by residents
of the development within which it is integrated.
E. Home occupation, light.**
F. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
*See additional requirements and standards in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements and standards in § 190-211.
§ 190-58.5 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.7
186:659
A. Density, lot width and lot depth.
Minimum Lot Width 2
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Minimum
Tract
Size per
Building
(sq. ft.)
At
Setback
Line
(feet)
At Edge
of
Existing
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwelling
With public
sewer
service
12,000 12,000 601 401 100
Without
public sewer
service
43,5601 43,5601 1001 401 200
Single-family
semidetached
dwelling,
two-family
detached
dwelling or
two-family
semidetached
dwelling
7,5001 15,000 451 401 100
All other
principal
uses (unless
larger lot
requirements
stated
elsewhere)
15,000 15,000 60 40 100
NOTES:
1 Per dwelling unit.
2 Except as required by § 190-58.7H.
B. Lot coverage: 30% maximum for all buildings and 70% maximum
impervious coverage. A minimum of 30% of the lot area shall be
landscaped.
C. Front yard setback.
(1) Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
§ 190-58.7 PALMER CODE § 190-58.7
186:660
(2) Fronting minor arterial streets: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Fronting collector streets: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Fronting local streets: 30 feet minimum.
(5) In the case where a property's front yard does not abut a public
street, the front yard setback shall be no less than 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback.
(1) Principal uses. There shall be two side yards with an aggregate
width of not less than 16 feet, and the width of the narrower side
yard shall be not less than eight feet.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet.
(3) Corner lot. See § 190-194.
E. Rear yard setback.
(1) Principal uses: 30 feet minimum, except as provided in Subsection
E(3) below.
(2) Accessory uses: five feet minimum.
(3) Raised open wood deck attached to principal use: 20 feet minimum.
F. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
G. Building setback from major arterial streets (expressways).
(1) Buildings including one or more dwelling units shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet from the existing right-of-way line of any
major arterial street, except as below.
(2) As a special exception use, if a use including one or more dwelling
units includes a landscaped earth berm of appropriate height and
design to deflect noise from the highway, and if such berm will be
located between the major arterial street and the principal
structure, then the minimum building setback shall be reduced to
60 feet from the existing right-of-way of the major arterial street.
(3) Major arterial streets include U.S. Route 22 and PA Route 33.
H. Lot widths along minor arterial and major collector streets. The
following shall be required for any lot created or resubdivided after the
adoption of this ordinance:
(1) Any use or uses on a lot created after the adoption of this ordinance
having its own direct vehicular access onto a minor arterial street
shall have a minimum lot width of 200 feet at the edge of the
existing right-of-way.
§ 190-58.7 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.7
186:661
§ 190-58.8. Area and bulk regulations for townhouse dwellings.
Area and bulk regulations for townhouse dwellings shall be as follows:
(2) Any use or uses on a lot created after the adoption of this ordinance
having its own direct vehicular access onto a major collector street
shall have a minimum lot width of 130 feet at the edge of the
existing right-of-way.
I. External property line building setback. Structures other than
townhouses and life care centers and their permitted accessory
structures shall be set back from all exterior lot lines of a tract a
minimum distance of 30 feet, except a minimum distance of 80 feet
shall be required from a lot line of an existing single-family detached
dwelling.
A. Minimum tract area. Townhouses shall have a minimum tract area of
21,000 square feet.
B. Vehicular parking setback. See § 190-168G. Off-street parking shall not
be permitted within the front yard area of a lot and shall be located to
the rear or side of the principal structure. No off-street parking areas
shall be permitted between the principal structure and the public
street. However, where the applicant can demonstrate, upon review by
the Planning Commission and approval as a conditional use by the
Board of Supervisors, that garages and parking oriented to the front of
the unit or structure will not extend beyond the width of the garage
doors, or become a prominent portion of the front yard, such parking
may be permitted.
C. Principal building separation. All principal buildings shall be separated
from any other principal building by a minimum of 30 feet and a
minimum average of 40 feet. A building may include multiple dwelling
units.
D. Maximum density.
(1) Site capacity calculation. The maximum total density of a
townhouse or a low-rise (garden) apartment development shall be
determined as follows. If an area of land would have more than one
characteristic stated in Subsection D(1)(b) through (g) below, it
shall only be deleted once. All land areas shall be stated in
hundredths of an acre. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-420]
(a) The total lot area of all lots within the tract, not including
existing rights-of-way of existing public streets.
= _______ acres
(b) Delete future rights-of-way abutting existing public streets that
are required to be dedicated.
§ 190-58.7 PALMER CODE § 190-58.8
186:662
- _______ acres
Areas voluntarily dedicated for an improvement to a public
street that are not required by PennDOT or the Township
but that the Board of Supervisors determines will serve a
substantial public need are not required to be deleted from
the buildable area of the tract.
Rights-of-way of proposed streets are not required to be
deleted from the buildable area of the tract, except as
specified above.
(c) Delete areas of more than 1,000 square feet with existing
natural slopes of 15% or greater.
- _______ acres
(d) Delete areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain, according
to official FEMA/FIA maps or a detailed study using accepted
hydraulic modeling techniques which meets all requirements
listed in § 190-154H(4).
- _______ acres
(e) Delete areas proposed to be used for any principal uses other
than townhouses or common open space.
- _______ acres
(f) Delete areas to be dedicated to the Township as public open
space.
- _______ acres
(g) Delete areas within existing surface utility or stormwater
rights-of-way or easements, such as overhead electric
transmission rights-of-way, existing stormwater management
facilities and/or drainage swales. Existing underground utility
and drainage easements are not required to be deleted from
the buildable area of the tract.
- _______ acres
____________________
(h) Equals the "buildable area of the tract."
= _______ acres
(i) To determine the maximum total permitted number of new and
existing dwelling units permitted within the tract, multiply the
buildable area of the tract by the following:
§ 190-58.8 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.8
186:663
[1] Townhouse density: six dwelling units per acre of buildable
area of the tract.
= _________
permitted dwelling units
(2) Flexibility in placement. The total number of dwelling units allowed
on the tract may be placed at any appropriate locations within the
buildable area of the tract within the setback and other provisions
of this ordinance. However, no single acre of land shall include
more than 12 dwelling units, once streets and dedicated common
open space are deleted from the lot area.
(3) In calculating the allowable overall density, land which is capable of
further development or subdivision for additional dwellings shall
not be counted unless the possibility of such development or
subdivision is precluded by one of the following methods:
(a) Deed restriction or agreement in form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor and duly recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Northampton County.
(b) Transfer of development rights to the Township.
(c) Dedication for public purposes or permanent open space to
serve the development.
(4) Condominiums and lots. The division of land into individual lots is
not required. This allows the development of condominium
townhouses. However, any condominium development or
conversion to condominium ownership shall follow the
requirements and processes of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.202
(5) Condominiums and streets. In any development of or conversion to
condominiums, the Township shall reserve the right to require all
roads and major driveways to be constructed or improved to
Township standards and dedicated to the Township. The
responsibility of maintaining interior roads and major driveways
should not be given to a homeowner association, unless there are
adequate safeguards.
E. Maximum height: 35 feet or 2.5 stories, whichever is more restrictive,
except that as a conditional use the Board of Supervisors may allow up
to 3.5 stories or 45 feet to allow excellence in architectural design.
F. Buffer yard. A buffer yard with screening shall be required, as
described in § 190-194D, between any townhouse building and any
abutting existing single-family detached dwelling that would be within
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-58.8 PALMER CODE § 190-58.8
186:664
120 feet of a townhouse building. The buffer yard shall be the
responsibility of the developer of the townhouses.
G. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) The accessory use provisions of § 190-52 and § 190-211 shall apply.
(2) The intent is to carefully avoid incompatible structures in a highdensity
environment.
(3) Garages or carports for the storage of private automobiles are a
permitted by right accessory use, provided that such structures are
architecturally compatible with the principal buildings.
(4) The developer shall state whether any deed restrictions or similar
restrictions will be established to control the design of any
detached accessory buildings and fences. Such controls are
strongly encouraged.
(5) Accessory structures may be placed a minimum of one foot from
the lot line along which dwellings are attached. Fences may be
located on a lot line.
H. Homeowners' and/or condominium agreements. If any dwelling units
are to be sold under homeowners' and/or condominium agreements,
such agreements or documents shall be reviewed by the Township
Solicitor and approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to recording
and filed with the subdivision or land development plan. It is strongly
recommended that any such agreements include restrictions requiring
any fencing or garages to be compatible with the overall design.
I. Maximum impervious coverage shall be 70%, based upon the entire
tract. For the purpose of this section, active recreational facilities such
as tennis or basketball courts shall not be limited by the maximum
impervious coverage regulation. However, such areas shall still be
considered impervious for the purposes of managing stormwater runoff.
J. Maximum length of building. The maximum length of a townhouse
building shall be 160 feet, with no more than four dwelling units
attached. As used in this section, "building length" means the horizontal
measurement of any building length from any one end to any other end,
without regard to offsets but without including diagonal measurements.
As a conditional use, upon review by the Planning Commission and
approval by the Board of Supervisors, the maximum length of the
building may be extended to accommodate up to eight units attached,
provided the applicant demonstrates excellence in design. At a
minimum, factors to be incorporated into design include articulation in
roofline and pitch, the use of dormers or other similar features, and
alternating facade materials (e.g., stone, brick, and wood). Also, a
minimum of 50% of all dwellings shall have a front entrance articulated
with a covered porch entry. The size of the front porch shall be a
minimum of five feet deep from the front wall of the dwelling to the
§ 190-58.8 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.8
186:665
enclosing porch rail and 10 feet long. The applicant may provide an
alternative design as part of the conditional use application that meets
the intent of this standard.
K. Changes in facade. No more than two adjacent townhouses in any
townhouse building shall have the same front wall plane. The minimum
variation or offset of the front wall plane shall be six feet. A visual
structural break in the roofline or front facade shall be provided
between every two townhouse units. Reference Appendix 1, Design
Guidelines, for example structures that exhibit the intent of this
standard.203
L. External property line building setback. Townhouse buildings and their
permitted accessory structures shall be set back from all exterior lot
lines of a tract a minimum distance of 30 feet, except a minimum
distance of 80 feet shall be required from the lot line of an existing
single-family dwelling. [Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-392]
M. Building setback from public or private streets. All principal and
accessory buildings and carports of townhouse buildings shall have a
minimum of 10 feet setback from the street right-of-way line of
proposed and existing streets where parking is located to the rear or
side of the principal structure. Where parking is proposed to be located
to the front of the principal building, the front yard setback shall be a
minimum of 30 feet from the street right-of-way line of proposed and
existing streets. If right-of-way is not established for a street, then
setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
N. Minimum width of townhouses. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall
have a minimum width of 20 feet, except that a minimum width of 26
feet shall apply if garage doors for two or more vehicles open onto the
front of a townhouse.
O. Minimum private area. For each townhouse, there shall be a yard
immediately adjacent to the front and back of the unit and including the
side for end units. Each dwelling shall be provided an area of not less
than 200 square feet for the exclusive use of the occupants of that
dwelling. Within the yard area described above, a balcony, patio, porch,
deck or other similar outdoor area shall be provided for each dwelling.
If a development is subdivided into lots, the same private area
requirement shall apply in determining the minimum size of the lot;
however, the minimum lot area shall not be less than 3,000 square feet.
Design measures shall be used to seek an appropriate level of privacy in
any rear yards. Such measures might include landscaped screening,
compatible fencing and earth berming. The intent is to avoid the
placement of incompatible fencing by individual lot owners in the
future. If a townhouse includes an individual fee-simple lot of over
1,200 square feet, then such private area is not required to be
specifically designated on plans.
203. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-58.8 PALMER CODE § 190-58.8
186:666
P. Minimum recreation and open space land. See Article X of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Q. Open space maintenance. See Article X of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
R. Private streets. All interior streets and accessways serving more than
five dwelling units but not including parking courts shall be built to
Township construction standards for public streets, regardless of
whether the streets or accessways will be dedicated to the Township.
However, the Board of Supervisors may allow widths of a cartway and a
right-of-way of any private street or accessway to be narrower than is
required for a public street, provided that a private street providing
direct or indirect access to 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum
width of 24 feet and garages, carports or parking areas are located to
the side or rear of the principal structure.
S. Architectural renderings required. Preliminary architectural
renderings shall be required of the front facades of any townhouse
development of more than 10 units.
T. Preservation of natural buffers. See § 190-194D(3)(c).
U. Architectural variety. A variety of complimentary designs are
encouraged among clusters of buildings within larger developments.
Extreme changes of facades among attached townhouse units are
discouraged.
V. Garages. Garages/carports should be oriented out of the view from
public streets. For this reason, parking courts and combined garage or
carport structures are encouraged instead of individual garages,
especially for narrow townhouse units. If garages are provided, they
should be located to the rear of the structures, with a common driveway
system, provided that adequate provision is made for maintenance
through a homeowners' association.
W. Mailboxes. Due to the density and compact design of townhouse
developments mailboxes should be located either on the facade of the
dwelling unit (where permitted by the United States Postal Service) or
within a common kiosk or enclosed structure. Individual freestanding
mailboxes at the curbside are discouraged.
X. Trash bins. Common trash receptacles shall be provided in locations
that are convenient for residents and for collection. Trash dumpsters
and similar facilities shall be completely enclosed within a decorative
masonry or wood fence, at least six feet in height, on three sides,
maintaining 100% visual blockage on three sides and a self-closing gate
on the fourth side. These areas shall be screened from view of streets
and dwellings.
Y. Access. Vehicular access points onto all minor arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest number possible.
§ 190-58.8 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.8
186:667
§ 190-58.9. (Reserved)204
§ 190-58.10. Additional regulations.
For off-street parking, see Article XVII. For signs, see Article XVIII. For uses
other than townhouses, see the construction area regulations of § 190-150.
For flood-prone areas, see § 190-151 and 190-154.
Z. Visitor/overflow parking areas.
(1) Design. Off-street parking area(s) shall be provided at a rate of 0.25
spaces per dwelling unit. The off-street parking area(s) shall be
provided in addition to the minimum off-street parking spaces
required for each individual dwelling unit. The visitor/overflow
parking areas shall be located not greater than 300 feet from any
given dwelling. Off-street parking areas shall not be located
between the public street and the principal building. Such parking
areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure
and in pods of not more than 20 spaces. Each parking area shall be
screened from view from the public right-of-way with a four-foot
decorative masonry fence or evergreen hedgerow, or a combination
of both. The parking areas shall contain internal landscaping. At a
minimum, terminal islands shall be installed at both ends of a
single unbroken row of parking. Terminal islands shall be a
minimum of 15 feet in length and minimum of 10 feet in width.
Each terminal island shall be landscaped with a minimum of one
shade tree and grass or a vegetative ground cover. In addition, a
landscaped divider strip shall be provided to connect the terminal
islands. The divider strip shall be a minimum of seven feet in width
and be planted with a minimum of one shade tree every 30 feet on
center and grass or a vegetative ground cover. These areas shall
not be used to meet the standard parking requirements.
(2) Use. Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall
be prohibited from said parking areas.
AA. Setback from industrial zoning districts. All buildings including one or
more dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the
boundary of any GI, LI, PIC or PO/IP District boundary. If a public street
is the zoning boundary, such setback shall be measured from the center
line of the street.
BB. Front yard landscaping. All townhouse dwelling units shall have a
clearly defined front yard using landscaping, hedging, fencing or a
brick or stone wall, none of which shall exceed three feet in height.
Front yards of attached duplexes or townhouses may be unified into one
common yard treated as a single yard for the entire building.
204. Editor's Note: Former § 190-58.9, Area and bulk regulations for offices as principal uses,
was repealed 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-392.
§ 190-58.8 PALMER CODE § 190-58.11
186:668
§ 190-58.11. Site plan review.
See § 190-201 regarding whether a zoning site plan submittal is required.
§ 190-58.11 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-58.11
186:669

ARTICLE VIII
PO/B Planned Office/Business District
§ 190-59. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide highly visible and appropriate
locations for major business developments, including offices and limited
commercial uses. Because the land within this district is within areas of the
Township affected by traffic congestion, special requirements are included
for coordinated circulation improvements to support the permitted
development.
§ 190-60. Review procedures.
Any application for a conditional use in the PO/B District or for any use
involving the subdivision of land into lots smaller than six acres shall
provide a site plan as described in § 190-201 and also the following
information. The submission and review of this information should be
coordinated with the requirements and processes of the sketch or
preliminary plan or land development plan process of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. The applicant shall provide a written description of the substance of
covenants, grant of easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon
the use of land, buildings and structures including proposed grants and/
or easements for common open space areas and public utilities, and the
legal form of provision and enforcement thereof.
B. In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a schedule
shall be provided showing the approximate order that applications for
final approval of each stage of the development are intended to be filed
and the approximate number and type of uses planned for each stage.
C. The Zoning Officer or Township Engineer may waive requirements for
information in the application that are cannot be reasonably provided at
this time for areas not scheduled for immediate development within the
tract. For those areas, a sketch plan of likely development shall be
provided. As each further stage occurs, a plan showing all of the
information required by this section shall be submitted or referenced
from previous approved applications.
D. Preliminary architectural renderings. Such renderings of the front
facades of principal buildings shall be submitted for informational
purposes. These plans shall not be used as the basis for a conditional
use or subdivision or land development process decision or any other
regulatory decision of the Township.
§ 190-59 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-61
186:671
§ 190-61. Permitted by right uses.
Each of the following principal uses and their accessory uses may be
permitted in the PO/B District, provided that all other requirements of this
Article, Article XX and all other parts of this ordinance are satisfied:
A. Business, professional, governmental or medical office or clinic.
B. Bank and financial institution.*
C. Standard restaurant, specifically not including fast-food restaurants.
D. Life care retirement center.*
E. Nursing home and personal care home.*
F. Routine replacements of an existing lawful use by a use that the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is permitted
and is closely similar in intensity to the previous use, within an existing
building.
G. Flexible office space, involving a maximum of 25% of the total floor area
of any structure or use being used as interior accessory wholesale
storage to a principal permitted office or service use.
H. Services directly primarily and predominantly to office uses, as opposed
to personal services. These may only include uses that are similar in
character and intensity to the following illustrative uses:
(1) Photocopying service.
(2) Package delivery service, not routinely served by heavy trucks.
(3) Office supply store.
(4) Computer and business machine sale and repair.
(5) Custom printing shop, not including printing and publishing on an
industrial scale.
I. Exercise club or nonhousehold swimming pool.
J. Convention, conference or training center.205
K. Community center, auditorium and cultural center.
L. Publicly-owned park and Township-owned facility.
M. Day-care center, child* or adult.*
N. Bed-and-breakfast use.*206
205. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, Research, development and testing laboratory, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316. This
ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections L through Q as
Subsections K through O, respectively.
§ 190-61 PALMER CODE § 190-61
186:672
§ 190-62. Special exception uses.
The following are permitted as special exception uses within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-63. Conditional uses.
The following uses are conditional within the requirements of Article XX:
O. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
P. Car wash, subject to the following provisions: [Added 11-29-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-447]
(1) Traffic flow and ingress/egress shall not cause traffic backups on
adjacent streets.
(2) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be
clearly marked.
(3) Signs and outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with this
ordinance.
(4) Adequate provisions shall be made for proper and convenient
disposal of refuse.
(5) On-site recycling of water shall be required.
A. (Reserved)207
B. Home occupation, general.**208
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Retail sales, rental uses and personal services uses within the following
limitations:
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, Planned residential development, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Appropriate governmental services and facilities, was
repealed 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Commercial communications antennae, and D,
Appropriate public utility facility, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
§ 190-61 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-63
186:673
(1) The total of all such uses shall not exceed a maximum of 25% of the
total floor area of a lot to the south of U.S. Route 22 and a maximum
of 10% for any stage of any development north of U.S. Route 22.
(2) Retail sale, rental and personal service use to the north of U.S.
Route 22 shall be intended primarily for the use of employees and/
or residents of the development.
(3) Such uses shall not be in an entirely retail freestanding structure,
but should be well-integrated with other permitted uses.
(4) Such uses shall be conducted entirely within a structure and shall
not include outdoor display of any goods for sale or rent.
(5) The floor area limitations on retail sales, rental and personal
services uses of this section shall, for the purposes of this Article,
specifically not apply to any use listed as permitted by right under
this Article, including standard restaurants, financial institutions
and services directed primarily to business uses.
(6) See also § 190-61F.
B. Hotel and motel, provided that any such use located within 400 feet of
the lot lines of at least two existing single-family detached dwellings not
separated by a minor arterial street shall have a single entrance
routinely used by patrons instead of individual entrances to units,
include substantially greater landscaping in quantity and quality than
what would normally be required, and not permit the parking of tractortrailer
trucks within 200 feet of a residential lot line.
C. College and trade school.
D. Hospital,* provided that the building(s) is located a minimum of 400
feet from all lot lines of existing dwellings.
E. Auditorium* (including an indoor sports arena), provided that the
structure is located a minimum of 400 feet from all residential lot lines.
F. Research, development and testing laboratory, not threatening
environmental hazard and related custom manufacturing for research
purposes. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
G. Appropriate governmental services and facilities, other than those
permitted by right. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
H. Commercial communications antenna. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
I. Appropriate public utilities facilities. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
J. Mental health care facility. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
K. Distribution center. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
§ 190-63 PALMER CODE § 190-63
186:674
§ 190-64. Conditional use requirements related to traffic. [Amended
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316; 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-320]
See § 190-208F.
§ 190-65. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-66. Specifically prohibited uses.
Specifically prohibited uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-67. Multiple uses in a building and buildings on a lot.
See § 190-192.
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
A. Accessory use and structure, specifically permitted by § 190-211.**
B. Accessory use and structure clearly customarily incidental to permitted
uses.**
C. Heliport, as a special exception.**
D. Home occupation, light.**
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Retail sale and personal service use that do not fully comply with
§ 190-63.
B. Commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display.
C. Solid waste disposal area or facility.
D. Adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult live entertainment use or
massage parlor.
E. Fast-food restaurants.
F. Manufacturing (except as provided in § 190-61).
G. Any use not permitted either by right, special exception, conditional use
or accessory use is prohibited. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
§ 190-63 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-68
186:675
§ 190-68. Area and bulk regulations for life care retirement centers.
See § 190-210, which also references the requirements of the HDR District.
§ 190-69. Area and bulk regulations for uses other than life care
centers.
Area and bulk regulations for uses other than life care centers shall be as
follows:
A. Coordinated development. All developments shall be constructed in
accordance with a well-coordinated, integrated overall plan with a
carefully designed interior and exterior system of vehicular access. If a
development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each stage shall
be planned so that the requirements and intents of this Article and this
ordinance shall be fully complied with at the completion of any stage.
B. Tract and lot size.
(1) Minimum tract size: six acres.
(2) As part of an approved planned development, lots with a minimum
lot area of 30,000 square feet may be created out of an overall
minimum six-acre tract, except that a hotel or motel shall have a
minimum lot size of four acres, and except for any larger minimum
lot size stated elsewhere.
(3) Condominium development. The minimum lot area required by this
section shall not apply to individual condominium-owned uses
within a building on a lot that complies with the minimum lot area.
Condominium ownership of offices or for other uses is specifically
permitted, provided that the general format of such agreements
include conditions that adequately safeguard the individual owners
and the Township, based upon a review by the Township Solicitor.
C. Lot width.
(1) Each tract shall have a minimum tract width of 225 feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet, except that the following lot widths
shall be required for any lot created or resubdivided after the
adoption of this ordinance:
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to maintain a smooth and
efficient system of traffic circulation along major roads, with
interior roads systems, shared driveways and shared parking
lots.
(b) Any use or uses on a lot having direct vehicular access onto a
minor arterial street shall have a minimum lot width of 250
feet, except if such access is provided onto PA Route 248, in
which case the minimum lot width shall be 350 feet at the edge
of the existing right-of-way.
§ 190-68 PALMER CODE § 190-69
186:676
D. Separation between buildings. Principal buildings within a lot shall be
separated by a minimum of 35 feet.
E. Lot coverage.
(1) Maximum total building coverage: 40%.
(2) Maximum total impervious coverage: 70%.
(3) All areas of a tract not covered by buildings or paving shall be
covered with an all-season ground cover and include appropriate
landscaping, especially in the most visible areas.
(4) See § 190-72 for possible bonus provisions.
F. Parking setbacks. See § 190-168G.
G. Parking lot layout. The bulk of vehicular parking should be placed to the
rear or side of the principal buildings, as opposed to between the street
and the principal building. Parking areas should be mostly screened
from view of major and minor arterial roads, through landscaping and/
or low earth berming.
H. Maximum height.
(1) Five stories or 65 feet maximum, whichever is more restrictive, for
uses that are principally offices, except that:
(a) The height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet for any use
within 100 feet of an existing right-of-way or right-of-way
reserved for future dedication.
(b) The height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet within 150
feet of the abutting exterior lot line of an existing residential
use or the abutting boundary of an LDR, MDR or HDR District.
(c) See Township Building and Fire Code requirements regarding
fire safety.209
(2) A maximum height of 45 feet or three stories, whichever is more
restrictive, shall apply to all uses that are not principally offices.
I. Building setback from exterior lot lines.
(1) A minimum of 35 feet from the future right-of-way of any public
street.
(2) Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from all abutting
lot lines of lots not within the same "tract", except a minimum
setback of 100 feet shall apply from the lot line of an existing
single-family detached dwelling.
209. Editor's Note: See Chs. 55, Building Construction, and 81, Fire Prevention, respectively.
§ 190-69 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-69
186:677
§ 190-70. Additional regulations.
See Articles XIX and XVII for screening and landscaping. See Article XVII
for off-street parking. See § 190-150 regarding the minimum construction
area intruding into certain features.
§ 190-71. Signs.
§ 190-72. Bonus provisions.
(3) From all abutting lot lines of a lot within the same tract, a minimum
setback of 20 feet shall apply.
J. Building floor area ratio.
(1) The ratio of total building floor area to total lot area shall not be
greater than 0.7 to 1.0.
(2) See § 190-72 for possible bonus provisions.
A. See Article XVIII.
B. In addition to the requirements of Article XVIII, all signs within this
district shall be guided by an overall coordinated design scheme. All
freestanding business signs should be surrounded by landscaping. Use
of natural materials in signs, such as relief-cut wood, is strongly
encouraged.
A. Intensity bonuses may be granted as a conditional use up to the limits
listed under § 190-72B for high quality development proposals. Any
decision by the Board of Supervisors to grant a bonus, after a review by
the Planning Commission and the Township Engineer, shall be based
upon the Supervisors' interpretation of the following criteria. No such
bonus shall be granted unless stormwater management of the tract is
completely adequate.
(1) The number of jobs that would be created.
(2) The quality and amount of landscaping in an overall plan that will
be provided, above the requirements of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance and this Zoning Ordinance,
especially in highly visible locations along major streets. This
especially pertains to feature landscaping as a central focus for a
development, such as a pond.
(3) The quality of the site layout of the proposal, such as use of
attractive, landscaped earth berming. This should include the
screening of bulk parking areas from view of major streets.
(4) The integration of significant recreation facilities for employees
and/or residents into the development.
(5) The respect for sensitive and attractive natural features.
§ 190-69 PALMER CODE § 190-72
186:678
§ 190-73. Site plan review.
A site plan is generally required for every principal nonresidential use. See
§ 190-201.
§ 190-74. Access to minor arterial streets.
(6) Excellence in traffic circulation, within the site and accessing
exterior roads.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent uses.
(8) Conformance with the site design guidelines of § 190-201D.
B. The Board of Supervisors may grant bonuses in intensity up to the
following maximum levels, based upon its interpretation of the criteria
of § 190-72A.
(1) Building coverage: up to 45% maximum.
(2) Impervious coverage: up to 75% maximum.
(3) Building floor area ratio: up to 0.9 to 1.0 maximum.
A. Purpose. The PO/B areas in the Township are all located at critical areas
for traffic movement. Extremely carefully designed traffic access will be
essential to avoid added congestion and traffic hazards. The number of
access points onto minor arterial streets needs to be minimized, and
traffic should be steered towards one or two traffic signals.
B. The standards in this section apply both as requirements for all uses in
the PO/B District and also as conditions for any conditional or special
exception use in the PO/B District.
C. PennDOT review. This section is intended to be used in close
cooperation with and not to supersede PennDOT requirements for
highway occupancy permits. In any decision by the Board of
Supervisors regarding access from a PO/B development to a minor
arterial street, the Board of Supervisors should first seek the advice of
PennDOT, the Planning Commission, the Township Police Chief, the
Township Engineer and any traffic studies that are submitted.
D. Access alternatives to minor arterial streets. Access involving left-hand
turns shall be provided from a PO/B tract only onto and off of an
abutting collector street, instead of directly onto a minor arterial street,
wherever practical, as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
E. Access onto minor arterial streets. A maximum of one access point
involving left-hand turns shall be provided from a PO/B tract directly
onto and off of a minor arterial street.
F. Setback of access points from intersections. An "intersection" is defined
as the point of intersecting legal rights-of-way of two streets. Any
§ 190-72 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-74
186:679
access point involving left-hand turns directly onto or off of a minor
arterial street shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the
following intersections: two minor arterial streets, a minor arterial and
a collector street or a minor arterial street and a major arterial ramp.
G. Setback of access points within a PO/B District. Any access point
involving left-hand turns onto and off of a minor arterial street within a
PO/B District shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from any other
access point onto that street from within a PO/B District.
H. Interior streets. All uses within a PO/B tract shall make maximum
possible use of a coordinated interior street system, as opposed to
individual access onto minor arterial streets.
I. Easements for access. The Board of Supervisors may at the time of
approval of a subdivision or land development within a PO/B District,
require a lot or tract to grant an easement for vehicular traffic to
adjoining tracts to allow an efficient interior access system.
J. Subdivision. All subdivision of land within a PO/B District into tracts or
lots shall only occur if it would not result in fragmented patterns of
ownership and development that would prevent a carefully coordinated
interior road system and minimization of access points to minor arterial
streets.
K. Variance reviews. Any request for a variance to the requirements of this
section shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors prior to any hearing on the matter by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 190-74 PALMER CODE § 190-74
186:680
ARTICLE IX
GC General Commercial District
§ 190-75. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for the orderly development of
those uses necessary to meet the community and regional needs for general
goods and services, as well as those of a social, cultural and civic nature;
and to exclude uses not compatible with such activities. This district is
intended to ensure well-planned and well-designed uses while seeking to
avoid the creation of new traffic hazards. This district also recognizes that
most of the GC District land areas are in close proximity to existing stable,
desirable and attractive residential areas, and seeks to avoid any conflicts
between these areas. This district also recognizes that most of the GC land
in the Township is developed and seeks to avoid review of routine changes
within very similar types and intensities of use.
§ 190-76. Permitted by right uses.
The following uses are permitted by right uses in the GC District within the
other requirements of this ordinance:
A. Crop farming and orchard.
B. Place of worship.*
C. Publicly-owned recreation or Township-owned use.
D. Emergency services station.
E. Commercial off-street parking.
F. Cultural or community center.
G. Plant nursery.
H. Christmas tree farm and seasonal sale of Christmas trees.
I. The routine replacement of a commercial use by a new commercial use
that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is
permitted and closely similar in intensity to the previous use, and
without any building additions.
J. The routine development or replacement of a retail, service or office
use listed under § 190-77 within a pre-existing structure that was
intended and previously approved for multiple uses (including uses
proposed for within an approved shopping center structure or office
building). This shall not include uses involving construction of new
buildings or building additions.
K. Nonhousehold swimming pool.*
L. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
§ 190-75 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-76
186:681
§ 190-77. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 266;
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
All the following uses are conditional uses in the General Commercial
District which must meet the general and specific standards governing
conditional uses within this ordinance:
M. Auto service stations/auto repair garages. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-316]
N. Auto, boat and/or manufactured home sales. [Added 5-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-316]
O. Restaurant. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
P. Trade school. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
Q. Business professional office, a financial institution or artisan or craft
studio. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
R. Speciality shop for custom items and services to be sold at retail on the
premises such as baking, confectionary, dressmaking, tailoring and
printing. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
S. Personal service establishment such as barbershop, beauty shop, shoe
repair, dry cleaner, laundromats, health clubs, laundry and tennis clubs.
[Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
T. Membership club. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
U. Medical, dental, photographic or similar office. [Added 5-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-316]
V. Veterinarian office or animal hospital. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
W. Printing and publishing establishment. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-316]
X. Retail sale of goods, prepared foods and/or services. [Added
6-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-394]
Y. Convenience store. [Added 11-29-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-403]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
A. Adult day-care center.
B. Funeral home.
C. Commercial indoor and outdoor recreation uses, such as golf driving
range, bowling alleys, indoor theaters, exercise clubs, skating rinks,
and outdoor drive-in theaters.
§ 190-76 PALMER CODE § 190-77
186:682
§ 190-78. Special exception uses.
The following is a list of special exception uses in a General Commercial
District; said uses are subject to further regulations set forth in § 190-210C:
§ 190-79. Permitted accessory uses.
The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses within the
requirements of § 190-211:
§ 190-80. Specifically prohibited uses.
All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited in each district, unless
their allowance is implied by a similar use. The following uses are clearly
and specifically prohibited in the GC District as principal and accessory
uses:
D. Nursing home or personal care home.
E. Commercial motor vehicle racetrack.
F. Appropriate governmental facilities and services, except those
permitted by right.
G. Commercial communications antenna.
H. Appropriate public utilities facilities.
I. Shopping center, up to a maximum of 250,000 square feet of gross floor
area. [Added 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-394]
A. Group home within a lawful existing dwelling unit.
A. Roadside product market.**
B. Accessory uses and structures specifically permitted under § 190-211
C.**
C. Accessory uses and structures which are clearly customarily incidental
to a permitted use.
D. Commercial outdoor storage or display.**
E. Home occupation, light or general.**
F. Unit for care of relative.**
G. Warehouse. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Purposes. These prohibitions specifically recognize the proximity of the
vast majority of land within the GC District to stable and desirable
§ 190-77 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-80
186:683
§ 190-81. Conditional use requirements related to traffic. [Amended
2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-346]
See § 190-208F.
§ 190-82. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations for each use in the GC District shall be as follows:
residential neighborhoods. These prohibitions are specifically intended
to protect the public's health, safety, general welfare and morals.
B. Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically permitted or implied is
prohibited. The following uses are specifically and clearly prohibited in
the GC District:
(1) Adult bookstore.
(2) Adult movie theater.
(3) Massage parlor.
(4) Adult live entertainment use.
(5) Junkyard.
(6) Solid waste disposal area or facility.
A. Lot area: a minimum of 10,000 square feet for any lot existing prior to
this ordinance taking effect; a minimum of 30,000 square feet for any
lot created after March 1, 1987. A lot may include more than one
principal use, within the requirements of § 190-191A, and/or more that
one building, within the requirements of § 190-192B. A building may
include more than one occupant, within the requirements of
§ 190-192C. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-394]
B. Lot width: a minimum of 120 feet per lot at the edge of the existing legal
right-of-way, except for the following:
(1) Common access. If more than one lot shares one common access
point and shares a common and integrated parking lot, the lots
combined may have a minimum lot width of 120 feet at the existing
legal right-of-way line (see the definition of "access point" in Article
II).
(2) New lots. If a lot including only one principal use is created after
March 1, 1987, that involves the creation of an additional and new
access point onto a minor arterial street, the minimum lot width at
the existing legal right-of-way line shall be 250 feet.
C. Building and impervious coverage. At least 15% of the lot shall be
landscaped. Maximum impervious coverage: 85%; maximum building
coverage: 40%.
§ 190-80 PALMER CODE § 190-82
186:684
§ 190-83. Off-street parking.
D. Front yard setback.
(1) Purposes: to strongly encourage the placement of vehicular
parking behind or to the side of principal buildings; and if parking
is to be located in front of a building, to require sufficient setbacks
to allow smooth and safe movement of vehicular traffic.
(2) If no vehicular parking or outdoor display of items for sale or rent is
to be located between a twenty-five-foot front yard building setback
line (measured from the future right-of-way line) and the edge of
the existing right-of-way line, the minimum front yard building
setback shall be 25 feet from the future right-of-way line.
(3) If Subsection D(2) does not apply, the minimum front yard building
setback shall be 60 feet from the future right-of-way line.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board by special exception may reduce a 60
feet front yard requirement to 40 feet in a GC District to take into
account lots of narrow width or peculiar circumstances.
(5) Vehicle service station canopy. A canopy structure over gasoline
pumps may be set back within 10 feet of all future right-of-way lines
and may be attached to the principal structure. However, no
advertising sign shall be attached to portions of such canopy that
are within the required setback.
E. Side yard setback: a minimum of 10 feet per side, except:
(1) When a mutual agreement is entered into by the adjoining property
owners, no side yard shall be required where two or more
commercial uses adjoin side by side and common shared parking
lots and driveways are provided in a safe and efficient manner. In
the case of adjoining structures on lots abutting and paralleling a
public right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at least 20 feet in
width and 20 feet in height shall be provided at grade level at
intervals not more than 400 feet apart.
(2) A minimum of 25 feet per side from the lot line of an existing
residential use.
F. Rear yard setback: 15 feet minimum, except 25 feet minimum from the
abutting lot line of an existing residential use. See also the screening
requirements of § 190-194D.
G. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
H. Trash dumpsters. Trash dumpsters shall be well screened from view of
streets or dwellings by appropriate evergreen planting, fencing or
walls.
A. See off-street parking regulations in Article XVII.
§ 190-82 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-83
186:685
§ 190-84. Additional sign, parking, setback and development
regulations.
See Article XVIII for signs. See § 190-168G for parking lot setbacks. See
§ 190-198 for development along arterial and collector roads. For hydrants,
see Article X of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. See
§ 190-150, which limits the intrusion of the construction area into certain
features.
§ 190-85. Site plan review.
A site plan is generally required for all principal nonresidential uses. See
§ 190-201.
B. Shared access drives and shared parking lots with adjacent uses are
strongly encouraged to create an efficient and safe interior circulation
system. See § 190-166B for conditional reduction of parking
requirements. The number of access points onto minor arterial roads
shall be minimized, as described in § 190-198B.
§ 190-83 PALMER CODE § 190-85
186:686
ARTICLE X
PC Planned Commercial District
§ 190-86. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide and require a unified and organized
arrangement of buildings, service and parking areas, together with
adequate circulation and open space, all planned and designed as an
integrated unit, in a manner so as to provide and constitute an efficient,
safe, convenient and attractive shopping area. This district also recognizes
that the PC District is mostly developed and that it adjoins heavily traveled
roads, necessitating careful vehicular access control.
§ 190-87. Review procedures for conditional uses.
See site plan and review requirements in §§ 190-201 and 190-209.
§ 190-88. Permitted by right uses.
Permitted by right uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-89. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses in the PC District shall be as follows:
A. Routine changes of establishments within an existing structure, for
retail sales of goods, restaurants and/or personal or business services.
B. Routine changes of establishments within an existing structure for
business, professional and medical offices and financial institutions.
C. Accessory use and structure that is customarily incidental to a lawful
principal use.
D. Exercise club.
E. Artisan's or crafts studio.
F. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
G. Business professional office, provided it is in a previously approved land
development. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
H. Retail sale of goods, commercial recreation, restaurant and/or personal
or business services involving new construction of structures or
structural building addition, provided it is in a previously approved land
development. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
A. Appropriate governmental facilities and services (see § 190-210).
§ 190-86 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-90
186:687
§ 190-90. Conditional uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
All of the following uses are conditional uses in the Planned Commercial
District which must meet the general and specific standards governing
conditional uses in this ordinance:
§ 190-91. Specifically prohibited uses.
Specifically prohibited uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-92. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the PC District shall be as follows:
A. Business, professional or medical/dental office or financial institution
that involves new construction of structures or structural building
additions, provided that said structure is the subject of an approved
land development plan.
B. Retail sales, commercial recreation, restaurant and/or personal or
business services involving new construction of structures or structural
building additions, provided that said structures are set forth on a
previously approved land development plan.
A. All exterior storage and exterior commercial display, except exterior
sales of nursery and gardening items.
B. Adult bookstore, adult live entertainment use, adult movie theater and
massage parlor.
C. All uses not permitted specifically either by right, special exception,
conditional use or accessory use are prohibited. [Added 5-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-316]
A. Tract area: 20 acres minimum. Lots of a minimum area of two acres
may be created out of a twenty-acre-minimum tract, provided that each
lot would be fully integrated into the overall development and that
vehicular access is provided only as part of an integrated, coordinated
system throughout the entire tract, and not with any additional exterior
access points.
B. Tract width: 1,000 feet minimum; a minimum lot width of 100 feet,
except that there shall be a minimum lot width of 250 feet for any lot
having direct individual vehicular access onto a major or minor arterial
street, apart from the coordinated vehicular access of a planned
commercial center.
C. Lot coverage: 35% maximum building coverage, except that an
additional 15% may be used as a parking garage; a maximum of 80%
impervious coverage, with a minimum of 20% of the lot area being
landscaped areas.
§ 190-90 PALMER CODE § 190-92
186:688
§ 190-93. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 190-94. Signs.
See Article XVIII.
§ 190-95. Environmental protection.
No construction of structures, parking areas or access roads shall occur on
any portion of and land with a slope prior to construction of greater than
15%. Vegetation shall remain substantially undisturbed on all areas of slope
of greater than 15%. See § 190-150 regarding intrusion of construction
areas into certain features.
D. Front yard setback.
(1) The following are the minimum front yard setbacks from the
exterior lot lines of the tract:
(a) Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
(b) Fronting minor arterial streets: 80 feet minimum.
(c) Fronting collector streets: 60 feet minimum.
(d) Fronting local streets: 60 feet minimum.
(2) A minimum front yard of 20 feet shall be required for an individual
lot within the tract.
E. Side and rear yard setbacks. The same requirements as listed in
§ 190-82E(1) shall apply to side and rear yards.
(1) Minimum of 60 feet from the exterior lot lines of the tract and a
minimum of 10 feet from any lot line of an individual lot within the
tract.
(2) Buildings on the lot line.
F. Parking lot setback.
(1) All vehicular parking areas developed after the adoption of this
ordinance shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from the future
right-of-way of PA Route 248 (Nazareth Road) and 40 feet from the
future right-of-way of all other minor arterial roads, including Park
Avenue.
(2) See also § 190-168G.
G. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet maximum, whichever is more restrictive.
§ 190-92 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-96
186:689
§ 190-96. Circulation and access.
No conditional use shall be granted within the PC District if it will, in
the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, create a traffic hazard within the
tract or exterior to the tract. Additional access points from a PC tract
that is currently most developed onto public streets are prohibited, unless
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that
such access is necessary and would not adversely affect the smooth flow of
through traffic.
§ 190-97. Site plan review.
See § 190-201.
§ 190-96 PALMER CODE § 190-97
186:690
ARTICLE XI
LI Light Industrial District
§ 190-98. Purpose.
The purpose of the LI District is to provide sufficient space, in appropriate
locations, to meet the anticipated future needs for limited industrial activity
with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites. It is further intended
that limited industrial operations will be compatible with surrounding
residential areas. The district includes a process for review of all industrial
uses to ensure that the performance standards of this ordinance will be
complied with fully.
§ 190-99. Review procedures for conditional uses.
§ 190-100. Permitted by right uses.
Permitted by right uses shall be as follows:
A. Site plans shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors under the
procedures established in §§ 190-201 and 209 for a conditional use.
B. In addition to the requirements of § 190-201, the following information
shall also be submitted to the Planning Commission by the applicant:
(1) A list of the types of establishments expected to be located on the
site and their approximate floor areas.
(2) The maximum number of employees expected to work on-site at
any point in time.
(3) An estimate of the average amounts of tractor-trailer truck traffic
expected to be generated.
A. Crop farming and orchard.
B. Business, government and medical office with a total floor area of less
than 30,000 square feet (see also as a conditional use).
C. Greenhouse/plant nursery.
D. Christmas tree farm.
E. Private picnic grove.*
F. Publicly-owned recreation and Township-owned facility.
G. Exercise club.*
H. Building contractor's headquarters and storage.
I. Auto service station. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316210]
J. Golf course.*
§ 190-98 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-100
186:691
§ 190-101. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses in the LI District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-102. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the LI District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX and the performance standards of Article XVI.
K. The routine replacement of an existing lawful use by a new permitted
use that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is
closely similar in intensity to the previous use and that does not involve
new construction or expansion of buildings. If the Zoning Officer has
doubts or questions about the potential nuisances or hazards of the use
and/or the amount of truck traffic, the Zoning Officer shall require a
conditional use application.
L. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
A. Appropriate governmental facilities and services,* except those
permitted by right.
B. Home occupation, general.**
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
A. Research, engineering or testing laboratory.
B. (Reserved)211
C. Auto service station.*
D. Business, government and medical office and administrative activities
with a total floor area of 30,000 square feet or more.
E. Industrial activity involving processing, cleaning, assembly, production,
conversion, packaging, manufacturing, repair or testing of materials,
goods and/or products that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors, based upon review by the Planning
Commission, will not primarily involve use of toxic substances or other
210. [Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection I concerning individual
single-family detached houses or individual (mobile) manufactured homes.
211. Editor's Note:Former Subsection B, Wholesale sales or warehouse, was repealed 5-20-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-100 PALMER CODE § 190-102
186:692
§ 190-103. Accessory uses.
§ 190-104. Specifically prohibited uses.
highly hazardous substances that could create a hazard to the public
health and safety, but not including uses that are specifically prohibited
by this Article or that cannot reasonably be expected to be able to
comply with Article XVI.
F. Raising of livestock.*
G. Commercial forestry.*
H. Recycling collection center.*
I. Funeral home. [Added 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311;
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
J. Distribution center. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
A. Roadside produce market.*
B. Accessory use and structure specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customarily incidental to
the permitted principal use.
D. Commercial communications antennae.
E. Home occupation, light.**
F. Warehouse. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
A. All uses are prohibited that would have a serious threat of future
inability to comply with the performance standards of this ordinance, as
stated in Article XVI.
B. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
(1) Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(2) Coke oven.
(3) Creosote treatment or manufacture.
§ 190-102 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-104
186:693
§ 190-105. Sewage restrictions on uses.
§ 190-106. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations for uses in the LI District shall be as follows,
unless a more strict requirement is stated elsewhere:
(4) Distillation of bones, coal or refuse (except in the manufacture of
gas).
(5) Explosives, fireworks, ammunition and gunpowder manufacture or
storage (except within a U.S. military facility).
(6) Fat rendering.
(7) Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse
refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animals or offal.
(8) Bulk manufacture of the following acids: hydrochloric, nitric,
picric, sulfuric, sulphanous or carbolic.
(9) Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
(10) Paper mill.
(11) Petroleum or kerosene refining or distillation or bulk storage.
(12) Potash work.
(13) Stockyard or slaughterhouse.
(14) Tar distillation or manufacture.
(15) Trucking company terminal as a principal use.
A. In areas of the Township determined by the Township Sewer Authority
unlikely to be served by public sewers within the next year following the
date of zoning application, no industrial use shall be permitted that
would reasonably be expected to generate an amount or intensity of
sewage greater than one equivalent dwelling unit per acre, nor any use
that would generate significant amounts of process waste, as
determined by the Township Sewer Authority.
B. The Board of Supervisors may require an industrial facility to
adequately pretreat its wastes if the Township Sewage Authority
determines that the waste that would result from the use would
represent a serious hazard to the proper functioning of the regional
sewage system.
A. Lot area: one acre minimum.
B. Lot width: 100 feet at the setback line, except a minimum of 200 feet at
the right-of-way line if having direct vehicular access onto a minor
arterial street.
§ 190-104 PALMER CODE § 190-106
186:694
§ 190-107. Additional landscaping, screening, parking and
performance regulations. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-301]
See Article XIX for landscaping. See § 190-194D for screening. See Article
XVII for off-street parking. See Article XVI for performance standards,
especially §§ 190-158 (noise standards) and 190-150 (regarding intrusion
of construction areas into certain features). See § 81-27 et seq. regarding
installation of a lock box.
C. Lot coverage: a maximum of 40% for all buildings, a maximum of 65%
for all impervious surfaces. See § 190-108 for possible intensity
bonuses.
D. Front yard setback: a minimum of 40 feet, except when a residential lot
line is adjacent to or across the road from the front yard, in which case
the front yard set back shall be 75 feet minimum.
E. Side and rear yard setbacks: a minimum of 30 feet; except that when a
residential lot line directly abuts the rear or side yard, the yard setback
shall be 120 feet minimum.
F. Height: 2 1/2 stories or 40 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
Structures higher than this may be permitted as a conditional use,
provided that fire protection measures above and beyond those
normally required would be included as the Supervisors determine are
necessary, after providing the Fire Commissioner with an opportunity
for a review. See also height exceptions in § 190-193. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
G. Enclosed structures. All manufacturing shall occur within a completely
enclosed structure. See also § 190-194D(6).
H. Truck parking and loading docks. Any area routinely used for the
parking of two or more tractor-trailer trucks and/or trucks that would
have refrigerated systems operating during nighttime hours and any
related loading dock(s) shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any
residential lot line. If such parking and/or loading dock(s) are within
200 feet of any residential lot line and are not separated from such lot
line by a building, then an earth berm shall be provided between such
parking and such lot line(s).
(1) Such earth berm shall have maximum side slopes of 3:1, a minimum
height of four feet and be covered with an attractive all-season
vegetative ground cover.
(2) An earth berm shall be accompanied by evergreen screening as
specified in § 190-194. The evergreen screening shall be placed
near the top of or on the residential side of such berm. The earth
berm may be placed within the width of a required buffer yard.
(3) Such berm shall have a minimum width of three feet across the top
of the berm.
§ 190-106 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-108
186:695
§ 190-108. Bonus provisions.
§ 190-109. Site plan review.
See § 190-201.
A. The provisions of § 190-72A shall also apply to this district.
B. The Board of Supervisors may grant bonuses in intensity up to the
following maximum levels based upon the criteria of § 190-72A:
(1) Building coverage: up to 45% maximum.
(2) Impervious coverage: up to 80% maximum.
§ 190-108 PALMER CODE § 190-109
186:696
ARTICLE XII
Heavy Industrial/Mixed-Use District
§ 190-110. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space, in appropriate
locations, to meet the current and anticipated future needs for a wide range
of industrial activity with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites
and to ensure that industrial operations will be compatible with surrounding
residential areas. Although nonindustrial uses may be provided for in this
district, this district is primarily intended to provide for industrial uses.
§ 190-111. Review procedures.
A development plan including the same types of information as listed under
§ 190-99B shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for all conditional
uses.
§ 190-112. Permitted by right uses.
The following are permitted by right uses in the HI District within the other
requirements of this ordinance:
§ 190-113. Special exception uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
Special exception uses in the HI District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of §§ 190-209, 190-210 and 190-211.
A. Crop farming or orchard.
B. Business, government and medical offices.
C. Christmas tree farm with seasonal sales.
D. Publicly-owned recreation or Township-owned facility.
E. The routine replacement of an existing business use with a business use
listed in § 190-114 that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer will be closely similar in intensity and that will not
involve construction of a new principal building or a structural addition
to an existing principal building. If the Zoning Officer has doubts or
questions about the potential nuisances or hazards of the use and/or the
amount of truck traffic, the Zoning Officer shall require conditional use
approval.
F. The routine initial development of permitted nonindustrial uses within a
building previously approved to include multiple uses (such as an office
building).
G. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
H. Auto service station. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
§ 190-110 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-113
186:697
§ 190-114. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the HI District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
A. Home occupation, general.**
B. Group home within a lawful pre-existing dwelling unit.*
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
A. Research, engineering or testing laboratory.
B. (Reserved)212
C. Auto service station.*
D. Industrial uses involving processing, production, assembly, repair,
cleaning or testing of materials, goods and/or products that the
applicant proves, to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, based
upon review by the Planning Commission, will not primarily involve the
use of toxic substances or other highly hazardous substances or
otherwise create a significant hazard to the public health and safety.
E. Tank farm* (involving flammable liquids storage) (see § 190-156).
F. Outside industrial storage, adequately screened from view of
residential lot lines and public streets.
G. Recycling collection center.*
H. Car wash.*
I. Self-storage development.*
J. Golf course.*
K. Appropriate governmental facility and service, except those permitted
by right. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
L. Trucking terminal, taxi terminal. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
M. Bus terminal. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
N. Distribution center. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
O. Schools, public or private.* [Added 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-369]
212. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Wholesale sales or warehouse, was repealed
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-113 PALMER CODE § 190-114
186:698
§ 190-115. Permitted accessory uses.
§ 190-116. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the HI District shall be as follows:
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
A. Retail market for the sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.*
B. Accessory use and structure specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customarily incidental to
a permitted use.
D. Industrial outdoor storage.*
E. Home occupation, light.**
F. Warehouse. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
A. Lot area: one acre minimum.
B. Lot width: a minimum 100 feet at the setback line, except a minimum of
250 feet at the existing right-of-way line for any use having direct
vehicular access onto a minor arterial road. The intent of this
requirement is to seek an efficient interior road system.
C. Lot coverage.
(1) Building coverage: maximum 40%.
(2) Impervious coverage: maximum 65%.
(3) See also § 190-118, Bonus provisions.
D. Front yard setback: a minimum of 40 feet, except when a residential lot
line is abutting or across the street from the front yard, in which case
the front yard setback shall be 75 feet minimum.
E. Side yard setback: a minimum of 15 feet, except when a residential lot
line directly abuts the proposed use, in which case the side yard
setback shall be 120 feet on the side thus abutted. On a corner lot there
shall be a side yard of not less than 40 feet.
§ 190-114 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-116
186:699
§ 190-117. Additional landscaping, screening, parking and
performance regulations. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-301]
See Article XVI for performance standards. See Article XIX for landscaping.
See § 190-194D for screening. See Article XVII for off-street parking. See
Article XVIII for signs. See § 190-150 regarding intrusion of a construction
area into certain features. See § 81-27 et seq. regarding installation of a
lock box.
F. Rear yard setback: a minimum of 15 feet, except when a residential lot
line directly abuts the proposed use, in which case the rear yard
setback shall be 120 feet.
G. Height.
(1) Three and one-half stories or 45 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
(2) Structures higher than the above height may be permitted as a
conditional use, provided that fire protection measures above and
beyond those normally required would be provided as the
Supervisors determine are necessary, after providing the Township
Fire Commissioner with an opportunity for a review. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
H. Parking lot setback. See § 190-168G.
I. Recreation trail setback. No structure, parking space for a commercial
or industrial use, or commercial or industrial storage or display shall be
located within 20 feet of the property line of the Palmer Township
Bikeway/Recreational Trail.
J. Truck parking and loading docks. Any area routinely used for the
parking of two or more tractor-trailer trucks and/or trucks that would
have refrigerated systems operating during nighttime hours and any
related loading dock(s) shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any
residential lot line. If such parking and/or loading dock(s) are within
200 feet of any residential lot line, and are not separated from such lot
line by a building, then an earth berm shall be provided between such
parking and such lot line(s).
(1) Such earth berm shall have maximum side slopes of 3:1, a minimum
height of four feet and be covered with an attractive all-season
vegetative ground cover.
(2) An earth berm shall be accompanied by evergreen screening as
specified in § 190-194. The evergreen screening shall be placed
near the top of or on the residential side of such berm. The earth
berm may be placed within the width of a required buffer yard.
(3) Such berm shall have a minimum width of three feet across the top
of the berm.
§ 190-116 PALMER CODE § 190-118
186:700
§ 190-118. Bonus provisions.
§ 190-119. Site plan review.
See § 190-201.
A. The provisions of § 190-72A shall also apply to this district.
B. The Board of Supervisors may grant bonuses in intensity as a
conditional use up to the following maximum levels based upon the
criteria of § 190-72A.
(1) Building coverage: up to 45% maximum.
(2) Impervious coverage: up to 80% maximum.
§ 190-118 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-119
186:701

ARTICLE XIII
PIC Planned Industrial/Commercial District
§ 190-120. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations to meet current and anticipated future regional needs for largesite
industrial and commercial development appropriate to the community;
to encourage industrial and commercial development that will benefit the
community and the region, both economically and aesthetically; and to
permit investment in a planned development that will provide for the colocation
of several plants and/or commercial establishments to ensure an
efficient interior street system with safe and efficient access to public
streets. This Article encourages excellence in site planning and building
design, careful traffic management, attractive landscaping and screening in
a campus-like setting.
§ 190-121. Review procedures for conditional uses.
For conditional uses in the PIC district, a development plan shall be
submitted including the following information, in addition to information
required in a site plan under §§ 190-201 and 190-208:
A. A list of the types of uses expected to be located on the tract and their
approximate floor areas.
B. A map and statement indicating the manner in which the proposed site
plan relates to existing and anticipated future development of the
balance of the PIC District, with respect to traffic flow and parking,
utilities and services, open space, landscaped areas and drainage.
C. A map and statement indicating the manner and extent to which open
space and landscaped areas are to be provided in the development,
including any proposal for extension of a recreation trail along the
Schoeneck Creek.
D. For any major industrial use(s), the likely hours of operation, the
maximum number of employees expected on any one shift and a
reasonable estimate of the expected amounts of different types of truck
traffic.
E. Proposed methods to screen and buffer any adjacent dwellings and any
adjacent residential districts.
F. Such additional data or evidence that the Board of Supervisors may
reasonably require to ensure compliance with specific provisions of
Township ordinances, especially to ensure public health and safety and
to ensure compliance with the performance standards of Article XVI.
G. An applicant for a development of multiple lots intended to involve
industrial uses shall provide the substance of the proposed declarations
of restrictions and covenants (if any) that would impose additional use
§ 190-120 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-121
186:703
§ 190-122. Permitted by right uses.
The following uses are permitted by right in the PIC District, provided that
all other requirements of this ordinance are met:
and development and maintenance restrictions on the development of
the tract. Such restrictions and covenants are strongly encouraged to
ensure adequate maintenance and to control nuisances from individual
uses within the tract. Any proposed covenants shall also include a
written process for enforcement, preferably by both the developer and
by neighboring property owners.
A. Crop farming or orchard.
B. Publicly-owned recreation or Township-owned facility.
C. Christmas tree farm, which may include seasonal sales.
D. Greenhouse/plant nursery.
E. Business, medical, public and semipublic office.
F. Private picnic grove.
G. Golf course.*
H. Commercial stable or riding academy.
I. Exercise club.
J. Membership club.
K. Printing and publishing establishment.
L. Facility for providing services, repairs and maintenance to office
equipment.
M. Bed-and-breakfast use.
N. The routine replacement of an existing business use with a business use
listed in § 190-125 that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer is of generally similar intensity and that will not involve
construction of a new principal building or a structural addition to an
existing principal building. If the Zoning Officer has doubts or questions
about the potential nuisances or hazards of the use and/or the amount
of the truck traffic, the Zoning Officer shall require conditional use
approval.
O. The routine initial development of permitted nonindustrial uses within a
building previously approved to include multiple uses (such as but not
limited to a shopping center or office building).
P. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
Q. Auto service station. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
§ 190-121 PALMER CODE § 190-122
186:704
§ 190-123. Permitted accessory uses.
The following are permitted by right accessory uses in the PIC District,
provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are complied with:
§ 190-124. Special exception uses. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316]
The following are special exception uses within the PIC District, provided
that all other requirements of this ordinance are complied with:
§ 190-125. Conditional uses.
The following are conditional uses in the PIC District, provided that all
other requirements of this ordinance are complied with, especially including
§§ 190-208, 190-210 and 190-211:
R. Retail sale of goods, prepared foods and/or services. [Added
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
S. Day-care center, child or adult.* ** [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-441]
NOTES:
* See additional standards in § 190-210.
** Only on land also within the Route 248 Overlay District.
A. Roadside produce market.*
B. Accessory use and structure specifically permitted under § 190-211C.**
C. Accessory use and structure which are clearly customarily incidental to
a permitted principal use.
D. Home occupation, light.**
E. Warehouse. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
A. Home occupation, general.**
NOTES:
**See additional standards in § 190-211.
§ 190-122 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-125
186:705
A. Research, engineering or testing laboratory, excluding all projects with
the potential of environmental or genetic hazards.
B. Appropriate public utilities. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-316213]
C. Heliport as an accessory or principal use. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-316214]
D. Industrial activity involving processing, cleaning, assembling,
packaging, conversion, production, repair, manufacturing or testing of
materials, goods and/or products (other than those uses specifically
permitted by right), that the applicant proves, to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors, based upon review by the Planning Commission,
will not create a significant hazard to the public health and safety.
These uses shall not include any use specifically prohibited by the
regulations of this district. These uses shall comply with the
performance standards of Article XVI. These industrial activities
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Testing and repair of manufactured products.
(2) Manufacture of products requiring light metal processing,
including finishing, grinding, polishing, heat treating and
stamping.
(3) Packaging and bottling operations with no retail activity on the lot.
(4) Manufacture and assembly of products from previously prepared
materials, such as plastic, leather, glass, cellophane or textiles.
(5) Manufacture of jewelry, precision instruments, optical goods and
similar products.
(6) Manufacture and assembly of small electrical and electronic
appliances, supplies and equipment.
E. Raising of livestock.*
F. Tank farm* involving the bulk storage of flammable liquids, subject to
the standards of the National Fire Protection Association and/or such
other recognized safety standards acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors.
G. Distribution center. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316215]
H. Hotel, motel* and conference/convention center.
213. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B, Wholesale sales or
warehouse.
214. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, Auto service station.
215. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection G, Retail sale of goods,
prepared foods and/or services.
§ 190-125 PALMER CODE § 190-125
186:706
§ 190-126. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the PIC District shall be as follows:
I. Shopping center or mall. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
J. Commercial outdoor recreation*, other than uses permitted by right.
K. Recreational vehicle storage.
L. Nature preserve.
M. Trucking terminal. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316216]
N. College or trade school.
O. Cultural center or auditorium.*
P. Commercial communications antennae.*
Q. Self-storage development.*
R. Planned commercial, business, office and/or industrial park or center
involving the subdivision of land into lots smaller than 15 acres.
S. Appropriate governmental facility or service,* other than uses
permitted by right.217
NOTES:
*See additional standards in § 190-210.
A. Tract area.
(1) Minimum area of 40 acres for shopping centers or other uses that
include greater than 15% of the total floor area in retail uses.
(2) Minimum tract size of 15 acres for all other uses.
(3) The fifteen-acre-minimum tract shall not be required for the
following uses: individual single-family house or mobile home,
greenhouse or plant nursery, membership club, private picnic
groves and a bed-and-breakfast use.
B. Lot area.
(1) Within the minimum tract area requirements if applicable, lots may
be subdivided into minimum lot areas of two acres, if complying
with the purposes of this district.
216. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection M, Industrial outdoor
storage or display.
217. Editor's Note: Former Subsection T, Single-family detached dwelling, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316.
§ 190-125 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-126
186:707
(2) A minimum lot area of three acres shall be required for the
following uses that do not require a fifteen-acre tract size:
greenhouse or nursery, membership club, private picnic groves and
a bed and breakfast use.
C. Lot width: a minimum of 100 feet at the setback line and a minimum of
60 feet at the existing right-of-way line, except a minimum lot width of
250 feet at the existing right-of-way line for any use having driveways
that only serve one lot entering directly onto a minor arterial road.
D. Lot coverage: a maximum building coverage of 40%; a maximum
impervious coverage of 65%. At least 20% of the lot shall be
landscaped. See also bonus provisions in § 190-132.
E. Front yard setback: a minimum of 40 feet, except when a residential lot
line is abutting to or across the street from the front yard, in which case
the front yard setback shall be 75 feet minimum.
F. Side yard setback: a minimum of 15 feet, except when a residential lot
line directly abuts the side yard, in which case the side yard setback
shall be 150 feet on the side thus abutted. On a corner lot there shall be
a side yard of not less than 40 feet.
G. Rear yard setback: a minimum of 15 feet, except when a residential lot
line directly abuts the rear yard, in which case the rear yard setback
shall be 150 feet.
H. Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 40 feet, whichever is more restrictive,
except that structures up to 60 feet may be permitted as a conditional
use, provided that fire protection measures above and beyond those
normally required would be provided as the Supervisors determine are
necessary, after providing the Township Fire Commissioner with an
opportunity for review. [Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-365]
I. Enclosed structures. All manufacturing shall occur within completely
enclosed structures. See also § 190-194D(6).
J. Changes in setback. Any structure with a length greater than 300 feet
should have a variation or offset of the front and back wall planes of 10
feet at minimum intervals of 300 feet.
K. Truck parking and loading docks. Any area routinely used for the
parking of two or more tractor-trailer trucks and/or trucks that would
have refrigerated systems operating during nighttime hours and any
related loading dock(s) shall be setback a minimum of 75 feet from any
residential lot line. If such parking and/or loading dock(s) are within
200 feet of any residential lot line, and are not separated from such lot
line by a building, then an earth berm shall be provided between such
parking and such lot line(s).
§ 190-126 PALMER CODE § 190-126
186:708
§ 190-127. Sewage restrictions on uses.
The requirements of § 190-105 shall apply.
§ 190-128. Multiple use buildings.
See § 190-192C.
§ 190-129. More than one principal building on lot.
See § 190-192B.
§ 190-130. Design guidelines.
The following guidelines are encouraged to guide the development of all
industrial structures:
§ 190-131. Additional landscaping, screening, parking and
performance regulations. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-301]
See Article XVI for performance standards. See Article XIX for landscaping.
See § 190-194D for screening. See Article XVII for off-street parking. See
Article XVIII for signs. See § 190-150 regarding intrusion of a construction
area into certain features. See § 81-27 et seq. regarding installation of lock
box.
§ 190-132. Bonus provisions.
(1) Such earth berm shall have maximum side slopes of 3:1, a minimum
height of four feet and be covered with an attractive all-season
vegetative ground cover.
(2) An earth berm shall be accompanied by evergreen screening as
specified in § 190-194. The evergreen screening shall be placed
near the top of or on the residential side of such berm. The earth
berm may be placed within the width of a required buffer yard.
(3) Such berm shall have a minimum width of three feet across the top
of the berm.
A. The proposed development should be designed with an overall plan
having a single architectural and landscaping theme.
B. Proposed buildings should relate in scale and materials to adjacent
buildings.
C. Long, unbroken facades are strongly discouraged.
D. The exteriors of all buildings that are visible to a public street should be
finished with masonry, brick, stone or equivalent types of attractive
materials, as opposed to tin, steel or aluminum.
A. The provisions of § 190-72A shall also apply to this district.
§ 190-126 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-132
186:709
§ 190-133. Transportation improvements.
§ 190-134. Site plan review.
A site plan submittal is required for certain uses. See § 190-201.
§ 190-135. Specifically prohibited uses.
The regulations of § 190-104 shall apply.
B. As a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may grant bonuses in
intensity up to the following maximum levels based upon the criteria of
§ 190-72A.
(1) Building coverage: up to 45% maximum, although no bonus shall
apply to a principally retail shopping center or mall.
(2) Impervious coverage: up to 75% maximum.
A. See § 190-208G.
B. Based upon § 190-208G and the past traffic impact studies for the
Northwood Mall, the widening of PA 248 from PA Route 33 to the
Palmer Park Mall to four lanes shall be a condition of any conditional
approval of a shopping mall or shopping center of more than 200,000
square feet of total floor area in the PIC District.
§ 190-132 PALMER CODE § 190-135
186:710
ARTICLE XIV
PO/IP Planned Office/Industrial Park District
§ 190-136. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide the same purposes as the PIC
District, but recognizing that the PO/IP District is less appropriate for retail
and personal services uses.
§ 190-137. Requirements and specifically prohibited uses.
The requirements of the PO/IP District shall be identical to the PIC District
except:
A. Retail sales of goods, prepared foods and/or personal services are
prohibited, except that such uses are permitted if they total a maximum
of 5% of the floor area of any building.
(1) However, this Subsection A shall not limit the following uses:
standard restaurants, financial institutions, hotels/motels,
convention/conference facilities and services directed
predominantly towards office and light industrial businesses.
B. Any shopping center, shopping mall or other lot including more than
10,000 square feet of retail floor area is prohibited in the PO/IP District.
C. Any combination of uses permitted by right or by condition in the
Planned Industrial/Commercial District (PIC) shall be permitted as a
conditional use. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-381]
D. Training facilities shall be permitted by right as a business, medical,
public or semipublic office use. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-381]
E. Distribution activities shall be permitted as a conditional use, either as
a stand-alone use or in combination with other uses (to be known as
limited distribution centers), provided that: [Added 8-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-381]
(1) The distribution and warehousing component of any building does
not exceed 200,000 square feet of building area; and
(2) The building does not contain more than one truck docking bay for
each 6,500 square feet of building area; and
(3) Docking bays shall not be constructed or maintained on opposite
sides of the building; and
(4) The building is located in an approved industrial park; and
(5) The building is situated on a parcel which does not abut
residentially zoned land
§ 190-136 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-137
186:711
F. Limited distribution centers need not comply with the requirements for
trucking company terminals, notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 190-210B(23). [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-381]
§ 190-137 PALMER CODE § 190-137
186:712
ARTICLE XV
C-R Conservation and Recreation District
§ 190-138. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to preserve and conserve important natural
areas while providing for such uses and intensities that would be compatible
with these objectives. This district is intended specifically to protect the
scenic, recreational and environmental resources of environmentally
sensitive lands along the Lehigh River and the Bushkill Creek and on
publicly-owned open space. Most of the lands within this district are highly
vulnerable to flooding, include wetlands and/or include steep slopes.
§ 190-139. Permitted by right uses.
The following are permitted by right uses in the C-R District within all other
requirements of this ordinance:
§ 190-140. Specifically prohibited uses.
Dumping of any kind, other than fill by clean soil and rock. See § 190-155.
A. Crop farming, orchard and plant nursery not including on-site retail
sales of items not primarily grown on the premises and not including
commercial forestry.
B. Publicly-owned recreation.
C. Picnic grove, private.*
D. Golf course.*
E. Horse stable and commercial riding academy.*
F. Household** or nonhousehold swimming pool.*
G. Township-owned facility.
H. Library or noncommercial museum.
I. Community center or publicly-owned auditorium.*
J. Nature preserve.
K. Cemetery.*
L. Forestry. [Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-299]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
§ 190-138 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-141
186:713
§ 190-141. Special exception uses.
The following are special exception uses in the C-R District within all other
requirements of this ordinance:
§ 190-142. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses in the C-R District shall be as follows, within the
requirements of Article XX:
§ 190-143. Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 190-144. Area and bulk regulations.
The following dimensional and yard requirements shall apply to each use in
the C-R District, except as specifically provided for in this ordinance.
A. Home occupation, general.**
B. Single-family detached dwellings within the requirements of the LDR
District, except with a minimum lot area of five acres.
C. Group home, within a lawful existing dwelling unit.*
D. Place of worship. [Added 1-29-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-314]
NOTES:
*See additional requirements in § 190-210.
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
A. Appropriate governmental facilities and services, other than those
listed as permitted by right uses.
B. Publicly and privately-owned schools, other than nonpublic trade
schools.
C. Appropriate public utility facilities, including a hydroelectric plant.
A. Accessory structures and uses clearly customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses.**
B. Residential accessory structures and uses.**
C. Home occupation, light.**
D. Unit for care of relative.**
NOTES:
**See additional requirements in § 190-211.
§ 190-141 PALMER CODE § 190-144
186:714
§ 190-145. Sign, parking and floodplain regulations.
See Article XVIII for signs. See Article XVII for off-street parking. See
§ 190-154 for floodplain areas. See § 190-150 concerning intrusion of the
construction area into steep slopes and other features.
§ 190-146. Environmental protection.
In keeping with the intent of this district, any use is expected to maintain
the highest levels of environmental protection.
§ 190-147. Site plan review.
Certain uses are required to submit a site plan under § 190-201.
A. Minimum lot area: two acres, except five acres for a single-family
detached dwelling.
B. Minimum lot width: 200 feet (measured at required front yard setback
line).
C. Maximum impervious coverage: 15%.
D. Maximum building coverage: 10%.
E. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
F. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
G. Minimum each side yard: 25 feet.
H. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
§ 190-144 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-147
186:715

ARTICLE XVI
Environmental Preservation
§ 190-148. Environmental preservation required.
§ 190-149. Nuisances prohibited.
No land or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
that:
§ 190-150. Proposed construction area and natural features and
utility corridors: steep slopes.
A. All uses shall be developed in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the quality of the existing environment and of any
natural amenities present on the site.
B. All uses shall seek to minimize alteration of natural drainage patterns,
shall minimize grading and unnecessary removal of natural vegetation,
shall seek to preserve substantial stands of mature and healthy trees,
shall take into account attractive scenic views and shall properly
respect any other important natural features existing on the site.
A. Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire, explosive or
toxic hazards.
B. Does not comply with federal or state regulations regarding
electromagnetic or radiation hazards.
C. Creates smoke, dust or odor nuisances.
D. Creates any other condition in such manner or in such amount as to
adversely affect the reasonable use of adjoining premises or to be
dangerous to public health or safety.
A. Proposed construction area and natural features. For any proposed new
lot that may potentially involve construction that could impact upon any
of the features identified in Subsection A(2) below, the applicant shall
be required to comply with this Subsection A. If the applicant states as
part of an application that none of the features specified in Subsection
A(2) would be impacted, then a site plan shall not be required by this
section.
(1) The subdivision and land development plans shall designate the
proposed locations of principal buildings. If an exact principal
building location is not known, then such site plan shall designate
the maximum outer extents of within which the building will be
located. Such locations are required to be to scale, but are not
required by this section to be professionally surveyed. Such plans
shall also show a construction area including lands within the
following minimum distances from the proposed location of each
§ 190-148 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-150
186:717
principal building: 30 feet in the front,* 30 feet to the rear* and 15
feet to the side.*
[NOTE: Unless the required yard is permitted to be smaller by the
applicable district regulations for that use, such smaller distance
shall apply. For instance, if an eight-feet-wide side yard is
permitted, then the construction area shall be eight feet along the
side from the proposed building location instead of 15 feet.]
(2) The lot and buildings shall be laid out so that the proposed
construction area described above does not include any of the
following features:
(a) Wetlands (as defined by federal and state regulations).
(b) Rights-of-way of underground pipelines.
(c) Rights-of-way or easements of overhead electrical lines.
(d) Ponds or lakes.
(e) One-hundred-year floodplain (as defined by § 190-154).
(f) Areas of more than 500 square feet with 15% or greater
existing natural slope (unless the lot meets the requirements of
Subsection C below).
(g) Slopes with 33% or greater proposed man-made slope (such as
sides of a drainage swale).
(h) For a residential use, any drainage swale that can be expected
to carry more than 12 cubic feet per second during a ten-year
storm.
(i) Any stormwater detention basin.
B. Natural steep slopes. "Steep slopes" shall be considered those of 15%
or greater slope (equal to 15 feet vertical distance over 100 feet
horizontal distance). If the proposed construction area described above
includes any areas with slopes of 15% or greater (other than slopes that
were clearly man-made), then the applicant shall submit a site plan and
shall comply with the following provisions. This Subsection B shall not
apply to townhouses and low-rise apartments, which are regulated by a
different set of standards.
(1) Such site plan shall show two-foot slope contours, with all areas of
slope greater than 15% and 25% identified, unless alternate
contour intervals are preapproved by the Township Engineer or
Zoning Officer. Detailed contours are not required within areas
identified as having over 25% slopes. The Zoning Officer may
require a plan to be drawn by a professional surveyor, professional
engineer or landscape architect. The plan shall show the proposed
principal building location and proposed construction area as
§ 190-150 PALMER CODE § 190-150
186:718
§ 190-151. Areas with high water table; wetlands.
described above. This site plan shall also show substantial areas of
mature trees.
(2) If the proposed construction area includes more than 1,000 square
feet with slopes greater than 15%, but does not include more than
1,000 square feet with slopes greater than 25%, then the following
regulations shall apply, unless a more restrictive provision is
established by another section of this ordinance:
(a) Permitted residential use: a minimum lot area of 43,560 square
feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Permitted commercial or industrial use: a minimum lot area of
two acres per principal use and maximum impervious coverage
of 25%.
(3) If the proposed construction area includes more than 1,000 square
feet with slopes greater than 25%, the following regulations shall
apply, unless a more restrictive provision is established by another
section of this ordinance:
(a) Permitted residential use: a minimum lot area of two acres per
dwelling unit and a maximum impervious coverage of 15%.
(b) Permitted commercial or industrial use: a minimum lot area of
four acres per principal use and a maximum impervious
coverage of 15%.
C. Conservation easement. To ensure that the construction area plan is
complied with and that important natural features are not disturbed,
the Board of Supervisors may require that a ninety-nine-year or longer
conservation easement be established by the applicant to ensure the
preservation of concentrations of steeply sloped, floodplain, wetland,
ponds and lakes areas. The Board of Supervisors may require that such
conservation easement be referenced in each deed for each lot. Also,
such conservation easement, at a minimum, shall grant the Board of
Supervisors the authority to enforce such easement. In addition, the
approved recorded subdivision or land development plan shall state
that such areas are to be preserved.
D. Streets and driveways. See applicable slope standards in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Erosion. See § 190-155.
A. High water table areas. In areas where the depth to the seasonally high
water table is less than four feet based upon the County Soil Survey, the
Board of Supervisors may, at its option, require that all portions of new
dwellings that are underground be adequately waterproofed to prevent
flooded basements.
§ 190-150 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-151
186:719
§ 190-152. Setbacks from waterways and drainage swales.
B. Wetlands.
(1) If the Zoning Officer or the Township Engineer has reason to
believe that a portion of a site proposed to be altered may possibly
meet the state or federal definitions of a "wetland," then the Zoning
Officer may require the applicant to provide a study by a qualified
professional delineating the locations of wetlands. The
qualifications of such expert shall also be submitted. However, the
Township accepts no responsibility to identify all wetlands or to
warn all parties of such possibilities.
(2) All permits of the Township are issued on the condition that the
applicant comply with all federal and state wetland regulations.
Such permits may be revoked or suspended by the Township for
noncompliance with such regulations.
A. Purposes: to protect the water quality of surface waters in the
Township, to preserve opportunities for future recreation use of the
waterways, to minimize erosion and sedimentation, to preserve the
natural stormwater drainage system of the area and to conserve
sensitive wildlife and aquatic habitats.
B. Setbacks from major surface waters.
(1) No structure or paved vehicle parking area or parking aisle shall be
located within 100 feet of the top of the primary bank of a major
surface water.
(2) "Major surface waters" are defined as the entire length of the
Lehigh River and the Bushkill Creek through the Township.
(3) The setbacks required by Subsections B and C shall not apply to a
hydroelectric plant or publicly-owned recreational facilities. See
§ 190-154 regarding whether larger building setbacks are required
by floodplain regulations.
C. Setbacks from minor surface waters. No structure or paved vehicle
parking area or parking aisle shall be located within 60 feet of the
center of any minor surface waters. "Minor surface waters" are defined
as the Schoeneck Creek.
D. Setbacks from major natural drainage swales.
(1) Major natural drainage swales shall, whenever reasonable, be
maintained in open space for a width approximately equal to their
width during a one-hundred-year flood. See § 165-63, Subsection O,
of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. No buildings
shall be located within 50 feet of the center of a major natural
drainage swale.
§ 190-151 PALMER CODE § 190-152
186:720
§ 190-153. Alluvial soils areas.
See § 190-154D(2).
§ 190-154. Floodplain management. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-304]
(2) A major natural drainage swale shall be a stormwater channel
segment that is unpiped and designated on the official Township
Topographic Base Maps as "Drainage and Intermittent Drainage."
(3) The Board of Supervisors may allow a natural drainage swale to be
diverted or piped underground in cases where the applicant proves
to the full satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that such a
method would be necessary for the reasonable development of the
tract, and that such a method would result in an overall
improvement of stormwater management within the entire area.
E. Setbacks and slopes of drainage swales; setbacks from detention
basins. See § 190-150 above.
F. Stormwater easements and maintenance. See § 165-63, Subsection O,
of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act of 1978,218 delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to
promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry.
B. Purposes. The purposes of these provisions are as follows:
(1) To promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community;
(2) To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices
in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
(3) To minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage;
(4) To reduce financial burdens imposed on the community,
governments and residents by preventing excessive development in
areas subject to flooding;
(5) To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for
building sites or certain uses because of flooding by prohibiting the
subdivision and/or development of unprotected flood-prone lands;
and
218. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 190-152 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:721
(6) To regulate development in flood hazard areas in accordance with
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. § 4001 et seq.)
and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act 166 of 1978 (32
P.S. § 679.101 et seq.).
C. Repealer, abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance hereby
repeals and supersedes any prior ordinances and any other similar
provisions currently in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, all
provisions of other ordinances shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict
between any of the provisions of this ordinance, the more restrictive
shall apply.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect; and for this
purpose the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This section does not imply, represent, or
suggest that areas outside any identified flood-prone area, or that
land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or
flood damages; and every person who proposes to build on or
develop any land within the Township is cautioned to cause his own
independent study to be made to determine the likelihood of
flooding or flood damage occurring on that property.
(2) This section shall not create liability on the part of Palmer
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this section or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder. See also § 190-222.
F. Administration.
(1) Designation of floodplain administrator.
(a) The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this ordinance and is referred to herein as the
"floodplain administrator." The floodplain administrator may:
[1] Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:722
[2] Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or
[3] Enter into a written agreement or written contract with
another agency or private-sector entity to administer
specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of
any part of these regulations by another entity shall not
relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
(b) In the absence of the designated floodplain administrator, the
floodplain administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the
Township Manager.
(2) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
(a) The floodplain administrator shall issue a floodplain
development permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
(b) Prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit, the
floodplain administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits
required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as
those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended);219 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);220 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended);221 and the United States Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
(c) During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make
as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(d) In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
219. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
220. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
221. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:723
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(e) In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the
work does not comply with the permit application or any
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
floodplain administrator shall revoke the permit and report
such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it
considers necessary.
(f) The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this ordinance,
including but not limited to finished construction elevation
data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(g) The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(h) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the floodplain administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the person identified in the floodplain
ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.
(i) The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements
of 34 Pa.Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest
revisions thereof.
(3) Permits required. A Township floodplain development permit is
required for all proposed construction, development and any manmade
change to improved or unimproved real estate within a
special flood hazard area, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
(4) Application procedures. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the
Township. If any proposed construction or development is located
within, or adjacent to, any identified floodplain area, applicants for
a building/zoning permit shall, in addition to supplying such
information as may be required by the provisions of other Township
ordinances, supply the following specific information in connection
with such application:
(a) A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to
flooding, the location of the proposed construction, the
location of any other floodplain development or structures, and
the location of any existing or proposed stream improvements
or protective works. Included shall be all plans for proposed
subdivision and land development in order to assure that:
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:724
[1] All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and conform with the
requirements of this and all other applicable codes and
ordinances;
[2] All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;
[3] Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
[4] Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse,
or lateral movement;
[5] Building materials are flood-resistant;
[6] Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have
been used; and
[7] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities have
been designed and located to prevent water entry or
accumulation.
(b) Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours;
information concerning base flood elevations, velocities, and
other applicable information such as pressures, impact and
uplift forces associated with the base flood; size of structures;
location and elevations of streets; water supply and sanitary
sewage facilities; soil types; and floodproofing measures.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has
been adequately designed to withstand the base flood
elevations, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and
other hydrostatic, hydrodynamic and buoyancy factors
associated with the base flood. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure.
(d) Information showing the proposed lowest floor and basement
elevations in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of
1988.
(5) Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications
and plans for any proposed construction or development in any
identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Township to the Northampton County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance
of a building/zoning permit. The recommendations of the
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:725
Conservation District shall be considered by the floodplain
administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
(6) Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications
for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by
the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (such as the Planning Commission, Township
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment, and the comments of the
agencies or individuals to whom such submissions are made shall
be considered by the floodplain administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
(7) Other permit issuance requirements. Prior to the issuance of any
floodplain development permit, the applicant shall obtain all other
necessary governmental permits, such as those required by state
and federal laws, including but not limited to those required by Act
537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, the Water Obstruction
Act of 1913, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
(8) Changes. After the issuance of a floodplain development permit, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any
of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the
floodplain administrator; and any work done pursuant to such
permit shall be done in accordance with plans, specifications and
other documents and in accordance with any conditions imposed
upon the granting of said permit by the Township. Requests for any
change to the application, permit, plans, specifications or other
documents shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
(9) Start of construction.
(a) Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 180 days
after the date of issuance of the floodplain development
permit, and work shall be completed within 12 months after
the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall expire,
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain
administrator. Time extensions shall be granted only if a
written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets forth
sufficient and reasonable cause for the floodplain
administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect
at the time the extension is granted.
(b) Construction shall be considered to have started with the first
placement of permanent construction on the site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. For a structure without a basement or poured
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:726
footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent
framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on
its pilings or foundation or the affixing of any prefabricated
structure to its permanent site. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations,
erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under
proposed subsurface footings, or the installation of sewer, gas
and water pipes, or electrical or other service lines from the
street. For a substantial improvement, construction shall be
considered to have started with the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
(10) Inspection and revocation. During the construction period, the
Township shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the permit and with all applicable
Township laws and ordinances. In the event it is found that the
work does not comply with the permit or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Township shall revoke the
permit and take such other action as in the circumstances it may
deem appropriate.
(11) Enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this
ordinance is a violation of this ordinance, and the floodplain
administrator may proceed with enforcement action in accordance
with Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Section 616.1,
Enforcement Notice, Section 617.2, Enforcement Remedies
(Penalties), and Article X-A, Appeals to Court. The floodplain
administrator may also issue a declaration of violation, under
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to deny flood insurance
on the property in violation. The effects of having a Section 1316
violation are nonavailability of flood insurance for any buildings,
possible reduction of market value, risk of damage without
compensation, possible mortgage foreclosure, and denial of
disaster assistance for repair of structural damage.
(a) Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation
of any provisions of this section, or of any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the floodplain administrator shall give notice
of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
[1] Be in writing;
[2] Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:727
[3] Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days,
for the performance of any act it requires;
[4] Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the
case may require; provided, however, that such notice or
order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon
such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served
with such notice by any other method authorized or
required by the laws of this state;
[5] Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this section.
(b) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the
floodplain administrator concerning the administration of the
provisions of this ordinance may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days
after the decision, determination or action of the floodplain
administrator.
[1] Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider the appeal in accordance with the
Municipalities Planning Code and any other local
ordinance.
[2] Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to
court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
[3] Granting of a municipal appeal will not relieve a
landowner from the obligation to comply with the
minimum requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program. Landowners that fail to meet the program's
minimum requirements, notwithstanding any appellate
decision to the contrary, are in violation of the National
Flood Insurance Program and remain subject to the
accompanying penalties.
G. Floodplain definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and
phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this
ordinance its most reasonable application. The following words, terms
and phrases shall have the following meanings for the purposes of
§ 190-154:
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:728
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for AE Zones that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Within
the approximated floodplain, the base flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the approximated floodplain
which is nearest to the construction site in question.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations. The term "development" shall also include but shall not be
limited to the placement or development of a mobile (manufactured)
home on a lot or the placement or development of any recreational
vehicle or travel trailer on a lot for more than 180 consecutive days.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFED — Watertight, with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:729
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes travel trailers and other similar
vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For
insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include
park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. The term
"manufactured home" shall have the same meaning as "mobile home."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — For floodplain
management purposes, a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined eligible for listing by the Secretary of the
Interior or the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission
(PHMC);
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or the PHMC as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary or the PHMC to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places.
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:730
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures. Any construction started after June 28, 1976, and
before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance. Work on existing structures is covered under the definition of
"substantial improvement."
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERMANENT — Having a life span of six months or more at a particular
location.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A or AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:731
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair
work performed. This term does not include the following:
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any exterior restoration or interior alteration of an historic
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
a state inventory of historic places or which the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission has officially determined is
eligible for such listing.
(2)
H. Description and identification of floodplain areas.
(1) Identification. The identified floodplain area shall include any areas
of Palmer Township classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 16, 2014, and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:732
the latest revision thereof, including all digital data developed
as part of the FIS. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and
any subsequent revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by
Palmer Township and declared to be part of this ordinance.
(2) Description and special requirements. The identified floodplain
area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(a) The floodway area shall consist of those areas identified in the
FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which represent the
channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot at
any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
[1] Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[2] Within any floodway area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
(b) The AE Area shall consist of those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided.
[1] The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall consist of those
areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations
have been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(c) The A Area shall consist of those areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal,
state, or other acceptable sources shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available,
the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the
elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:733
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others
of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality. [See provisions for site-specific
floodplain studies in Subsection H(4) below.
(3) Floodplain as overlay area. The identified floodplain area shall
function as an overlay district over the zoning district that applies
to a lot. All portions of this ordinance shall also apply to the
floodplain area; except that where the floodplain regulations and
other regulations of this ordinance regulate the same matter, the
more-restrictive regulation shall apply. Should any part of the
identified floodplain area be declared inapplicable because of
lawful official action of the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning
Hearing Board, the Federal Insurance Administration or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the underlying zoning district shall
continue to remain in effect.
(4) Studies by a developer.
(a) If the applicant does not desire the regulations of the identified
floodplain area to apply within an approximated floodplain, the
applicant may, at the applicant's expense, have a detailed study
completed to determine the exact base flood elevation using
accepted hydraulic modeling techniques (HEC-RAS, HEC-2,
etc.).
(b) This determination shall be made under the review and
approval of the Township Engineer and be sealed by a
professional engineer.
(c) An applicant may also provide any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other reputable
source.
(d) Such study may also seek to show that an area is within an A or
AE flood area and not the floodway area.
(e) Based upon such study and information, in areas that the
Township Engineer determines, in writing, not to be within the
identified floodplain area, the regulations of the identified
floodplain area shall not apply.
(f) No modification or revision of the water surface elevation, the
floodway area, or any area identified as being flood-prone as
set forth in the latest Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:734
Federal Insurance Administration shall be made without prior
written approval from the Federal Insurance Administration.
(5) Changes in identification of floodplain area. The identified
floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval
must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable,
but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes
to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or scientific
data.
(6) Boundary disputes. When exact measurements do not exist, the
boundaries of the floodplain areas shall be determined by the
floodplain administrator by scaling distances off the Flood
Insurance Rate Map. If an applicant challenges such determination
by the Floodplain Administrator, the applicant may appeal the
boundaries to the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall seek
comments from the Township Engineer. The person contesting the
location of the floodplain boundary shall have the burden of
establishing that the land does not lie within the identified
floodplain area.
I. Floodplain area prohibited uses. On any site or portion of a site which is
located in a special flood hazard area, the construction, enlargement or
expansion of any of the following uses shall be specifically prohibited,
regardless of their elevation relative to the floodplain:
(1) All new or substantially improved:
(a) Residential dwellings.
(b) Commercial, institutional or industrial structures.
(c) Hospitals, nursing homes, jails and prisons.
(d) Mobile/manufactured homes, a mobile/manufactured home
park or a recreational vehicle park.
(e) Solid waste disposal areas/facilities.
(f) Dumps or junkyards.
(g) Outdoor storage or disposal of materials that could be carried
by stormwater or could obstruct stormwater.
(h) Bulk storage of manure, except within a waterproof enclosure.
(i) On-site sewage disposal systems.
(j) Any building or structure which would cause any increase in
the base flood elevation.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:735
(k) All uses not specifically permitted, unless their allowance is
clearly implied in the determination of the Zoning Hearing
Board by a very close similar use.
(2) Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for
the production or storage of any hazardous materials or
substances, or which will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any hazardous materials or substances on
the premises, or which will involve the production, storage or use
of any amount of radioactive substances, including but not limited
to the comprehensive list below, or such similar substances and
materials that would create a hazard to water quality:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(3) The production or storage of any substance defined as hazardous
waste under the Pennsylvania DEP's Hazardous Waste
Management Regulations in quantities of more than five gallons
within the identified floodplain area.
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:736
(4) The filling of marshlands, dredging, removal of topsoil or damming
or relocation of any watercourse, except with the approval of the
Pennsylvania DEP.
(5) Any relocation or altering of a watercourse if the water-carrying
capacity will be reduced without an appropriate alternative method
of stormwater management approved under the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Ch. 165,
Subdivision and Land Development) or any relocation of a
waterway without needed Pennsylvania DEP permits. The State
Floodplain Coordinating Office and downstream municipalities
shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a stream
watercourse, and copies of such notifications shall be submitted to
FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development.
J. Permitted uses in special flood hazard areas shall be as follows,
provided that all other requirements of this section and this ordinance
are complied with:
(1) Crop farming, orchards and raising of livestock.
(2) Plant nursery or Christmas tree farm.
(3) Recreational uses, including public and private parks, day camps,
picnic groves, golf courses, hunting and fishing membership clubs
and boating launches, marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc., but not
to include recreational vehicles or recreational vehicle parks.
(4) Game farm, fish hatchery, hunting and fishing reserve.
(5) Nature preserve.
(6) Front, side or rear yards and required lot area for uses that may or
may not be in an abutting district.
(7) Pervious parking areas.
K. Special exception uses. All applications for special exceptions shall
require appropriate state and federal approvals. Special exception uses
in the floodplain area shall be as follows:
(1) Dams, culverts and bridges approved by the Pennsylvania DEP if it
has jurisdiction over the watershed in question, or by the
governmental agency exercising jurisdiction over the watershed.
(2) Paved roads, and driveways, parking areas, and loading areas.
(3) Storm sewers, not including detention facilities.
(4) Grading or regrading of land, including the deposit of topsoil and
the grading thereof, and the construction of retaining walls,
provided that a detailed engineering study is provided that proves
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board, based upon review
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:737
by the Township Engineer, that the grading work will not
individually or collectively increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
L. Permissible nonconformities. A structure or use of a structure or
premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these
provisions but which is not in conformity with these provisions may be
continued, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Existing nonconformities (structures and/or uses) located in the
floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged (unless the effect
of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully
offset by accompanying stream improvements).
(2) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or
improvements of any kind to a nonconformity (structure and/or
use) located in the floodway area to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(3) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement
of any kind to a nonconformity (structure and/or use), regardless of
location, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its value
constitutes a substantial improvement and, therefore, shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this and
any other applicable ordinance.
(4) Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not
be permitted to continue.
M. Fill in the floodplain. In addition to any required federal and state
permits, a Township floodplain development permit shall be required
for any filling of either the floodplain area or anywhere within 100 feet
of the top of the primary bank of the Lehigh River or the Bushkill Creek
or within 50 feet of the top of the primary bank of the Schoeneck Creek.
An applicant for such permit shall prove that there will be no increase
in stormwater flows or flooding of the contiguous properties of other
owners. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the floodplain administrator.
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:738
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
N. Design standards and improvements.
(1) General.
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified and
until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained
from the commonwealth. In addition, the Federal Insurance
Administrator and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any
alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(b) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances,
land located in flood-prone area(s) may only be platted for
development subject to the requirement that the developer
construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood
damage in accordance with this and any other laws and
ordinances regulating such development.
(c) No subdivision and/or land development, or part thereof, shall
be approved if the proposed development and/or
improvements will, individually or collectively, increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot at any point. In
identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are
not available, plans shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and
letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing
fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(d) If the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors shall determine
that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it
shall limit development to that part and shall require that
development proceed consistent with this determination.
(e) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself
and the Palmer Township Board of Supervisors determines that
additional controls are required to ensure safe development, it
may require the developer to impose appropriate deed
restrictions on the land as recommended by the Township
Solicitor. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed
and noted on every recorded plat.
(2) Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(a) Residential structures.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:739
[1] Any new construction or substantial improvement of a
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation.
[2] The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 IBC, the 2009 IRC and 34 Pa. Code,
or the most-recent revisions thereof, shall be utilized
where they are more restrictive.
(b) Nonresidential structures.
[1] Any new construction or substantial improvement of a non
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
[a] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; and
[b] Has structural components with the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
[2] Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made
watertight below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication
entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations," published by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
[3] The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 IBC, the 2009 IRC and 34 Pa. Code,
or the most-recent revisions thereof, shall be utilized
where they are more restrictive.
(c) Space below the lowest floor.
[1] Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area
other than a basement shall be designed and constructed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:740
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior
walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes crawl
spaces.
[2] Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] There shall be a minimum of two openings having a
net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
[b] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(d) Elevation records. Records of elevations of the base flood
elevation and the lowest floor (including basement) of
structures shall be provided by the applicant for all new or
substantially improved structures in, and in vicinity to, the
floodplain areas. Such information shall indicate whether or
not such structures contain a basement. Such information shall
be maintained in Township records.
(3) Construction standards. The following minimum standards shall
apply for all construction proposed to be undertaken within any
identified flood-prone area:
(a) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed
to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient
manner without damage to persons or property. The system
shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also
be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto
adjacent properties.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities.
[1] All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities, whether
public or private, and private package sewage treatment
plants (including all pumping stations and collector
systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they
should be located and constructed and floodproofed up to
a point one foot above the base flood elevation to minimize
or eliminate flood damage and impairment.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:741
[2] No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be
located within any identified floodplain area except in
strict compliance with all state and local regulations for
such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
[3] The Palmer Township Board of Supervisors may prohibit
installation of on-lot sewage disposal facilities requiring
soil absorption systems where such systems will not
function due to high groundwater, flooding, or unsuitable
soil characteristics. The Board of Supervisors may require
that the developer note on the face of the plat and in any
deed of conveyance areas of the subdivision where soil
absorption fields are prohibited.
[4] The design and construction provisions of the UCC and
FEMA No. 348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood
Damages," and "The International Private Sewage
Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
(c) Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system and be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(d) Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be
no more than one foot below the base flood elevation.
(e) Utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, being placed in flood-prone areas should be
located, elevated (where possible) or floodproofed up to a point
one foot above the base flood elevation and constructed to
minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(f) Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive
or, in times of flood, could be injurious to human, animal, or
plant life shall be stored below the base flood elevation.
(g) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to
offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be
designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of
floodwater.
(h) Anchoring.
[1] All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:742
[2] All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the base flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(i) Floors, walls and ceilings.
[1] Wood flooring used at or below the base flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of
the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without
causing structural damage to the building.
[2] Plywood used at or below the base flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
[3] Walls and ceilings at or below the base flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are
water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
[4] Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
base flood elevation shall be made of metal or other waterresistant
material.
(j) Paints and adhesives.
[1] Paints or other finishes used at or below the base flood
elevation shall be of a water-resistant quality.
[2] Adhesives used at or below the base flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
[3] All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall
be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(k) Electrical systems and components.
[1] Electric water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating systems, and other electrical equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the base flood
elevation.
[2] Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet
above the base flood elevation.
[3] Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and
shall be dropped from above.
(l) Utilities and equipment.
[1] Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilation
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment
or apparatus shall not be located below the base flood
elevation.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-154
186:743
[2] All fuel supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provision
shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(4) Pilings or columns rather than fill, for the elevation of structures
within flood-prone areas, shall be required in order to maintain the
storage capacity of the floodplain and to minimize the potential for
negative impacts to sensitive ecological areas.
O. Variances in the floodplain areas.
(1) A variance shall only be granted to the requirements of this
§ 190-154 if the applicant can prove that an exceptional and
unnecessary hardship of a unique nature is imposed upon the
property.
(2) In addition to the variance standards stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), the
following requirements shall be applicable:
(a) Variances shall not be issued within the designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood elevation
would result.
(b) The applicant shall be notified in writing, over the signature of
the floodplain administrator, that:
[1] A decision to allow construction of a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
[2] Such construction below the base flood elevation increases
risks to life and property.
(c) A detailed professional on-site survey at the expense of the
applicant shall be conducted and be subject to acceptance by
the Township Engineer. Such study shall prove that the
floodplain area, watercourse or drainage course can be altered
in such a way to safely allow the proposed variance while not
adversely affecting the accommodation of the base flood.
(d) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the requested variance:
[1] Will not substantially violate any of the purposes of this
section;
[2] Is the minimum modification necessary to afford relief;
[3] Will not increase the base flood levels;
[4] Is necessary for a reasonable use of the land;
§ 190-154 PALMER CODE § 190-154
186:744
§ 190-155. Erosion control and grading.
[5] Will not result in negative impacts to the creek or river;
and
[6] Is necessary to prevent an exceptional hardship to
applicant.
(e) The applicant shall be required to comply with all provisions of
the Township Building Codes. (See Ch. 55, Building Code.)
(f) Applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act and the Federal Flood Insurance Flood Plain
Management Criteria shall apply to any new or substantially
improved structure.
A. All activities, other than routine crop farming unrelated to
development, which would involve the disturbance of earth over an
area greater than 1/4 acre or disturbance of slopes of over 15% shall
submit in advance a grading plan to the Township and a soil and erosion
control plan to the County Conservation District. The erosion control
plan shall be revised as needed until it is found acceptable by the
Conservation District. Compliance with such approved plan shall be a
condition of any Township permit, and a Township permit may be
suspended for noncompliance.
B. Grading regulations.
(1) The existing grade shall not be increased so that unstable slopes
are created.
(2) The surface area of any yard adjacent to a building or structure
shall be graded so that surface water will be drained away from
such structure.
(3) The deposit of soils, detritus or other debris (as a result of site
preparation, grading or excavating) shall not be unsightly or
detrimental to any property, street, sewer or natural waterway.
(4) Materials used for fill as a future base for construction shall be
nonorganic and provide a suitable and secure base.
(5) The Board of Supervisors may require appropriate underground
testing of a proposed building site if there is reasonable doubt in
the opinion of the Township Engineer that the subsurface is
suitable and secure for building.
(6) A site plan shall be provided to the Zoning Officer showing the
existing natural features of a site before grading occurs, with
sufficient information to ensure compliance with the tree
preservation and steep slope regulations of this ordinance. Such
information should also include photographs of the site prior to
grading.
§ 190-154 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-156
186:745
§ 190-156. Storage of gases, liquids and solids.
§ 190-157. Sewage treatment.
(Hereafter in this section "sewage" shall refer to sanitary sewerage.)
A. No underground or subsurface storage of chemicals, either gas, liquid
or solids, shall be permitted in any district, except for underground
storage of petroleum products as regulated by the State Police and/or
other state or federal regulatory agency.
B. No aboveground or surface storage of hazardous or explosive
substances or gases shall be stored in excess of 20 cubic feet in volume
within 300 feet of a residential lot line except: for substances needed
for routine heating and cooling of a building, fire suppressant
chemicals, printing supplies, photographic developing chemicals,
janitorial chemicals and lawn and agricultural fertilizers. All storage of
explosive or hazardous substances or gases shall comply fully with the
standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
C. All bulk outdoor business storage facilities for fuel, chemicals or
hazardous machinery stored outdoors, other than at construction sites
shall be enclosed by a secure fence with a minimum height of six feet.
D. Depositing of wastes.
(1) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a form
or manner that they may be transported off by natural causes or
forces.
(2) No substance shall be allowed to enter any groundwater or surface
water if such substance can:
(a) Contaminate groundwater or surface water.
(b) Render groundwater or surface water undesirable as a source
of water supply or recreation.
(c) Destroy aquatic life.
A. All methods of sanitary sewage treatment and disposal shall be
approved by the DER and in accordance with the sewage plan for the
Township. See § 165-64 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance concerning provisions of an alternate on-lot septic system.
B. Recertification of the adequacy of sewage disposal systems shall be
required, prior to an expansion or conversion of an existing use that can
reasonably be expected to increase sewage flows.
C. Public sewerage connections. A developer shall extend the public
sewerage system to each lot intended to involve development of a new
principal use and each principal use shall connect to the public
sewerage system, unless the Board of Supervisors determines that such
§ 190-156 PALMER CODE § 190-157
186:746
§ 190-158. Noise control.
extension and/or connection would be impossible or cost-prohibitive,
based upon review of the Sewer Authority staff. If the Board of
Supervisors determines that such service currently is not reasonably
accessible, then capped sewers shall be required to be installed by the
developer, within the requirements of § 165-64 of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
D. Capped sewers. See the requirements of § 165-64 of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Sanitary sewage disposal improvements installed by the developer shall
meet requirements of the authority or municipality providing such
service and DER regulations.
F. Sanitary sewerage systems shall not be used to carry stormwater and
shall be constructed and maintained to prevent infiltration.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or public
property any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound
level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use
category in the following table when measured at or within the property
boundary of the receiving land use:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use and Time
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving
Noise Hours and Days
Maxium
Permitted Sound
Level
(dBA)
Principally residential
lot or nursing homes
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays and
major legal holidays
62
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and
Sundays and major legal
holidays
57
Industrially developed
or zoned lots
All times and days 74
Any lot not listed
above
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays and
legal holidays
67
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and
Sundays and major legal
holidays
62
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in Subsection A
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
§ 190-157 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-158
186:747
§ 190-159. Vibration control.
No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device or conduct
or permit any use to be conducted that creates vibration which is above
the vibration perception threshold of an average person (without the use
of instruments) on private property outside of the lot lines of the use
generating the vibration. This restriction shall not apply to occasional nonroutine
blasting that may be necessary during construction of structures,
streets or utilities.
§ 190-160. Dust, dirt, smoke, vapor, gas and odor control.
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
(2) Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public
utilities when public health or safety are involved.
(3) Domestic power tools, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m.
(4) Construction (including necessary blasting) and street and utility
repair operations.
(5) Agriculture.
(6) Motor vehicles traveling on public streets (See the State Motor
Vehicle Code222).
(7) Public celebrations, specifically authorized by the Township.
(8) Railroads or airplanes.
(9) The unamplified human voice.
C. For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound (a sound of
short duration, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay and an occurrence
of not more than one time in any fifteen-second interval), the sound
level shall not exceed 20 dBA over the ambient sound level, regardless
of time of day or night or receiving land use.
A. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not conform with
the standards established under DER air pollution control regulations.
B. No use shall generate odors that would be seriously offensive to
persons of average sensibilities beyond the boundaries of a lot line.
Tighter standards on what is seriously offensive shall apply in the LDR,
MDR, HDR, HDR-II and PO/B Districts than in other districts.
[Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
222. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 190-158 PALMER CODE § 190-160
186:748
§ 190-161. Light and glare control.
C. Any spreading of manure and septic sludge shall follow good soil and
water conservation and standard practices to reasonably minimize
odor. General standards shall be those recommended by the
Pennsylvania State University Agricultural Extension Service.
A. Overall. All uses shall direct, deflect and shield lights and control the
intensity of lights and illuminated signs to avoid nuisances and prevent
glare onto other properties and streets and to avoid distractions to
motorists. Lights shall not shine directly into the normal line of sight of
motorists. [Amended 2-24-204 by Ord. No. 2004-346]
B. This section shall not apply to approved streetlights within the street
right-of-way.
C. Luminaire height. No privately-owned light standard, other than
lighting of lawful athletic fields, shall have a height greater than 25 feet
if such standard is within 300 feet of an existing principally residential
use or undeveloped residentially-zoned land. In all other situations,
such maximum height shall be 35 feet. These maximum heights may be
waived by the Board of Supervisors for sites with particular and
unusual circumstances that require higher lights.
D. Signs. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261; 8-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 288]
(1) Illumination of signs beyond what is customary in a residential area
shall be prohibited within the LDR, MDR, HDR, HDR-II and C-R
Districts. No sign shall be excessively illuminated beyond which is
necessary for the sign to be readable. Internally illuminated signs
shall be prohibited in all residential districts in the Township.
Where permitted in nonresidential districts, internally illuminated
signs shall have a dark background with illuminated text that
accounts for a maximum of 20% total sign area. (See Figure I.223)
[Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(2) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white, steady,
stationary light. For all freestanding pole signs, the light shall be
attached directly to the sign. (See Figure II.224). External light shall
be of reasonable intensity directed at the sign without light
spillover and without causing glare for motorists, pedestrians or
neighboring properties. Signs may be backlighted with a diffused
or shielded light source if deemed necessary by the Township to
controlling glare. Backlighting shall illuminate the letters,
characters or graphics on the sign but not its background in order
to shine only on the face of the sign and not spill over into the
property.
223. Editor's Note: Figure I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
224. Editor's Note: Figure II is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-160 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-161
186:749
§ 190-162. Electric substation.
Electric substations shall have plant screening (with a majority of the plants
being evergreens) alongside any public street or abutting dwelling.
§ 190-163. Control of radioactivity, electrical emissions, and
electrical disturbances.
§ 190-164. Tree preservation.
(3) Hours of illumination. Signs shall be lit during office hours or
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., whichever is less.
All existing internally illuminated signs in a residential zoning
district shall be lit during office hours only.
(4) Digital signs and electronically changing message signs shall be
prohibited in all residential districts in the Township. [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
A. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any device or
conduct or permit any use to be conducted which does not comply with
the regulations of the DER, the Federal Nuclear Regulatory
Commission and the Federal Interstate Commerce Commission.
B. No person shall conduct or permit any use to be conducted which
causes electrical disturbances (except from domestic household
appliances and overhead electric transmission lines) to adversely affect
any equipment at any time other than the equipment creating the
disturbance.
C. No radioactive or hazardous wastes, as defined by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, shall be disposed of within any
district.
A. Applicability.
(1) Tree cutting.
(a) If tree cutting and related development activity are regulated
by the tree preservation requirements of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO) of
1994, as amended, then such tree preservation requirements
shall apply instead of these provisions of this § 190-164 of the
Zoning Ordinance. If such SALDO provisions apply, then
waivers or modifications may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors for just cause, without having to meet
requirements for a zoning variance.
(b) If such SALDO provisions do not apply, then this § 190-164
shall apply to all tree cutting and related development activity.
(NOTE: The tree provision provisions in the SALDO and this
section are identical as of 1993.)
§ 190-161 PALMER CODE § 190-164
186:750
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following
activities:
(a) Bona fide tree nurseries for replanting, bona fide Christmas
tree farms or commercial orchards.
(b) "Forestry, commercial" which is regulated as a distinct land use
(See § 190-210 of this ordinance).
(c) Cutting of trees on a lot of less than two acres that has a
primarily residential use, after a certificate of occupancy has
been granted.
(d) Cutting of trees of less than six-inch diameter. (NOTE: Except
that trees that were required to be planted by any Township
ordinance [such as Subsection E(10) below] shall not be cut
down unless replaced by a closely similar tree.)
B. Purposes: to protect wildlife and bird habitats, encourage groundwater
recharge, avoid thermal pollution, decrease air pollution, maintain the
attractive character of areas, maintain and increase property values,
protect water quality and conserve energy; and, through these
purposes, to serve the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Measurement. For the purposes of this section, the width of trees shall
be the diameter of the trunk at a height of 4.5 feet above the average
surrounding original ground level.
D. Tree removal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show
that tree cutting or removal will be held to a reasonable minimum.
Except for exemptions under the above Subsection A, Applicability,
trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or greater may only be cut
down, killed or effectively destroyed if such trees meet one or more of
the following standards:
(1) In addition to other provisions of this section, a maximum of five
trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or more on a lot may be
cut down in a one-year period.
(2) The "thinning of woods" is specifically permitted, provided that
selective cutting is used instead of clearcutting, and provided that a
maximum of 15% of trees six inches or more in diameter in a lot are
cut down and provided that the treecutting is clearly intended to
promote the healthy development of the remaining trees.
(3) Trees may be cut down if the applicant proves that it is necessary to
allow reasonable development of the lot as part of an approved
development plan or building permit (after considering reasonable
alternatives, such as adjusting the location of a building, street or
driveway). For example, trees may be cut down where necessary in
the following situations:
§ 190-164 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-164
186:751
(a) The trees would be located within 10 feet of an existing or
proposed uncurbed vehicle cartway or stormwater detention
basin or paved area or street light or fire hydrant.
(b) The trees would be located within three feet of an existing or
proposed vehicular cartway, parking area, vehicle shoulder,
utility corridor, sidewalk or driveway.
(c) The trees would be located within 25 feet of a proposed on-site
sewage system or the structural walls of the new or expanded
structure.
(d) The trees would be located within the area of proposed use
that needs to be kept open, such as the fairway of a golf course.
(e) The locations of the trees would be affected by unavoidable
significant grade changes.
(f) The trees would be an unresolvable hazard to a public utility.
(4) Trees may be cut down if they are clearly a hazard to the public
safety, such as being a sight distance hazard, an obstruction to a
traffic signal or stop sign or a danger to existing buildings.
(5) Trees may be cut down if they are dead, mostly dead or clearly not
healthy, such as trees that are diseased, unresolvably pest-infected
or clearly near the extreme end of their life span.
(6) Trees may be cut down if the majority of their root system would
need to be destroyed or the root system would need to be covered
by paving or significant grade changes.
E. Protection of trees during construction.
(1) Reasonable efforts shall be taken during any construction to ensure
that trees protected by this section are not intentionally or
accidentally injured or effectively destroyed, including root
compaction by equipment and materials, mechanical damage or
change in grade level.
(2) Within buffer areas. See § 190-194D.
(3) A tree protection area shall be designated on development plans.
This area to be protected shall include the outer limits of land areas
("the dripline") under the branches of trees.
(4) Fencing. The tree protection area shall be separated from all
construction, storage and vehicle areas by a substantial temporary
fence with a minimum four-foot height. Such fence may include
snow fencing or wood planks or strong wires or ropes attached to
metal posts or a similar secure method. The fence shall be kept in
good repair. Such fence shall be removed only after completion of
§ 190-164 PALMER CODE § 190-164
186:752
the work. Trees that are to be removed may also be used as a
temporary buffer to protect trees to be preserved.
(5) The following shall not occur within the defined tree protection
area:
(a) Paving (other than sidewalks). [NOTE: Where practical,
sidewalks should (but are not required to) curve around and/or
be placed as far from the trunk as possible or be placed outside
of the dripline of a tree.].
(b) Storage of building materials, equipment, debris or fill.
(c) Movement of motorized vehicles or equipment.
(d) Grade changes or unnecessary compaction of soil.
(6) If vehicles will need to cross through areas of trees, a defined
fenced path shall be established. The tree protection area should
be noted with prominent signs such as "Tree Protection Area -
Please Keep Out." Such fences and signs shall be removed upon
completion of the work.
(7) Root and limb protection. The cutting of root systems of trees to be
protected shall be minimized. When activity must occur under the
dripline of a tree to be protected, tunneling is recommended
instead of trenching. Limbs should be trimmed or tied back if likely
to be damaged during construction.
(8) A concrete washout area shall not be located in close proximity to
the tree protection area.
(9) Layout. Buildings and other features of a development shall be laid
out to maximize the preservation of healthy mature trees. For
example, building and paving areas should be designed so that
trees are located within islands of sufficient size.
(10) Replacement of trees.
(a) If tree(s) that were required by the Township to be protected
and preserved are killed, removed or otherwise destroyed,
then the Township shall require the applicant or developer to
replace such tree(s) with approved species of trees with a
minimum trunk diameter of four inches measured at one foot
above the average grade level.
[1] One such tree shall be planted for each tree destroyed.
[2] These replacement trees shall be in addition to any trees
required by other provisions of this ordinance.
(b) This replacement provision shall not limit the Township's
ability to also seek fines or other enforcement actions and
§ 190-164 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-164
186:753
§ 190-165. Studies to determine conformance to performance
standards.
remedies under this ordinance or the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
A. Intent. This section is intended to provide a process for the Township to
carefully review unusual or highly complex proposed land uses
(especially industrial uses involving toxic or highly hazardous or
explosive substances) to determine the threat of significant hazards to
the public health and safety and/or future noncompliance with the
performance standards of Article XVI.
B. If a reasonable doubt exists whether a proposed use will comply with
the performance standards of this Article, the Board of Supervisors may
require the applicant for a zoning or occupancy permit to fund such
reasonable and necessary studies to determine the use's compliance
with the performance standards. Such studies shall be completed by
expert(s) selected by the Board of Supervisors. Such studies should be
completed in written form within 90 days after the submittal of an
application for a zoning or occupancy permit.
C. The applicant shall be required to provide such information to the
appropriate reviewer designated by the Board of Supervisors to allow
an accurate determination of potential hazards.
D. If a reasonable doubt exists that a use would violate the performance
standards of this ordinance, the Board of Supervisors may require a use
to fund such reasonable and necessary independent monitoring to
ensure its compliance.
§ 190-164 PALMER CODE § 190-165
186:754
ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 190-166. Required number of off-street parking spaces.
A. Requirement.
(1) Each use established, enlarged or altered in any district shall
provide and satisfactorily maintain off-street parking spaces in
accordance with Table 17.1225 and the regulations of this Article.
(2) Uses not specifically listed in Table 17.1 shall comply with the
requirements for the most similar use listed in Table 17.1, as
determined by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer should
request a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(3) Where a proposed use contains or includes more than one type of
use (regardless of whether each use is listed in Table 17.1 or is an
unlisted use), the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use.
(4) Where the computation of required parking spaces results in a
fractional number, the fraction shall be rounded to the closest
whole number.
B. Conditional reduction in off-street parking areas.
(1) The Township recognizes:
(a) The importance of providing adequate, well-designed off-street
parking areas.
(b) The need to limit the amount of paved parking areas to
preserve open space and limit stormwater runoff.
(c) That unique circumstances associated with a land use may
justify a reduction in the parking requirements of Subsection
A.
(2) Following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit a reduction,
through the special exception review process of § 190-209, of the
number of parking spaces to be initially developed as required by
Subsection A, provided that each of the following conditions are
satisfied:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board, using existing
and projected (five years) employment, customer, resident or
other relevant data, that a reduction in the off-street parking
spaces to be initially developed as required by Subsection A is
warranted.
225. Editor's Note: Table 17.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-166 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-166
186:755
§ 190-167. General regulations for parking facilities.
(b) Parking lot plans.
[1] The applicant shall submit plans of the parking lot(s)
which designate a layout for the total number of parking
spaces needed to comply with the parking requirement in
Subsection A.
[2] The plans shall clearly designate which of these parking
spaces are proposed for immediate use and which spaces
are proposed to be conditionally reserved for potential
future use.
[3] The portion of the required parking spaces conditionally
reserved for potential future use shall not be within areas
for required buffer yards, setbacks or areas which would
otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the
physical characteristics of the land or other requirements
of this ordinance.
[4] Areas conditionally reserved for potential future use shall
be attractively landscaped and remain in open space.
(c) Agreement.
[1] The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the
Township requiring the applicant to maintain each
conditionally reserved area as attractively landscaped
open space and convert some or all of the conditionally
reserved area to additional off-street parking if at any time
the Board finds (based upon the results of field
investigations and recommendations of the Township
Engineer or Zoning Officer) that additional parking is
needed.
[2] This agreement shall be recorded to the deed as a
covenant running with the land or other legally binding
method acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
A. General. Parking space layout and requirements shall be adequate for
the intended use.
B. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the effective date
of this ordinance shall not be subject to the requirements of this Article,
provided that the kind of use is not changed and that any parking
facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future be
reduced to an amount less than that required by this ordinance.
C. Changes in use. Whenever a building or use (including those specified
in Subsection A) is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of
employees, number of dwellings, seating capacity or otherwise to
§ 190-166 PALMER CODE § 190-167
186:756
create a need, based upon the requirements of § 190-166 for an
increase of 10% or more in the number of existing parking spaces, the
number of additional spaces to be provided shall be based upon the
incremental change or enlargement so required.
D. Continuing character of obligation.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be provided and maintained so
long as the use which the facilities were designed to serve still
exists.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent
except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements
of this Article in conjunction with a change in the nature of the use.
E. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any other
use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is
required to serve.
F. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served.
G. Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common parking lot, provided that the total number of spaces in such
lot shall not be less than the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually and provided such parking lot is within 300 feet walking
distance of all of the principal uses served by such lot, and provided
that the applicant shows evidence of a long-term legally binding
mechanism to assure joint use of the parking. The applicant may seek to
prove that the parking requirement should be reduced under the
provisions of § 190-166B because the uses would have their peak
parking at different times of the day.
H. Definition of "employee." See Article II.
I. Handicapped parking.
(1) Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a revised regulation is officially established under the Federal
Americans With Disabilities Act:
Total Number of Required
Parking Spaces on Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
4 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
§ 190-167 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-167
186:757
§ 190-168. Design standards for off-street parking facilities.
Total Number of Required
Parking Spaces on Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20, plus 1% of required number
of spaces over 1,000
(2) Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable wheelchair-accessible
distance to a handicapped accessible building entrance. Curb cuts
shall be provided as needed to provide access from the
handicapped spaces.
(3) Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be
eight feet by 18 feet. In addition, each space shall be adjacent to a
five-foot-wide access aisle. Such access aisle may be shared by two
handicapped spaces by being placed between them. However, one
out of every eight required handicapped parking spaces shall have
an adjacent access aisle of eight-foot width instead of five feet.
(4) Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less
than 6% slope in any direction.
(5) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and permanent markings. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
A. General requirements.
(1) Every parking facility shall be designed so that its use does not
constitute a nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to
traffic.
(2) Every parking area shall be arranged for orderly, safe movement.
(3) No parking area shall be designed to require or encourage parked
vehicles to back into a public or private street in order to leave a
parking space, except for a single-family or two-family dwelling
backing onto a road other than a major or minor arterial road.
(4) Every parking area shall be designed so that each motor vehicle
may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle, except those of a
single-family or two-family dwelling.
§ 190-167 PALMER CODE § 190-168
186:758
(5) No parking area shall be located within:
(a) A required buffer yard; or
(b) Ten feet of a septic system absorption area.
(6) All parking areas shall include clearly defined and marked traffic
patterns, with the utmost care taken to provide for safe internal
traffic movement and to avoid conflicts between vehicles and
pedestrians.
B. Parking spaces.
(1) Each parking space shall at a minimum consist of a rectangle with a
minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet,
except that a minimum length of 22 feet shall be required for
parallel parking.
(2) All spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their location, except
those of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
C. Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only shall
be at least the minimum aisle width specified as follows:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel or up to 30 12
45 14
60 18
90 20
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be at
least 25 feet in width.
(3) No aisle shall exceed 200 feet in length.
(4) Parking within and obstruction of a required aisle shall be
prohibited.
D. Access drives and driveways.
(1) Driveway width.
(a) Unless a differing requirement is established by PennDOT
along a state street, for common driveways serving four or
more dwelling units, or for any driveway or accessway serving
a nonresidential principal use, the following driveway widths
shall apply, measured at the curbline (or at the edge of street
paving if no curb will exist):
§ 190-168 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-168
186:759
[1] For two-way traffic: a minimum width of 24 feet and a
maximum width of 50 feet.
[2] For one-way traffic: a minimum width of 12 feet and a
maximum width of 20 feet.
(b) All other driveways shall have a minimum width of seven feet
and a maximum width of 24 feet.
(c) All driveways shall be set back from any property line a
minimum distance of five feet. [Added 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311; amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-320]
(2) Driveway slope. See § 165-67 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO). If the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance does not apply to a proposed driveway,
then the same slope requirements as stated in the SALDO shall
apply by reference through this Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain uninterrupted
parallel drainage along a public street at the point of driveway or
access drive entry.
(4) At least 50 feet shall be provided between any two driveways along
one street for one lot.
(5) See the minimum separation distance between driveways and
streets in § 165-67 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(6) All driveways to be constructed, paved or resurfaced shall require a
driveway construction permit. If access is to a state street or road,
a state highway occupancy permit shall be obtained. [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(7) Where access drives and driveways are proposed as part of a
subdivision or land development, the provisions of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall also be met.
(8) Sight distance for driveways. See § 190-194C(2).
E. Paving, grading, surface drainage. Except for areas that are landscaped
and so maintained, all parking facilities, including parking access aisles
and driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
decorative paving block or other appropriate material approved by the
Township, and drained to the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion
or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining properties.
F. Nighttime illumination.
(1) Any parking area designed for use by six or more cars after dusk
shall be adequately illuminated for security and pedestrian safety
during all hours of darkness when the parking area is in use. The
§ 190-168 PALMER CODE § 190-168
186:760
minimum illumination of such parking spaces and aisles shall be
0.75 footcandle, except that a minimum of 0.5 footcandle is
permitted for industrial uses.
(2) All luminaires shall be adequately shielded and directed to protect
adjacent dwellings and motorists on public streets from glare. See
also screening requirements of § 190-168I. See also § 190-161,
Light and glare control, especially concerning maximum height of a
luminaire.
G. Parking lot setbacks. The following requirements shall apply to uses
other than single- and two-family dwellings.
(1) All parking spaces and driveways shall be at least five feet from any
side or rear lot lines, unless the uses share a parking lot and access
or unless the adjacent lots involve buildings that are attached at
the lot line, or unless shared abutting driveways are approved by
the Township.
(2) No parking space nor outdoor display of articles or vehicles for sale
or rent shall be located within the right-of-way required to be
reserved for future dedication under § 190-196.
(3) Parking setback from buildings. No parking space or parking
access aisle shall be located within 15 feet of any apartment
building of four or more dwelling units or any townhouse building
or within 10 feet of any nonresidential principal building. This
setback shall not apply for driveways entering into a private
garage, carport or vehicle service garage bay. This requirement is
intended to allow sufficient space for walkways, foundation
landscaping and firefighting. This requirement may be waived or
reduced by the Zoning Officer if the Planning Commission finds
that the requirement would be unreasonable or unsafe considering
the characteristics of the site.
(4) Parking setback from arterial and collector streets. No off-street
parking space nor outdoor display of articles or vehicles for sale or
rent shall be located within 15 feet of the proposed curbline (or of
the proposed legal right-of-way for a street that will not be curbed)
of a minor arterial street for lots that include parking spaces for
more than five cars and less than 60 cars. This setback shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for lots including a total of 60 or more off-street
parking spaces. Such setback shall be five feet for a collector
street.
H. Parking lot landscaping. The following shall apply for uses other than
single-family or two-family dwellings.
(1) All areas not serving as parking spaces, aisles, access drives or
pedestrian walkways shall be covered with an all-season ground
cover and be well-maintained.
§ 190-168 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-168
186:761
§ 190-169. Parking of commercial, unlicensed and junk vehicles in
residential districts.
(2) Except where entrance and exit driveways cross street lines, all
parking areas shall be physically separated from any public street
by a raised curb or landscaped berm and an area not less than 10
feet in depth (measured from the right-of-way line) which shall be
permanently landscaped and maintained.
(3) Any lot that would include more than 30 parking spaces shall be
required to provide landscaped areas within the paved area. This
required landscaped area shall be equal to a minimum of 5% of the
total paved area.
(4) One deciduous tree of a minimum caliper of 1.5 inches shall be
required for every 15 required off-street parking spaces. The trees
shall be of the same species as listed in the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
(5) A substantial proportion of the trees required by this section should
be planted within the parking lot within protected islands. These
protected islands should be used to direct the flow of traffic
through the parking lot in a smooth and safe manner to prevent
"cross-taxiing." Required trees are also encouraged to be planted in
highly visible locations, especially between parking areas and
major streets.
I. Screening. Any area of six or more off-street parking spaces which is
not within a building that abuts or is across the street from any
residential lot in an LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District or an existing
primarily residential use shall be provided with a suitable fence, wall or
evergreen planting at least four feet in height, designed to screen the
parked vehicles and headlight glare from such residential lot. [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
A. Commercial vehicles. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261;
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311; 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-395]
(1) Applicability. This Subsection A shall apply to the following:
(a) Within any lot in any district occupied by a primarily
residential use.
(b) Within a lot without a principal building within the LDR, MDR,
HDR or HDR-II District.
(c) Within on-street parking spaces within 25 feet of a lot occupied
by a primarily residential use within the LDR, MDR, HDR or
HDR-11 District.
§ 190-168 PALMER CODE § 190-169
186:762
§ 190-170. Off-street loading.
(2) In locations specified in Subsection A(1) above, no commercial
vehicle with a PennDOT registration of Class 5 or higher shall be
sold, stored, repaired, dismantled or parked.
(3) Exceptions:
(a) Routine operations as may be permitted within a lawful
principal business nonconforming use or home occupation use.
(b) The on-site construction or repair of buildings, streets and
utilities.
(c) Routine service or delivery calls by commercial vehicles or
routine loading or unloading of moving trucks.
(d) A single, operable commercial vehicle with a PennDOT
registration of up to Class 5, unless otherwise approved
elsewhere in a Township ordinance or by zoning variance, may
be parked in a residential zone if the vehicle is necessary for
the occupation of the resident, including a lawful home
occupation. If parking is available on the lot, the vehicle shall
be parked there; otherwise, it shall be parked on the street
immediately adjacent to the lot.
B. Junk and unlicensed vehicles. In the LDR, MDR, HDR pr HDR-II
Districts, or on primarily residential lots in other districts, on lots of less
than five acres, no junk vehicles (as defined in Article II herein) shall be
parked outside of an enclosed building, except as specifically permitted
for an auto service station, auto repair garage, junkyard or other lawful
use. For parking an unlicensed or junk vehicle on public streets,
reference is made to the Pennsylvania State Motor Vehicle Code226 or
the Palmer Township Nuisance Code.227 [Amended 11-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 261; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
C. In LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II Zoning Districts, all streets and off-street
parking areas shall be reserved and used for automobile parking only.
Not allowed in such zoning districts are sales, dead storage, repair
work, dismantling or major servicing of any kind or any type of vehicles.
[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261; amended 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-311]
A. General requirements. Each use shall provide off-street loading
facilities sufficient to accommodate the maximum demand generated by
the use (as determined by the Zoning Officer or another applicable
review agent for the Township), which comply with the regulations
contained in this section.
226. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Nuisances.
§ 190-169 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-170
186:763
B. Design and layout of off-street loading facilities. Off-street loading
facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
(1) Each off-street loading and unloading space shall be at least 14 feet
in width by 60 feet in depth, unless the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Township that the use will only utilize smaller
trucks.
(2) Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering room separate from
other parking to eliminate traffic conflicts within off-street loading
and parking areas.
(3) Each space shall be located entirely on the lot being served and be
so located that each space and all maneuvering room is outside of
required buffer areas, yard areas, and rights-of-way.
(4) An appropriate means of access to a street or alley shall be
provided that the maximum width of driveways (measured at the
street lot line) shall be 35 feet and that the minimum width shall be
20 feet.
(5) All off-street loading and unloading spaces, maneuvering areas,
driveways and entranceways shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt
or other suitable material and drained to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of
dust, erosion or excessive water flow across public ways and to
protect adjoining property.
(6) No such facilities shall be designed or used in any manner so as to
constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to
traffic.
(7) All such facilities shall comply with the lighting requirements of
§ 190-161F, the landscaping requirements of § 190-168G and the
noise limitations of § 190-158.
§ 190-170 PALMER CODE § 190-170
186:764
ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
§ 190-171. Applicability.
A. Purpose. These sign provisions are intended to:
(1) Promote and maintain overall community beautification.
(2) Establish reasonable time, place and manner regulations on the
exercise of free speech, without regulating content of signs.
(3) Promote traffic safety by avoiding distractions and sight distance
obstructions.
(4) Promote the most appropriate uses of the land.
(5) Ensure compatibility with the character of adjacent land uses.
[Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
(6) Carry out the goals of the Pennsylvania Outdoor Advertising
Control Act of 1971, as amended.228
B. Permit required. A zoning permit shall be required for all signs in any
zoning district except for signs not requiring a permit, as listed in
§§ 190-178 and 190-179. All signs shall comply with the regulations of
this ordinance. No sign shall be permitted other than those provided for
in this article.
C. Special business displays. A permit may be issued four times in any one
calendar year for new or existing businesses to display banners used as
promotional devices for special occasions. Any given permit shall not
exceed 14 days at a time and the sum of the four allowed permits shall
not exceed a total of 30 days in any one calendar year. Banners shall not
exceed 20 square feet in sign area. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No.
288]
D. Proposed development signs. A temporary zoning permit is required for
any sign advertising a proposed major subdivision or land development.
A maximum of one such sign is permitted per subdivision or land
development. Such sign shall not be posted until after a valid
subdivision or land development application has been submitted to the
Township. Such sign permits shall be valid for a maximum of six
months. The Zoning Officer may extend the permit for an additional
year while a development is actively under review and/or construction.
Such a sign shall not exceed 36 square feet in sign area on each of two
sides.
E. Official signs. Official signs are specifically exempted from the
requirements of this article.
228. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.
§ 190-171 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-172
186:765
§ 190-172. Nonconforming signs.
§ 190-173. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BANNER SIGN — A sign made of flexible material, usually a fabric, which
is hung at short intervals to promote special events.[Added 8-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 288]
DIGITAL SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises advertising sign or
billboard or portion thereof that utilizes digital or video light-emitting
diodes (LED), liquid crystal components (LCD), neon or plasma light
segments or similar electronic methods to create a changeable image
display area.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An informational sign indicating direction, entry or
exit, loading or service area, fire lanes, or similar information incidental to
the primary use and not itself advertising that use.[Amended 8-21-2000
by Ord. No. 288]
ELECTRONICALLY CHANGING MESSAGE SIGN — A sign or portion
thereof that utilizes light-emitting diodes (LED), fiberoptics, light bulbs or
other similar illumination devices to create characters or letters within
the display area that can be controlled or programmed by computer or
other electronic device to accommodate frequent message changes without
altering the face or surface of such sign.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-405]
A. Signs legally existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance and
which do not conform to the requirements of the ordinance shall be
considered nonconforming signs. Legal nonconforming signs may be
repainted or repaired (including externally illuminated signs) and may
be changed in wording, provided that such work does not increase the
nonconformity of the sign. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
B. Damaged signs. Any nonconforming sign which is damaged in excess of
25% of its cost of replacement or is removed shall be replaced only with
a conforming sign, except as provided in Subsection C below.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may allow the replacement of existing
freestanding and wall signs of nonconforming business uses by smaller
and less high signs as a special exception, provided that the new signs
would be of such a size, character and illumination that would not
conflict with adjacent uses.
D. Signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product no longer
available shall be removed or changed to advertise the new use or
product within 90 days of the cessation of the original use, except if for
a sign relating to existing building space which is still available for
lease or sale. Once a nonconforming sign is removed, it shall only be
replaced by signs in conformance with this ordinance.
§ 190-172 PALMER CODE § 190-173
186:766
FENCE SIGN — A sign hung or mounted on a specially crafted residential
fence, advertising the maker or installer of that fence.[Added 8-21-2000
by Ord. No. 288]
FLASHING SIGN — A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant
in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked
changes in lighting effects. Signs which indicate the time, temperature, date
or other similar information shall not be considered flashing signs.[Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is self-supporting upon the ground
or which is supported by means of poles, pylons or standards in the ground.
A "freestanding sign" is not attached to a building except by secondary
supports such as guy wires.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying a home occupation or
identifying the use of a property but one that has no advertisement.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, DIRECT — A sign which is designed to be illuminated
by artificial light from a source adjacent to, or outside of, the sign in such a
manner that the source of the light is not directly visible from the street or
any other intended vantage point of the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, EXTERNAL — A sign which is designed to be
illuminated by artificial light from a source adjacent to, or outside of, the
sign in such a manner that the source of the light is not directly visible
from the street or any other intended vantage point of the sign.[Added
8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INDIRECT — A sign which is designed to be
illuminated by light from within the sign rather than a source adjacent to or
outside of the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNAL — A sign which is designed to be
illuminated by light from within the sign rather than a source adjacent to or
outside of the sign.[Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
MOVABLE SIGN — A sign which is not secured or attached to a structure or
to the ground.
NAMEPLATE SIGN — A sign indicating only the name and/or address of
persons or person residing on or legally occupying the premises.
OFFICIAL SIGN — A sign erected by the state, county, Township or other
legally constituted governmental body or specifically authorized by a
Township ordinance or resolution.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See Article II.
OPEN HOUSE or AUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign used as an open
invitation for the general public to inspect a specific building listed for sale
or auction. This shall not include signs directing persons to a model or
sample home.[Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
§ 190-173 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-173
186:767
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign which indicates the name, cause or affiliation of
a person seeking public office or on which reference is made to an issue for
which a public election or referendum is scheduled to be held.
PUBLIC SERVICES SIGN — A sign which advertises availability of rest
rooms, telephone, meeting times of service organizations or other similar
public conveniences.
SIGN — See Article II.
SIGNABLE AREA — A continuous rectangular area on the face of a building.
SIGN AREA — See Article II.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level immediately below a sign to the highest point of the sign
and its supporting structure. Average ground level shall be measured at
grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.[Amended
8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
SIGN, HOME SECURITY — A sign advertising a company that provides
security services and systems to home and business owners.[Added
8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
SIGN ON MOBILE STANDS — A freestanding sign of more than six square
feet in sign area per side that is not permanently attached to the ground
and that was originally designed to be able to be periodically transported to
a different location. See § 190-186B.
SIGN, PARKING and NO TRESPASSING — A sign used to indicate special
parking information or to alert people that they are not to trespass on the
property.[Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, wood,
metal or any lightweight material intended to be displayed for a short period
of time, normally less than 30 days.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGNS — A sign or portion of a sign whose sole
purpose is to indicate the time and/or temperature.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A sign affixed or painted on a vehicle, trailer, or
similar device that is incidental to the primary purpose of the vehicle but
becomes that primary purpose in itself.[Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No.
288]
WALL SIGN — A sign posted on, painted on, suspended from or otherwise
affixed to a wall or vertical surface of a building which does not project more
than 18 inches from the wall or vertical surface to which it is attached.
WINDOW SIGN — A temporary sign attached or affixed to the interior of a
window or door or a sign which is readily visible and can be read from the
exterior through a window or door from an exterior lot line.
§ 190-174. Construction. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
§ 190-173 PALMER CODE § 190-174
186:768
§ 190-175. Abandoned signs.
§ 190-176. Location of signs.
A. Every sign, except temporary signs not requiring a permit, shall be
constructed of durable, nonplastic materials and must be kept in good
condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to become dilapidated
or a hazard shall be repaired or removed by the property owner or
lessee of the property within 30 days of notice or it may be removed by
the Township at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property on
which it is located.
B. Signs shall be limited to three colors per sign (white included), with
neon and fluorescent colors prohibited.
A. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises
that they own or control a sign which has been abandoned. An
"abandoned sign," for the purpose of this section, is a sign that:
(1) Is located on and/or related to the use of a property which becomes
vacant and unoccupied for a period of nine months or more;
(2) Was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present
occupant in business and is not being lawfully used for the new
occupant; or
(3) Which relates to a time, event or purpose which is past.
B. Any such abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or person
controlling the property within 30 days of the date of abandonment, as
herein defined.
A. No sign except official signs, name plate signs, public service signs and
directional signs shall be erected within two feet or project over an
existing street right-of-way. Freestanding business signs shall be set
back a minimum of five feet from the existing street right-of-way.
B. No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with the sight
distance requirements of § 190-194C, except that one sign may have
one pole with a maximum width of one foot within a sight distance
triangle.
C. No signs except official, political, public service and specifically
permitted off-premises signs shall be erected on a property to which it
does not relate.
D. No temporary sign, political or otherwise, shall be placed on any
Township-owned property or on any public utility pole or on any traffic
light standard or on any other edifice, whether artificial or natural,
owned or controlled by any governmental entity or any public utility
except signs specifically authorized by such government or public
utility.
§ 190-174 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-176
186:769
§ 190-177. Illumination of signs.
See § 190-161 of this ordinance.
§ 190-178. Temporary signs.229
E. All signs erected in any zoning district shall comply with the accessory
side yard requirements for the district, except a freestanding sign may
be erected one foot from the side lot line in the GC District if the
abutting use is a principal business use.
F. No business sign shall be placed facing and/or within 200 feet of an
LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District if acceptable reasonable alternative
locations exist in other locations, in the determination of the Zoning
Officer. If there exists no acceptable reasonable alternative location on
the property for a sign, such sign shall not be a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
A. The following types of signs are exempt from zoning permit
requirements, provided that they are removed in the time specified and
conform to the sign requirements of this section. Any sign not meeting
the time limits and size limits specified below shall need a zoning
permit and shall only be allowed if permitted by another section of this
ordinance.
(1) Up to two yard or garage sale signs per event, provided each does
not exceed four square feet in area and shall be put up a maximum
of 24 hours prior to a sale and removed within 24 hours after sale.
[Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261; 8-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 288]
(2) Signs giving notice of the sale or rental of the property on which
the sign is located, provided that they do not exceed 30 square feet
in area, except that a maximum of six square feet shall apply to lots
of less than three acres in an LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District.
Such signs shall be removed within 10 days after final settlement
for a sale property or occupancy of the premises for a rental.
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(3) Political signs are permitted under this section, provided that they
do not exceed 32 square feet in area and are removed within 21
days after the election or referendum to which the sign relates.
[Amended 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-358]
(4) Off-premises or on-premises signs of up to 24 square feet erected
by a nonprofit or entirely charitable entity denoting a special event,
229. Editor's Note: Former § 190-178, Vehicle signs, was repealed 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288.
This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 190-179 through 190-184
as §§ 190-178 through 190-183, respectively, former § 190-185 as § 190-183.1 and former
§§ 190-186 through 190-189 as §§ 190-184 through 190-187, respectively. Additionally, this
ordinance also repealed former § 190-190, Sign area bonuses.
§ 190-176 PALMER CODE § 190-178
186:770
§ 190-179. Signs not requiring permits.
Zoning permits are not required for the following types of signs, as defined
by § 190-173:
provided they are erected no more than 15 days before the event
and removed within three days after the event. Signs by an entirely
charitable entity shall be permitted for up to four months if
approved by the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 8-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 288]
(5) Signs and decorations for an officially recognized designated
holiday, provided that they do not create traffic or fire hazards and
are removed within seven days following the event.
(6) Signs announcing work being performed on the premises by
contractors, mechanics, painters, artisans, etc., are not to exceed
10 square feet, except that a maximum of eight square feet shall
apply within the LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II Districts. Such signs
shall be permitted on the premises only while work is being done
on a daily basis and must be removed at the time of substantial
completion of work (90% completion of the total value of the work),
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Such signs shall
also be removed should a delay of more than seven days prevent
continuance of work and may be replaced upon the continuance of
said work. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288; 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(7) Signs advertising the temporary sale of products or goods such as
Christmas trees. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
and shall be removed within 30 days.
(8) (Reserved)230
(9) Signs placed on bus shelters shall be permitted for up to six months
in the following districts: PO/IP and PIC. A maximum of two signs
shall be permitted per shelter, each sign shall be limited to six
square feet. [Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
B. Signs on mobile stands are defined as a special type of temporary sign,
with special requirements listed in § 190-184B. These signs are
prohibited in all districts except the GC District.
A. Official signs.
B. Nameplate signs: one per lot, not to exceed two square feet in sign
area.
C. Identification signs: one per lot, not to exceed two square feet in sign
area.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8), regarding open house or auction signs, was
repealed 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261.
§ 190-178 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-179
186:771
§ 190-180. Signs prohibited in all districts.
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
D. Directional signs: each not to exceed four square feet in sign area and
not to include any advertising.
E. Memorial or historic markers when approved by motion or resolution of
the Board of Supervisors or the Pennsylvania Museum and Historical
Commission.
F. Public service signs such as those advertising availability of rest rooms,
telephone, meeting times of service organizations or other similar
public conveniences, each not to exceed two square feet.
G. Temporary signs within the provisions of § 190-178.
H. Parking and no-trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature
of a road, driveway or premises and signs prohibiting or controlling
hunting and fishing upon the premises: four per lot, not to exceed two
square feet in sign area. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
I. Signs physically carried by a person, which are not regulated in any
way by this ordinance.
J. Home occupation signs. These signs are exempt from the permit
requirements if they have a maximum total area of one square foot and
are limited to one per lot or use, whichever is less. These signs shall not
be internally illuminated. See § 190-211. These signs shall be attached
to the primary residential structure and shall not be internally
illuminated. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
K. Home security signs shall be a maximum of 12 square inches and shall
be affixed to the principal structure. [Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No.
288]
L. Fence signs shall be limited to one per fence, not to exceed one square
foot, and shall be positioned so the text faces toward the principal
structure. [Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
A. Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for
commercial advertising purpose whether containing a message or not,
except as permitted in § 190-171C.
B. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or mechanically moving signs of
any type, except those portions of signs which indicate time and
temperature changes, and the outlining of roofs, doors, windows or wall
edges by illuminating tubing or strings of lights for advertising
purposes. This section specifically regulates window signs and signs on
mobile stands. This shall not prohibit Christmas lighting or displays in
season. This provision shall not restrict digital signs or electronically
changing message signs. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261;
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
§ 190-179 PALMER CODE § 190-180
186:772
§ 190-181. Signs and/or structures identifying major residential or
business developments.
C. Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the eaves of the roof of any building.
D. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
E. Signs which contain information that states or implies that a property
may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of the
Township Zoning Ordinance in the zoning district in which the property
to which the sign relates is located.
F. Signs that are of such character, form, shape or color that it imitates or
resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device or that has any
characteristics which are likely to confuse or distract the operator of a
motor vehicle on a public street.
G. Signs that use reflective materials to give the appearance of flashing,
blinking or twinkling.
H. Signs or displays that include words or images that are obscene,
pornographic or highly offensive to public decency.
I. Balloons of greater than 10 cubic feet that are tethered to the ground
and primarily intended for advertising purposes.
J. Any sign on a mobile or movable stand other than as provided for by
§ 190-184.
K. Vehicle signs. [Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288]
A. When allowed. Signs and/or structures described in this section may be
allowed for:
(1) Residential subdivisions or land developments approved for 10 or
more dwelling units; or
(2) Office, commercial or industrial subdivisions or land developments
comprising three or more principal uses.
B. Size and number. Signs described in this section may have a maximum
sign face area of 30 square feet and a maximum height of eight feet.
These signs and/or structures may be located at up to three of the major
entrances to the development from exterior streets. This sign area may
be an addition to other sign area limits of this ordinance.
C. Durability. Such signs shall be designed to be of a durable nature
requiring little maintenance.
D. Message. Such signs may include the overall name of the development
and any logo. Such signs shall not include advertising.
§ 190-180 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-181
186:773
§ 190-182. Area of signs.
The following regulations shall be used in computing the area of signs:
§ 190-183. Maximum height of signs.
E. Landscaping. It is the intent of this section that such signs be
attractively landscaped, with plants and shrubs requiring minimal
maintenance.
F. Location. Such signs and structures shall be located outside of the
future right-of-way lines and shall satisfy the sight distance
requirements of § 190-194C.
G. Maintenance. If such signs are intended to remain beyond the
completion of a developer's involvement in a project, the developer
shall provide an appropriate method to ensure proper maintenance of
the sign.
A. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording,
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed but not
including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental
to the display itself.
B. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or
painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other regular shape,
including the sign background, which encompasses all of the letters and
symbols.
C. In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side shall
be considered, provided that both faces are identical in size. If the
interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is
greater than 45º, than both sides of such sign shall be considered in
calculating the sign area.
D. Unless otherwise specified, all square footages are maximum sizes.
A. Maximum height. No sign shall exceed the maximum height restriction
for the particular type of sign structure and zoning district established
below. (NOTE: "Maximum height" shall mean the vertical distance
measured from the average ground level immediately below a sign to
the highest point of the sign and its supporting structure. See Figure
III.231) [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288; 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311]
231. Editor's Note: Figure III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-181 PALMER CODE § 190-183
186:774
§ 190-183.1. Signs permitted in residential districts. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
The following sign regulations shall apply within the LDR, MDR, HDR, HDRII,
C-R and RA Zoning Districts:
Type of
Sign
RA, C-R, LDR,
MDR, HDR or
HDR-II District
GC or PC
District
LI, PO/IP
or PIC
District
Any Other
District
Freestanding 5 feet 10 feet 10 feet 5 feet
Wall Equal to the
total height of
the principal
building
Equal to the
total height
of the
principal
building
Equal to
the total
height of
the
principal
building
Equal to the
total height
of the
principal
building
B. Minimum height. Freestanding business signs in the GC District that
include any portion of the sign within 20 feet of the existing street rightof-
way shall have a minimum height of six feet. This minimum height
shall be measured from the ground or pavement to the bottom most
part of the sign.
A. The following types of signs are permitted:
(1) Signs not requiring permits in § 190-179.
(2) Temporary signs in § 190-178.
(3) Subdivision and land development signs in § 190-181.
B. The following type of signs, and no others, are permitted for any lawful
permitted or nonconforming principal nonresidential use (not including
home occupations):
(1) One wall sign, not to exceed 10% of the total area of the building
face on which it is visible or 32 square feet, whichever is less, and
permitted on the front wall of the structure only.
(2) One freestanding sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area for a
place of worship or 20 square feet for other uses. No more than one
freestanding sign per street frontage. Any freestanding sign that
would be associated with a proposed conditional or special
exception use shall be reviewed and either be approved or denied
at the same time that the conditional or special exception use is
being reviewed. A condition of approval of such sign shall be
compatibility with adjacent land uses.
(a) A freestanding sign for a public or private elementary or
secondary school may include an electronically changing
message sign, provided that it meets the size requirements of
§ 190-183 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-183.1
186:775
§ 190-184. Signs permitted in commercial districts.
this section, the height requirements of § 190-183 and the
provisions of § 190-189. Where more than one sign may be
permitted on a lot under the provisions above, only one sign
shall be an electronically changing message sign. [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
C. Movable signs and signs on mobile stands are specifically prohibited.
D. For home occupation signs, see § 190-179J.
E. As of November 1, 2002, internally illuminated signs shall not be
permitted to be erected in residential districts within the Township.
However, internally illuminated signs shall be permitted to be erected
within the William Penn Highway Overlay District, Route 248 Overlay
District, as well as any subsequent commercial overlay districts created
by the Township subject to all other provisions of the Palmer Township
Zoning Ordinance governing signs. As of November 1, 2002, internally
illuminated signs which are located in a residential district and were in
existence before the enactment of this ordinance (except for those
located in the William Penn Highway Overlay District, Route 248
Overlay District, and any other commercial overlay districts
subsequently adopted and created by the Township) shall be lit during
office hours only. [Added 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-326]
A. The following types of signs are permitted in the GC and PC Districts:
(1) Signs not requiring permits in § 190-179. [Amended 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(2) Temporary signs in § 190-178. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311]
(3) Signs for uses not included under § 190-184A(4), including a use
occupying an individual structure on a single lot, in accordance
with the following regulations (see Figure IV232): [Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261; 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288;
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(a) Wall signs. One shall be permitted for each wall facing a public
street, each with a total area not to exceed 10% of the total
area of the building face on which the sign is located. The
maximum total wall sign area shall be 60 square feet.
(b) Freestanding signs.
[1] One shall be permitted with a total area not to exceed 28
square feet. This sign may consist of a structure to which
are attached several signs, within the total square footage.
232. Editor's Note: Figure IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-183.1 PALMER CODE § 190-184
186:776
[2] If a use has a total linear road frontage of more than 300
feet, a second freestanding sign is permitted with a total
square footage of 60 square feet for the two signs together.
[3] A lot in the GC District may also include one additional
nonilluminated freestanding sign with a maximum square
footage of six square feet.
[4] A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it
meets the size requirements of this section and the
provisions of § 190-189. An electronically changing
message sign shall have a maximum height of five feet.
[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
[5] Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot under
the provisions above, only one sign shall be a digital sign
or electronically changing message sign, provided that it
meets the size requirements of this section and the
provisions of § 190-189. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-405]
(c) Window signs. Total window signs, as defined by this article,
shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the window on which
the sign is located.
(4) Signs relating to more than one commercial establishment on a lot,
in accordance with the following regulations:
(a) Wall signs. One shall be permitted for each establishment. The
total area of all wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the total
area of the building face on which the signs are located. Wall
signs shall only be allowed on portions of a building that face
onto a public street and not on faces that abut residential uses.
The maximum wall sign area shall be 200 square feet per lot.
(b) Freestanding signs.
[1] One shall be permitted with a total area not to exceed 40
square feet. This sign may consist of a structure to which
are attached several signs, within the total square footage.
[2] If a lot has a total linear street frontage of more than 300
feet or if the lot includes more than 10 principal
establishments or involves the sale of automobiles by more
than three distinct manufacturers, a second freestanding
sign shall be allowed with a total square footage of 80
square feet for the two signs together.
[3] A lot in the GC District may also include one additional
nonilluminated freestanding sign with a maximum square
footage of six square feet.
§ 190-184 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-184
186:777
[4] A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it
meets the size requirements of this section and the
provisions of § 190-189. An electronically changing
message sign shall have a maximum height of five feet.
[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
[5] Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot under
the provisions above, only one sign shall be a digital sign
or electronically changing message sign, provided that it
meets the size requirements of this section and the
provisions of § 190-189. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-405]
(c) Window signs. Total window signs, as defined by this article,
shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the window on which
the sign is located. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
(d) Buildings including more than one use. The requirements of
this section shall apply. It is the specific intent of this section
that for buildings including more than one use, that each use
be identified as part of one coordinated freestanding sign
structure and not by individual freestanding signs.
B. Signs on mobile stands.
(1) Purpose: to recognize signs on mobile stands as a particular type of
sign that has the characteristics of a temporary sign but that is
inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This section is based on
the policy that if a use desires to regularly display a sign for
regularly changing messages, that it erect a permanent sign within
all of the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Standards for signs on mobile stands.
(a) Signs on mobile stands shall be permitted only in the GC
District.
(b) Signs on mobile stands shall have a maximum sign area of 40
square feet.
(c) Only one mobile sign shall be permitted per use or per lot,
whichever is lesser.
(d) Permit. The display of signs on mobile stands shall require a
special permit to ensure their use only as a temporary sign.
The cost of this permit shall be $10.
(e) Time limit. A permit for a sign on a mobile stand shall be
limited to 20 days and be issued only once per use or lot,
whichever is lesser, within a calendar year.
§ 190-184 PALMER CODE § 190-184
186:778
§ 190-185. Signs permitted in industrial and business districts.
(f) Deposit. To ensure that a sign on a portable stand is removed
within 20 days, the applicant shall be required to pay a deposit
of $150 to the Township. This deposit shall be refunded only if
the sign is removed within the 20 days of the issuance of the
permit. Refusal to remove the sign after the 20 days shall
constitute a zoning violation, within the procedures of this
ordinance.
(g) No sign on a mobile stand shall be placed so that it causes a
hazard to traffic nor shall it be placed within the existing/future
road right-of-way.
(h) No sign on a mobile stand shall include a flashing or blinking
light.
(3) Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all signs
on mobile stands that are placed for display to the public after this
ordinance goes into effect. These standards shall also apply to all
signs on mobile stands that currently exist in the Township for
which a permit from the Township has not been granted for a
permanent sign.
A. The following types of signs are permitted in the LI, HI, PIC and PO/IP
Districts, but not including PO/B:
(1) Signs not requiring permits in § 190-179. [Amended 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(2) Temporary signs in § 190-178. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311]
(3) Signs identifying major developments in § 190-181. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(4) Wall signs. Up to two shall be permitted for each establishment.
Each sign shall have a maximum total sign area of 50 square feet.
(5) Freestanding signs, not to exceed one structure per street
frontage. The total area of each freestanding sign shall not exceed
50 square feet.
(a) A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or electronically
changing message sign, provided that it meets the size
requirements of this section and the provisions of § 190-189.
An electronically changing message sign shall have a
maximum height of five feet. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-405]
(b) Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot under the
provisions above, only one sign shall be a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it meets
§ 190-184 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-185
186:779
§ 190-186. Approval of signs associated with proposed variances
and changes in nonconforming uses.
Any signs that are to be associated with a proposed variance or change of
a nonconforming use shall be reviewed and either be approved or denied at
the size requirements of this section and the provisions of
§ 190-189. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
(6) Signs on mobile or movable stands are specifically prohibited.
(7) Each principal establishment within a multi-tenant building may
also have a wall sign with a maximum sign area of four square feet,
which shall be located near or on the use's door.
B. The following types of signs are permitted in the PO/B District:
(1) Exempt signs in § 190-179. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
(2) Temporary signs in § 190-178. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311]
(3) Signs identifying major developments in § 190-181. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(4) Wall signs. Up to two per building, each with a maximum sign area
of 16 square feet. Such sign shall be posted a minimum of four feet
and a maximum of 10 feet above the average adjacent finished
grade.
(5) Each principal establishment within a multi-tenant building may
also have a wall sign with a maximum sign area of four square feet,
which shall be located near or on the use's door.
(6) Freestanding signs, not to exceed one sign for each principal
building. The total area of each freestanding sign shall not exceed
50 square feet.
(a) A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or electronically
changing message sign, provided that it meets the size
requirements of this section and the provisions of § 190-189.
An electronically changing message sign shall have a
maximum height of five feet. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-405]
(b) Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot under the
provisions above, only one sign shall be a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it meets
the size requirements of this section and the provisions of
§ 190-189. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
(7) Signs on mobile stands are specifically prohibited.
§ 190-185 PALMER CODE § 190-186
186:780
the same time that such action is approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. A
condition of such approval shall be compatibility with adjacent land uses.
§ 190-187. Off-premises signs (including billboards).
A. Purposes:
(1) To carry out the purposes stated in § 190-171A.
(2) This section is intended to carefully control the sizes and locations
of off-premises signs for the following reasons:
(a) Uncontrolled placement of off-premises signs would result in
visual pollution that would conflict with the economic
development goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
[1] The Township has a goal of attracting desirable light
industrial and office development. These types of uses are
very prestige conscious and seek an attractive physical
environment. Uncontrolled erection of off-premises signs,
especially along major entranceways to the Township and
the Lehigh Valley, would harm the positive image of the
Township that business persons receive.
(b) Uncontrolled placement of off-premises signs would create an
environment of visual pollution that would conflict with the
existing and planned residential character of many areas of the
Township.
[1] Even most commercial areas of the Township are within
close proximity to existing and proposed residences.
[2] The visual impact and glare from off-premises signs could
create decreased residential property values in
surrounding areas.
(c) The visual pollution and visual clutter that would result from
uncontrolled placement of off-premises signs could harm areas
of great natural and scenic beauty in the Township. This would
threaten the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of seeking
to maintain the agricultural and open space character of many
areas of the Township.
(d) The visual clutter from uncontrolled placement of off-premises
signs could cause serious traffic hazards and distractions,
including obstructing sight distances for vehicles and
pedestrians. Also, possible sites abutting arterial streets would
add to existing problems of complex turning movements,
congestion and traffic hazards. Such high-traffic roads require
drivers to place their full attention onto the road without
needless attractions.
§ 190-186 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-187
186:781
(e) This section recognizes that a full variety of alternative means
of free speech are available within the Township, including
provisions for on-premises signs, certain types of temporary
signs and a number of existing off-premises nonconforming
signs that exist in the Township and are available for rent.
(f) The owners of all properties in the Township are provided with
a reasonable variety of reasonable uses for their land other
than permitted off-premises signs.
(g) This section seeks to avoid off-premises signs from having
unfair advantages in sign area and height over on-premises
signs in the competition for attention.
B. Nonconforming off-premises signs. This section is not intended to
require the removal of existing lawful off-premises sign that are
structurally sound and in good repair.
C. Commercial and noncommercial signs. This section applies to both
commercial and noncommercial off-premises signs except as may be
specifically provided for elsewhere in this ordinance.
D. State signs. Signs erected and maintained by the PA Department of
Transportation are permitted by right in all districts. Such signs that
identify business services available at an interchange are specifically
encouraged as an appropriate and orderly means of providing
information without causing visual pollution or traffic hazards.
E. Prohibition. Based directly on the purposes stated in this section, all offpremises
signs are prohibited in all districts of the Township, except as
is specifically permitted by provisions of this ordinance.
F. Allowance for peculiar circumstances.
(1) This section recognizes that peculiar and exceptional
circumstances may cause a need for an off-premises sign other than
those that are permitted.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board may as a special exception allow one offpremises
sign related towards one individual use. Such a sign shall
be limited to 30 square feet in sign area on one face and with a
maximum height of 20 feet.
(3) Such a sign may be permitted in any district other than LDR, MDR,
HDR or C-R.
(4) No approval shall be granted for such a sign unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that peculiar
and exceptional characteristics of both the individual use and the
site overwhelmingly require a need for such a sign in order for that
use to exist. The applicant shall also prove that the location of such
a sign would be completely compatible with adjacent uses.
§ 190-187 PALMER CODE § 190-187
186:782
G. Permitted off-premises "billboard" signs. An off-premises billboard-type
sign is only permitted if it complies with all of the following
requirements: [Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405;
3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-406]
(1) Shall have a maximum of one sign face per structure if one-sided or
two sign faces per structure if two-sided.
(2) Shall have a total maximum height of 40 feet above the surrounding
ground level. However, for off-premises signs located adjacent to
and directed toward U.S. Route 22 or PA Route 33 and where the
grade of the lot is below the grade of the highway, then the total
maximum height of the sign may be 40 feet above the grade of the
highway.
(3) Shall only be permitted in the GC, LI, PO/IP or PIC District.
(4) Shall be located at least 800 feet from any other such sign.
(5) Shall be located within 300 feet of the existing right-of-way of U.S.
Route 22 or PA Route 33
(6) Shall be located at least 300 feet from any residential lot line, as
measured from a point directly opposite the sign, along the nearest
edge of the right-of-way on the same side of the roadway.
(7) Shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any lot line other than a
residential lot line.
(8) Shall have a maximum sign area of 300 square feet on each of the
permitted sign faces, except where such sign is located within 200
feet of the right-of-way of, and intended or designed to be viewed
from, U.S. Route 22 or PA Route 33, in which case the maximum
area on each of the two sides may be 672 square feet.
(9) Shall not be required to meet the maximum height and size
requirements for a freestanding sign. The maximum height and size
requirement governing freestanding signs as defined by this
ordinance shall not apply to billboard signs.
H. Digital signs and electronically changing message signs. [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
(1) If an off-premises billboard sign, or any portion thereof, is a digital
sign or electronically changing message sign, it shall be separated
a minimum of 1,000 feet from any other digital or electronically
changing off-premises sign. The distance between sign structures
shall be measured between points directly opposite the signs, along
the nearest edge of the right-of-way on the same side of the
roadway.
§ 190-187 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-187
186:783
§ 190-188. Lights around commercial structure rooflines. [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311; amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-320]
Lights shall be permitted as an outline to commercial structure rooflines,
provided that the lights are white, nonflashing, nonblinking and pose no
distraction or harm to passing motorists. Lights shall be no more than 3/4
inches in height and 8.1 watts per bulb.
§ 190-189. Digital signs and electronically changing message signs.
[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-405]
(2) An existing off-premises sign shall only be permitted to be
converted to a digital sign or electronically changing message sign
if:
(a) All of the requirements of § 190-189 are met; and
(b) The off-premises sign would be able to meet all of the current
requirements that apply to off-premises signs as if the offpremises
sign would be newly placed on the property.
(3) Where applicable, such off-premises signs shall be located,
constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations, in addition
to all Palmer Township regulations. Where there is a conflict
between regulations, the more-restrictive regulation shall apply.
(4) An engineering certificate shall accompany any application for a
digital or electronically changing off-premises sign. The
certification shall indicate under seal of a professional engineer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the sign has
been designed in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices.
(5) The applicant shall provide, in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, proof that the property owner and licensee or other
person in control of the signage consents to the removal of the offpremises
sign if no advertising is located on it or the sign otherwise
ceases to be used for a period of three consecutive months.
(6) The applicant shall be required to permit and coordinate message
access for local, regional, state and national emergency services
during emergency situations.
A. Digital signs shall only be permitted to be located within 200 feet of the
right-of-way of, and intended or designed to be viewed from, U.S. Route
22 or PA Route 33, as permitted within a GC, PC, LI, HI, PI/C, PO/IP or
PO/B Zoning District. Where applicable, such signs shall be located,
constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations, in addition to
§ 190-187 PALMER CODE § 190-189
186:784
all Palmer Township regulations. Where there is a conflict between
regulations, the more-restrictive regulation shall apply.
(1) A digital sign shall not be placed within 500 feet of a residential
zoning district, as measured from a point directly opposite the sign,
along the nearest edge of the right-of-way on the same side of the
roadway.
B. Electronically changing message signs shall only be permitted to be
located within 50 feet of the right-of-way of, and intended or designed
to be viewed from, U.S. Route 22, PA Route 33, William Penn Highway,
Route 248/Nazareth Road/South 25th Street, or Freemansburg Avenue,
as permitted within a GC, PC, LI, HI, PI/C, PO/IP, PO/B or C-R Zoning
District. Where applicable, such signs shall be located, constructed and
maintained in accordance with all applicable Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation regulations, in addition to all Palmer Township
regulations. Where there is a conflict between regulations, the morerestrictive
regulation shall apply.
(1) An electronically changing message sign shall not be placed within
200 feet of a residential zoning district, as measured in any
direction, except where separated by U.S. Route 22 or PA Route 33.
(2) An electronically changing message sign shall be attractively
landscaped, with plants and shrubs requiring minimal
maintenance. The permit application for an electronically changing
message sign shall require a landscape plan which includes the
botanical and common names of the plants to be used, the sizes to
be planted and the quantity and spacing of each.
C. A digital sign or electronically changing message sign shall be
separated a minimum of 500 feet from any other digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, except as required under
§ 190-187H(1). The distance between sign structures shall be measured
between points directly opposite the signs, along the nearest edge of
the right-of-way on the same side of the roadway.
D. All messages, images or displays on a digital sign or electronically
changing message sign shall remain unchanged for a minimum of 7.5
seconds. Signs of 24 square feet or less which indicate only the time,
temperature, date or similar information shall be excluded.
E. The time interval used to change from one complete message, image or
display to the next complete message, image or display shall be a
maximum of one second.
F. There shall be no appearance of a visual dissolve or fading, in which any
part of one message, image or display appears simultaneously with any
part of a second message, image or display.
§ 190-189 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-189
186:785
§ 190-190. (Reserved)
G. There shall be no appearance of flashing, twinkling, blinking, or sudden
bursts of light, and no appearance of video motion, animation, scrolling,
twirling, or flow of the message, image or display.
H. The intensity and contrast of light levels shall remain constant
throughout the sign face.
I. The illumination and/or intensity of the display shall be controlled so as
to not create glare, hazards or nuisances. The luminance or brightness
of the display shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle of light above the normal
ambient light levels. Each digital sign or electronically changing
message sign shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology to
adjust the sign's brightness based on ambient light conditions.
(1) The luminance specification shall be determined by a footcandle
metering device held at a height of five feet and aimed towards the
sign, from a distance of 175 feet.
(2) The metering device should be at a location perpendicular to the
center of the digital sign (as seen in plan view) as this angle has the
highest luminance.
(3) The measurement of luminance shall include the measurement of
an all-white image displayed by the sign to evaluate the worst-case
condition.
(4) If the difference between the sign turned on and the sign turned off
is 0.5 footcandle or less, then the sign luminance shall be
determined to be in compliance.
J. Signs shall be equipped with a properly functioning default mechanism
that will stop the sign display on one message or image should a
malfunction occur.
K. Digital signs and electronically changing message signs shall be
inspected annually to verify dwell time and brightness level. An annual
inspection fee of $150 shall be charged for every digital sign and
electronically changing message sign.
§ 190-189 PALMER CODE § 190-190
186:786
ARTICLE XIX
General Regulations
§ 190-191. Principal uses limited; posting of address.
§ 190-192. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings. [Amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-320]
A. A maximum of one principal use is permitted on one lot, except as
specifically permitted by this ordinance, and except for approved multitenant
commercial and industrial buildings. See § 190-192C.
B. Every principal building shall post its street number (if one has been
established) in such a prominent place that it can be clearly viewed
from a public street.
A. Frontage required onto improved street.
(1) Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with permanent
access upon a public street or a private street that is improved to
meet Township standards, including a street right-of-way, or for
which such improvements have been insured by the posting of a
performance guaranty pursuant to the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance. In the case of townhouses or lowrise/
garden apartments, this requirement may be met by access
onto a parking court which has access onto such street.
(2) See Article X of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance regarding required improvements to streets.
(3) If a pre-existing lawful lot only has access onto an existing private
street that does not meet Township standards and the improvement
of that street is reasonably beyond the control of the applicant, the
lot may be used for a single permitted by right use, but no new lots
shall be created that will not be able to meet this requirement.
B. Multiple buildings on a lot. An approved commercial, institutional,
industrial or garden apartment lot may include more than one principal
building. In such case, the minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements shall only apply at lot lines of the property. In such case, a
twenty-five-foot-wide minimum separation distance shall apply between
principal buildings, unless stated otherwise. Individual buildings or
portions of such buildings may be held in approved condominium
ownership, but the lot shall be owned by a single legal entity.
C. Multiple occupancy.
(1) A principal commercial or industrial building may be occupied by
more than one tenant within a similar general type of use, provided
that all requirements of this ordinance are complied with.
§ 190-191 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-192
186:787
§ 190-193. Height exceptions; airport approaches.
§ 190-194. Special lot and yard requirements, sight distance and
buffer yards.
(2) Each use within a multiuse building shall be required to apply for
separate building and zoning permits through the required
processes.
A. Height exceptions. The maximum structure height specified for each
district shall not apply to farm silos and associated agricultural
structures, communications towers, amateur radio antenna, water
towers, clock or bell towers, steeples of places of worship, electrical
transmission lines, elevator shafts, windmills, chimneys or other
appurtenances usually required to be and customarily placed above the
roof level and not intended for human occupancy. For these exempted
structures, the maximum height shall be 250 feet above the average
surrounding ground level.
B. Height and airport approaches. At a minimum, any structure proposed
to have a height of 75 feet or more above average surrounding ground
level shall present sufficient information to the Zoning Officer to prove
that the structure would comply with all applicable federal, state and
Township requirements regarding airport approaches and warning
lights. See the Township Airport Approach Zoning Provisions, which
specifically shall remain in force and which are not repealed by this
ordinance.
C. Minimum height. No dwelling shall be less than one story in height,
except during a maximum twenty-four-month period from the date of
issuance of the zoning permit. This period may be extended by the
Zoning Hearing Board. This requirement shall not apply to a dwelling
specifically designed to be an "earth-sheltered house" if such dwelling
meets all other requirements of this ordinance and is approved as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, after considering
compatibility with adjacent uses.
A. In general.
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this ordinance. This includes, but is not
limited to, setback areas, impervious areas and off-street parking
areas.
(2) Emergency access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles.
(3) Setbacks not applicable. See exemptions for certain structures in
§ 190-211.
§ 190-192 PALMER CODE § 190-194
186:788
(4) Accuracy. The applicant is responsible to make sure that all
measurements submitted to the Township are accurate.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
(1) Nonconforming lots. See § 190-196.
(2) Through lots. Any lot having frontage on two approximately parallel
streets (not including an alley) shall provide a required front yard
setback abutting each of these streets.
(3) Corner lots.
(a) A setback area equal to the minimum front yard setback shall
be provided along all portions of a corner lot abutting any
public street, except where the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that the provision of a smaller
setback of a different yard for a residential building will
conform with the clearly prevailing yard pattern on numerous
existing developed adjoining lots fronting on the same street.
(b) If a lot is required to provide front yard setbacks along two of
four lot lines, then the remaining two yards may be side yards
without a rear yard being required.
(4) Projections into required yards.
(a) Cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural features,
exterior stairways, fire escapes or other required means of
egress, rain leads or chimneys or other similar structures that
do not include space usable by persons may extend or project
into a required yard not more than two feet, except as may be
required under a drainage or utility easement.
(b) Front, side or rear porches that are covered by a roof and are
not enclosed, and are not raised more than four feet above the
ground level may project from the principal building into a
required yard setback, provided that the porch does not
intrude more than five feet into a required yard and has a
maximum width of 10 feet.
(5) Front yard setback exception.
(a) In any district within a block containing a lot proposed for a
construction or expansion of a building, where 50% or more of
the improved lots on such block frontage currently have front
yards of less depth than is currently required for that district,
and where the clear majority of such lots are already
developed, the average of such existing front setbacks shall
establish the minimum front yard depth for the remainder of
the frontage; provided, however, that an absolute minimum
front yard setback of 25 feet shall apply.
§ 190-194 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-194
186:789
(b) In any district within a block containing a lot proposed for a
construction or expansion of a building, where 90% or more of
the lots on such block frontage include existing principal
buildings have front yards of greater depth than is currently
required for that district, and where the clear majority of such
lots are already developed, the average of such existing front
setbacks shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the
remainder of the frontage; provided, however, that the
minimum front yard setback shall not be more than 15 feet
greater than what would otherwise apply.
(6) Triangular lots. If a three-sided lot does not have a rear lot line,
then the required rear yard shall be twice as wide as would
otherwise be required and be measured from the corner of the lot
farthest from the front lot line.
(7) Septic systems. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the
Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer from requiring a minimum
lot area larger than what is stated in this ordinance to carry out
state and Township sewage regulations.
(8) Previously approved setbacks. Where a subdivision or land
development was granted final approval prior to the adoption of
this ordinance, and the lawful setbacks in effect at such time are
shown on the approved plans, at the option of the developer, those
approved setbacks may apply in place of any revised setbacks in
this ordinance.
(9) Electric power lines. See definition of "lot area" in Article II. Active
recreation facilities shall not be developed immediately beneath
electric overhead transmission rights-of-way or easements.
(10) Recreation trail setback. No structure, parking space for a
commercial or industrial use or commercial or industrial storage or
display shall be located within 20 feet of the lot line of the Palmer
Township Bikeway/Recreational Trail.
C. Sight distance.
(1) Sight distance at intersections.
(a) Purpose. To ensure that traffic passing through an intersection
or turning onto a street can safely see oncoming traffic.
(b) A triangular area as described in this section shall be graded
and shall be kept free of sight obstructions between the ground
level and a height of 10 feet above the center-line grade of the
intersecting streets, including structures, nontransparent
fences, vegetation and signs (but not including mowed grass,
posts of official signs which must be located in the sight
triangle because of their function or the trunks of existing
§ 190-194 PALMER CODE § 190-194
186:790
trees whose branches are kept clear of the sight triangle).
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(c) This sight distance triangle shall be shown on development
plans submitted to the Township and be shown on any plan
required to be recorded. Such triangle shall serve as a
permanent setback line for all such visual obstructions and
shall be binding upon present and future owners of the land.
(d) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the intersecting
street center lines and a diagonal connecting two points, one
which is at each end of the center lines of each street as
follows:
[1] One hundred fifty feet from the intersection of such street
center lines, if either street is an arterial street.
[2] One hundred feet from the intersection of such street
center line if either street is a collector street.
[3] Seventy-five feet from the intersection of such street
center line if both streets are local streets.
(2) Sight distance at intersections of driveways or accessways with
streets.
(a) A triangular area as described in Subsection C(1) above shall
be graded and shall be kept free of sight obstructions between
the ground level and a height of 10 feet above the center-line
grade of the intersecting driveway, accessway or street,
including structures, nontransparent fences, vegetation and
signs (but not including mowed grass, posts of official signs
which must be located in the sight triangle because of their
function or the trunks of existing trees whose branches are
kept clear of the sight triangle). [Amended 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-311]
§ 190-194 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-194
186:791
(b) This sight distance triangle shall be shown on development
plans submitted to the Township and be shown on any plan
required to be recorded. Such triangle shall serve as a
permanent setback line for all such visual obstructions and
shall be binding upon present and future owners of the land.
(c) Such triangular area shall be bounded by the intersecting
street center lines and a diagonal connecting two points, one of
which is at each end of the center line of each street,
accessway or driveway 30 feet from the intersection of such
center lines.
(d) No sign shall be placed or vehicle parking located in such
locations that would obstruct clear sight lines necessary for the
safe movement of traffic out of any driveway or accessway onto
a street.
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards and screening complying with the following
standards shall be required under the following situations:
(1) Buffer yard width; when required. Buffer yards with evergreen
screening shall be required in the following situations, with
whichever is most restrictive applying.
(a) A minimum forty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be required
between any newly developed or expanded area of an
industrial use and any abutting LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II
District or existing principal residential use. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(b) A minimum ten-foot-wide buffer yard shall be required
between any newly developed or expanded area of a
commercial use and any abutting LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II
District or existing principal residential use. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(c) A minimum twenty-foot-wide buffer yard shall be required
between any newly developed or expanded area of industrial
outdoor storage and/or a loading dock routinely used for
tractor-trailer trucks or refrigerated trucks and any abutting
principal office use, LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District, public
§ 190-194 PALMER CODE § 190-194
186:792
street right-of-way or publicly-owned recreation area.
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(d) A minimum twenty-five-foot-wide buffer yard shall be required
between any townhouse or garden apartment principal
building and the lot line of any directly abutting existing singlefamily
detached dwelling.
(e) In any other location where a buffer yard is required by this
ordinance, and where such width is not specifically stated,
such yard shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
(2) Location of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary
line, future street right-of-way line or lot line, whichever is
applicable.
(b) Plants needed for the visual screen shall not be placed within a
future street right-of-way. The required buffer yard width shall
be in addition to the required future street right-of-way.
(c) The buffer yard may include areas within a required front, side
or rear yard, or a paved area setback area, provided that the
larger yard requirement shall apply in case of overlap.
(d) A business use shall not be required to provide a buffer yard
for an adjacent residential use or district if the uses/districts
are separated by an expressway. However, outdoor storage or
tractor-trailer parking adjacent to an expressway shall still
provide any required buffer yard and screening.
(3) Characteristics of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage or display,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas or vehicle parking or display. No new
driveways or streets shall be permitted in the buffer yards
except at points of approved crossings for ingress or egress.
(b) Maintenance. In buffer yards, all areas not covered by trees
and shrubs shall be well-maintained in an all-season vegetative
ground cover (such as grass) and shall be kept free of debris
and rubbish and shall not include grass areas higher than eight
inches.
(c) Preservation of existing vegetation or slopes. If an applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that an existing
healthy tree line, attractive thick vegetation, natural earth
berm and/or steep slopes will be preserved and serve the same
buffer purposes as plant screening that would otherwise be
required, then such preserved existing buffer shall be
§ 190-194 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-194
186:793
permitted to be used in place of planting new plants. In such
case, the width of the buffer yard required by Subsection D(1)
shall still apply. If this existing buffer requirement is removed,
the applicant shall be required to plant a buffer yard that will
meet the planting requirements of this section.
(d) Fence. Any fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the inside
of any required evergreen screening.
(4) Plant screen.
(a) Each buffer yard shall include a planting screen of trees or
shrubs extending the full length of the lot line.
(b) Each planting screen shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Plant materials needed to form the visual screen shall have
a minimum height when planted of four feet, unless
otherwise stated in another section of this ordinance.
[2] Plants needed to form the visual screen shall be of such
species, spacing and size as can reasonably be expected to
produce, within three years, a solid year-round visual
screen at least six feet in height.
[3] The plant screen shall be permanently maintained by
present and future landowners. Any plants needed to form
the visual screen that die or are removed shall be replaced
within five months.
[4] The plant screen shall be placed so that at maturity the
plants will be at least five feet from any cartway and will
not grow over an exterior lot line.
[5] The plant visual screen shall be interrupted only at:
[a] Approved points of vehicle or pedestrian ingress and
egress to the lot that are perpendicular to the buffer
yard.
[b] Locations necessary to comply with the sight distance
requirements of Subsection C.
[c] Locations needed to meet other specific state and
Township requirements.
[6] Evergreen trees likely to grow substantially in diameter
should be planted in two or more rows or offsets if needed
to allow space for future growth.
(c) In circumstances where it is impractical to provide plant
screening meeting the requirements of this section, the Zoning
Officer may approve acceptable alternative methods of
screening (such as an attractive visually solid weather-
§ 190-194 PALMER CODE § 190-194
186:794
resistant wood fence), provided that the applicant proves such
alternative would meet the spirit, objectives and intent of the
screening requirements. The applicant shall state in writing
the proposed size and materials of any such fence.
(5) Buffer yard plans.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this ordinance where a
buffer yard would be required, and on any required subdivision
or land development plan, the applicant shall submit plans
showing:
[1] The location and arrangement of each buffer yard.
[2] The placement, general selection of species and initial size
of all plant materials.
[3] The placement, size, materials and type of all fences to be
placed in such buffer yard.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall review such plans to determine that
the plans are in conformance with the terms of this ordinance.
(6) Mechanical screening. All outdoor stationary ground level
industrial mechanical equipment that is visible from a public street
shall be separated by landscaping and/or have an architectural
building material screen or covering or design that is harmonious
with the building design, as seen from the street.
(7) Based upon a review by the Planning Commission, the Board of
Supervisors may allow an adjustment in the buffer yard
requirements of this section where such requirements are deemed
unnecessary because of the location (such as if a steep slope forms
a natural buffer) or would create a hardship or where an alternative
method of buffering (such as an earth berm and/or solid wood
fence) would be more appropriate.
(8) As a condition of approval of a conditional or special exception use
or a variance, the Board of Supervisors or Zoning Hearing Board as
applicable may require additional screening, additional width and/
or a raised earth berm where necessary to prevent a serious threat
of incompatibility with neighboring uses.
(9) See paved area screening requirements of § 190-168J.
(10) Species of plants in screening. Trees and shrubs needed to form a
required visual screen shall be of the following or closely related
species, unless the applicant proves to satisfaction of the Planning
Commission or Zoning Officer that a substitution would be
appropriate. A required visual screen shall primarily include
evergreen plants. Leafy deciduous plants may be selectively used,
provided that their use does not result in significant visual
openings during the winter. If more than 25 plants are needed to
§ 190-194 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-194
186:795
form a visual screen, then a maximum of 75% of such plants shall
be of one species.
Buxus: all varieties of boxwood
Caragana arborescens: Siberian pea shrub
Cephalanthus Occidentalis: buttonbush
Chaenomeles Japonica: flowering quince
Cornus: all varieties of dogwood
Cotoneaster divaricata: spreading or upright cotoneaster
Crataegus crus-galli: cockspur thorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum: Washington hawthorn
Elaeagnus angustifolia: Russian olive
Eucalyptus: all varieties of eucalyptus
Euonymus: all varieties of euonymus
Forsythia spectablilis: showy forsythia
Hamamelis: all varieties of witch hazel
Hydrangea arborescens: hills of snow hydrangea
Ilex: all varieties of holly
Juniperus: all varieties of junipers
Kolkwitzia amabilis: beauty bush
Laurus mobilis: sweet bay
Ligustrum: all varieties of privet
Lonicera: all varieties of honeysuckle
Magnolia stellata: star magnolia
Photinia: all varieties of Photinia
Picea: all varieties of spruces
Pinus: all varieties of pines
Pseudotsuga: all varieties of firs
Pyracantha lalandei: Laland firethorn
Rhamnus davurica: Dahurian buckthorn
Rhamnus frangula: glossy or alter buckthorn
Spirea: all varieties of spirea
Syringa: all varieties of lilac
Taxus: all varieties of yews
Thuja occidentalis: American arborvitae
Thuja origentalis: Oriental arborvitae
Tsuga: all varieties of hemlocks
Viburnum: all varieties of viburnum
§ 190-194 PALMER CODE § 190-195
186:796
§ 190-195. Landscaping.
§ 190-196. Establishment of future/ultimate right-of-way widths for
streets.
A. Ground cover and plan required. Any part or portion of a lot which is
not used for buildings, structures, loading or parking areas and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with an allseason,
well-maintained vegetative ground cover and shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs in accordance with an overall
landscape plan. This landscape plan should include the botanical and
common names of the plants to be used, the sizes to be planted and the
quantity and spacing of each.
B. Modifications. Landscaping of superior quality and quantity should be
provided in highly visible areas of the Township, especially along
arterial roads. The Planning Commission may allow, with concurrence
of the Board of Supervisors, that the specific landscaping requirements
be adjusted to allow approximately the same amount of landscaping to
be placed in different locations or arrangements or to be of different
species than would otherwise be required, if the Township determines
that such alternative would be superior in effect. To receive such
adjustments, an applicant shall provide a landscaping plan prepared by
a registered landscape architect.
C. See § 190-168H, Parking lot landscaping, § 190-168I, regarding parking
lot screening, § 190-194D, Buffer yards, and Article X of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance regarding street trees.
D. Street trees. See Article X of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(1) If a Township regulation would require that street trees be placed
within a state street right-of-way, and PennDOT specifically refuses
permission for such plantings, or if the Township determines that
there are no acceptable locations for street trees within the rightof-
way, then the street trees shall be planted immediately outside
the right-of-way.
(2) Location. See § 165-73A(8) of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(3) Any street trees planted under or near overhead utility lines shall
be of a species with a limited mature height. (NOTE:
Recommendations are available from the local utility company).
A. Purpose. Minimum future/ultimate right-of-way widths are established
for streets where the existing right-of-way is less than that indicated in
this section for the particular classification of street. These future
rights-of-way are designed to reserve adequate rights-of-way for future
circulation improvements, including street widenings, intersection
realignments and widenings, shoulders, bikeways and sidewalks, and to
§ 190-195 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-196
186:797
provide rights-of-way for needed public sewer and water lines and other
utilities and drainage improvements.
B. Measurement.
(1) The future right-of-way shall be measured with 1/2 on either side of
the center line of the existing right-of-way. If the existing right-ofway
is clearly significantly off-center of the cartway, the center line
of the cartway shall be used.
(2) The specific classification of each street is shown on the Township
Official Street Classification Map, at the end of this document.233
C. Dedication of future/ultimate right-of-way. See § 165-59N of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.
D. Minimum widths. The following future rights-of-way shall be reserved
along each street:
Street Classification
Minimum Future Right-of-Way
(feet)
Major arterial street/expressway 120 or existing right-of-way width,
whichever is wider
Minor arterial street 80, except as stated below
Collector street 60
Local/marginal access/private
streets
50
E. Maintenance. The owner of the adjacent property shall be responsible
for maintenance of portions of the right-of-way not used for vehicles.
F. Modifications of right-of-way width.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may approve a reduction in the minimum
future right-of-way where the applicant clearly proves to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors either of the following:
(a) That the proposed use and/or subdivision is of such low
intensity that it will not create any measurable additional
impact on the adjacent street system; or
(b) That it would, for practical purposes, be infeasible for the
street to be substantially widened at any time in the future
because of the existence of substantial existing buildings on
the applicable side of such street within close proximity to such
street and that the additional right-of-way is not needed for the
extension of water and sewer lines.
233. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-196 PALMER CODE § 190-196
186:798
§ 190-197. Right-of-way requirement for industrial and commercial
uses.
No industrial or commercial use shall be permitted adjacent to a street
designated on the Township Official Street Classification Map234 as a minor
arterial or collector street unless such street has a right-of-way with a
minimum width of 30 feet from the center line of said street to the lot line
of the proposed use or unless such width will be provided.
§ 190-198. Access onto arterial and collector streets.
To encourage well-planned development fronting onto minor arterial and
collector streets (as defined on the Official Street Classification Map235) and
to minimize traffic congestion and hazards, the following provisions shall
apply to access onto such streets:
(2) Rights-of-way shall not be required to be dedicated in specific
locations that are presently occupied by buildings that are
proposed to remain.
(3) The Board of Supervisors may by resolution or ordinance establish
a wider future right-of-way along a specific street than is provided
by this section, where the Board of Supervisors determines there is
a clear, necessary and reasonable need for such additional width.
A. Parking, loading and drive-throughs. See § 190-166. All off-street
parking, loading, vehicle storage and display and associated internal
vehicle accessways shall be physically separated from the cartway of a
minor arterial or collector street (except at approved perpendicular
entrance and exit points) by a raised curb, planting strip, wall or other
suitable barrier to prevent unchannelized access onto the street. All
parking and drive-through facilities shall have sufficient areas for
stacking of vehicles to prevent the "backup" of vehicles onto a public
street.
B. Access points. Each lot with less than 250 feet of frontage on an arterial
street shall have not more than one access point involving left-hand
turns onto each such street, and no lot with 250 or more feet of total
frontage on an arterial street shall have more than two access points
involving left-hand turns onto any such arterial street. If a lot has more
than one access point, the separation distance between access points
should be maximized, where reasonable considering other traffic safety
concerns.
(1) This provision shall not apply to the following:
(a) Construction of new streets onto an existing arterial street.
234. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
235. Editor's Note: The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-196 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-198
186:799
§ 190-199. Nonconformities.
(b) Access points that are clearly limited to use by only emergency
vehicles.
(2) A separate ingress point and a separate egress point shall be
considered one access point, if well-marked and if the geometry of
the driveways inhibits two-way traffic.
C. Where practical, access to two or more nonresidential lots should be
combined and/or shared and/or coordinated to minimize the number of
access points onto an arterial street. Shared parking lots and driveways
connecting adjacent nonresidential lots are strongly encouraged. See
possible reduction of parking requirements in § 190-166B.
D. See the access control provisions in Article X of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, including §§ 165-59F
and 165-67.
E. Larger developments. The following standards shall apply to any
development involving three or more principal commercial lots
(including but not limited to office, service or retail uses) or more than
five acres of commercial, garden/low-rise apartment or townhouse
uses.
(1) Whenever feasible, each principal building shall have its primary
vehicle access onto a service road, marginal access street, common
parking lot, common accessway, collector street or other
alternative method approved by the Township as opposed to direct
vehicle access from each lot involving left-hand turns onto a minor
arterial street.
(2) See requirements for setbacks of driveways from street
intersections in § 165-67 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(3) Adequate vehicle access shall be provided to each use without
causing undue congestion to, hazards upon or interference with
traffic movement on public streets. Uses shall include adequate
signalization, turn lanes, stacking areas and deceleration lanes to
provide safe and efficient access.
(4) Illumination. See § 190-161 of this ordinance.
(5) See § 165-59F of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
concerning access onto arterial streets. Alternative rear access to
properties fronting an arterial street should be considered.
A. Registration of nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility of a party
asserting a nonconformity to provide the evidence that it is lawful. A
property owner may request a written statement of nonconformity from
the Zoning Officer after providing sufficient evidence.
§ 190-198 PALMER CODE § 190-199
186:800
B. Continuation. A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot as defined
by this ordinance may be continued and may be sold and continued by
new owners. Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
C. Expansion of, construction upon or change in use of nonconformities.
(1) Nonconforming structures.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded, provided that:
[1] Such action will not increase the severity, extent or
amount of the nonconformity (such as the area of the
building extending into the required setback) or create any
new nonconformity.
[2] Any expanded area must comply with the applicable height
restrictions and applicable setbacks set forth in the base
zoning district in which the nonconforming structure is
located and any and all other requirements of this
ordinance. [Amended 3-23-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-347]
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(2) Nonconforming lots of record.
(a) Dwellings. In a district in which single-family detached
dwellings are permitted, such dwelling and customary
accessory structures may be erected on a lawful lot of record
after receiving special exception approval, provided that such
lot:
[1] Has a minimum width of 60 feet measured at the minimum
building setback line, except that the minimum lot width in
the LDR District shall be 100 feet.
[2] Was in lawful existence as of January 15, 1973.
[3] Was in single and separate ownership from any abutting
lot as of January 15, 1973 and as of the present.
[4] Has a minimum lot area of one acre in the C-R District,
12,000 square feet in the LDR District and 6,000 square
feet in any other district.
[5] Will comply with minimum setbacks and other
requirements of this ordinance for any new construction or
expanded area, except for minimum lot depth and those
§ 190-199 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-199
186:801
provisions specifically allowed to be altered by this
subsection or for which a variance is granted.
[6] Has minimum side yard setbacks of eight feet each or 10%
each of the lot width, whichever is larger.
[7] If a new principal building will be served by an on-lot
septic system, the lot will comply with all state septic
regulations, and shall provide an approved alternative
drainfield location.
(b) Integration. Two (1) or more abutting nonconforming lots
under common ownership at the time of adoption of this
amended section shall be integrated to form a lot that would be
less nonconforming. Such integrated lot in common ownership
shall not be subdivided, resubdivided or sold in parts using
separate deeds to separate owners, unless specifically
approved as a subdivision under the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance and in compliance with this
ordinance. See § 165-9B of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance regarding resubdivision of lots.
(c) Nonresidential districts. In a district where single-family
detached dwellings are not permitted, a single permitted by
right principal use and its customary accessory uses may be
constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a nonconforming
lot of record as a permitted by right use if all of the following
requirements are met:
[1] The lot has a minimum lot width of 60 feet.
[2] The lot width is at least 30% of the required minimum lot
width.
[3] The lot is a lot of record that lawfully existed prior to the
adoption of this ordinance or an applicable subsequent
amendment.
[4] Minimum setbacks and other requirements of this
ordinance are complied with for any new construction or
expanded area.
[5] If a new principal building will be served by an on-lot
septic system, the lot shall comply with all state septic
regulations, and shall provide an approved alternative
drainfield location.
(d) Modification of setbacks. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant
a special exception to reduce the required setbacks concerning
construction on a nonconforming lot if the Board determines
that such reduction would result in a building that would be
§ 190-199 PALMER CODE § 190-199
186:802
more compatible with neighboring residences than would be
built if the setback requirement was not reduced.
(e) Variances. If a proposed use on a nonconforming lot does not
meet the requirements of the above Subsection C(2)(a), (b), (c)
or (d), then the development of the nonconforming lot shall not
occur unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition to the standards stated for a variance in the
PA Municipalities Planning Code,236 the Zoning Hearing Board
shall also review whether any alternative permitted uses could
reasonably be made of the property that would have less
significant adverse impacts upon the established character of
an existing residential neighborhood. The full burden of proof
shall be upon the applicant to prove that the lot is a lawful lot
of record, the variance standards are met and the provisions of
this Subsection C are complied with.
(3) Expansion of nonconforming nonresidential uses. A nonconforming
use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall not be
expanded, except in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) An expansion of a total of more than 5% in total building floor
area in any five-year period shall require special exception
approval from the Zoning Hearing Board under Article XX.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use or
the total area covered by impervious surfaces of a
nonconforming use shall not be increased by greater than 50%
beyond each such measurement that existed in such use at the
time such use became nonconforming. This maximum increase
shall be measured in aggregate over the entire life of the
nonconformity.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this ordinance, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(4) Expansion of nonconforming residential uses. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded in floor area as a
permitted by right use, provided that:
(a) The number of dwelling units is not increased.
(b) The expansion meets all applicable setbacks.
(c) No new types of nonconformities are created.
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-199 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-199
186:803
(d) A nonconformity is not made more severe (including the
building area within the required setback area).
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities.
(1) Except as provided for in Subsection D(3) and J below, a
nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged
equal to 50% or more of its total value by fire, windstorm, lightning
or a similar cause deemed to be not the fault of the owner may
rebuild in a nonconforming fashion only if the application for a
building permit is submitted within 18 months after the date of
damage or destruction, work begins in earnest within 12 months
afterwards and no nonconformity is created or increased by any
reconstruction.
(2) Submittal. Rebuilding of a damaged or destroyed nonconformity
shall not begin until plans for rebuilding have been presented and
approved by the Zoning Officer. Any change of one nonconforming
use to another nonconforming use shall comply with the provisions
of this section.
(3) Agricultural. Nonconforming agricultural structures on farms may
be reestablished or reconstructed as a permitted by right use if
damaged or destroyed, without a time limit.
E. Abandonment of nonconformity.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a structure or land is discontinued,
razed, removed or abandoned for 12 months or longer, subsequent
use of such building or land shall conform with the regulations of
the district in which it is located, except:
(a) As provided for in the damaged or destroyed nonconformities
provisions of this section.
(b) For crop farming.
(c) For Subsection J.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the
nonconformity was not abandoned.
F. Changes from one nonconforming use to another.
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land shall not
revert to a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use only if permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Board shall determine whether the applicant has
provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed new use will be
equally or less objectionable in external effects than the preexisting
nonconforming use with regard to:
§ 190-199 PALMER CODE § 190-199
186:804
§ 190-200. Temporary structure or use.
(a) Traffic generation (especially truck traffic).
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire
and explosive hazards.
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage.
(d) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings.
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
G. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
H. Floodplains. See § 190-154H of this ordinance.
I. Building permits and nonconformities. When an active building permit
has been lawfully issued prior to the adoption of a section of this
ordinance that makes such activity nonconforming, such use, lot or
structure shall be regulated under the applicable nonconforming
regulations, provided that such construction is completed within a
maximum of 12 months of the issuance of such permit.
J. Nonconforming use of open land. If a nonconforming off-premises
junkyard, outside storage area or similar nonconforming use of open
land is discontinued for 90 days or more, or is damaged or destroyed to
an extent of 50% or more of replacement cost, such structure or use
shall not be continued, repaired or reconstructed.
A. Tents and membrane structures.
(1) In addition to the special exception procedure provided for in this
section, the Zoning Officer may allow the temporary erection of a
tent, membrane or similar temporary structure that is not totally
enclosed for a maximum of seven days in any four-month period for
clearly routine customarily accessory uses such as a wedding in the
rear yard of a dwelling, a festival by a place of worship or a special
sale within the lot of a lawful commercial use.
(2) The Zoning Officer may allow the temporary erection of a tent,
membrane structure or similar temporary structure for a period of
up to a maximum of 180 days in any given calendar year, for clearly
routine customary accessory uses.
(3) All tents, membrane structures or similar temporary structures to
be erected for a total of more than seven days shall require the
submission of a site plan and an application for a zoning permit.
The fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. Such structure shall comply with all applicable Palmer
Township Code requirements.
§ 190-199 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-200
186:805
B. Removal. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a temporary use or
structure, the applicant shall present a statement from the owner of
record of the land recognizing the application and accepting
responsibility to ensure that the use or structure is removed once the
permit expires. Any temporary structure or use shall be removed
completely upon expiration of the permit without cost to the Township.
If the structure or use is not removed in a timely fashion after proper
notification, the Township may remove the use or structure at the cost
of the person who owns the land upon which the structure or use is
located.
C. Conditions. The temporary use or structure shall be compatible with
adjacent uses and clearly be of a temporary nature. Clearly customary
and incidental accessory uses to a lawful permitted use are permitted
(such as festivals at a place of worship).
D. Construction vehicle parking and temporary offices. The parking of
construction vehicles and temporary construction offices on a site that
is necessary for the actual construction on the same lot or tract that is
actively underway is permitted by right, provided that such vehicles or
offices shall be removed immediately once the type of construction they
relate to is completed or suspended.
E. Food carts. A permitted principal commercial use on lots of more than
20,000 square feet may include the temporary use of a food and
nonalcoholic beverage cart for on-site sales, provided that the following
requirements are met:
(1) The cart is used for maximum periods of four days once in any sixmonth
period. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
(2) The cart is removed within 48 hours after the sales are complete.
(3) The applicant submits a site plan showing that the cart will be welllocated
to avoid pedestrian-vehicle conflicts.
F. Other temporary uses by special exception. A temporary permit may be
issued by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception for
structures or uses, other than those types listed as permitted by right in
this section, subject to the following additional provisions:
(1) Duration. The Zoning Hearing Board shall establish a limit on the
duration of the use. In most cases, a temporary approval should
have a maximum term of no longer than two years. In the case of a
special event, except under special circumstances, this term should
be a maximum of six days in any sixty-day period. The Zoning
Hearing Board may grant a single approval once for numerous
occurrences of an event.
(2) Fee. Either the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors
may waive and/or return the required application fee if the
applicant is an Internal Revenue Service recognized and well
§ 190-200 PALMER CODE § 190-200
186:806
§ 190-201. Site plan review procedures for certain uses.
established nonprofit organization, and the applicant clearly shows
that the proposed use is temporary and will be used to clearly
primarily serve a charitable or public service purpose.
(3) Nonprofit. Only a well-established and Internal-Revenue-Servicerecognized
nonprofit organization proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable or public service purpose shall
be eligible to receive approval for a commercial use in a district
where that use is not permitted.
(4) Special events. For a new special event (not including annual
reoccurrences of a previously held event) that will attract
significant numbers of the public, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
deny the use if it determines that the following will not be generally
appropriate: sanitary and water service, traffic control, off-street
parking and protection of the public health and safety.
A. When site plan required. A site plan review by the Planning Commission
and Board of Supervisors under this section is required for any of the
following uses unless the physical layout of the principal building(s) and
use will be approved under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(1) Any aggregate expansion of more than 2,000 square feet in the
floor area of a structure. Aggregate calculation of expansion shall
begin upon adoption of this amendment or December 31, 2001,
whichever is sooner, for all structures of the following types:
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(2) Any new or expanded paved area of greater than 5,000 square feet.
(3) Conversion of a noncommercial or nonindustrial building to a new
principal commercial use.
(4) Any change from one commercial or industrial use to a different
commercial or industrial use that would require the addition of 15
or more off-street parking spaces beyond what would have been
previously required.
(5) Any conditional use, except a routine replacement of one
commercial use by another commercial use of similar intensity,
within an existing building and using existing parking.
B. Site plan procedures. The following procedures shall be followed for
any use required to be reviewed under this section (See the procedures
in Article XX for procedures for review of a conditional use):
(1) Submission. Three complete copies of any required site plan shall
be submitted to the Township. The Zoning Officer shall refuse to
accept an application if it does not contain sufficient information to
§ 190-200 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-201
186:807
determine compliance with this ordinance. A minimum of one copy
shall be retained in Township files. The site plan shall include the
information listed in Subsection C below. The Zoning Officer shall
seek a review by the Township Engineer if engineering matters are
involved.
(2) Time. The Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors shall be
given an opportunity to review the site plan and provide any
advisory comments in writing to the Zoning Officer within the time
limit stated or in Subsection B(3) below.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall review the site plan and determine its
compliance or noncompliance with this ordinance, based upon his/
her review and any comments of the Board of Supervisors and
Planning Commission. The Zoning Officer shall make such
determination within 90 days after the first scheduled Planning
Commission regular meeting following at least 21 days after the
receipt of a complete site plan submission, unless the applicant
grants a written time extension. Such determination shall be
provided in person or through the United States Mail, in writing, to
the applicant or his/her representative.
C. Submission requirements for site plan review. The following
information, as applicable, shall be submitted by the applicant for any
conditional use or any use required to submit a site plan under Article
XX or this section, except for information waived by the Zoning Officer
as not applicable or necessary. If a conditional use review will also need
approval of the physical layout under the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, then the Zoning Officer may permit an
applicant to satisfy the conditional use plan requirement with a plan
meeting the sketch plan requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, provided that such plan provides sufficient
information to determine compliance with this Zoning Ordinance.
(1) A statement describing the proposed use, including proposed
maximum hours of operation, maximum number of employees on
the highest shift and the type of services or type of manufacture.
(2) Layout. A site layout drawn to scale (preferably one inch equals 50
feet) showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot; the
location, dimensions and height of proposed and any existing
structures; the required setback areas; the proposed density of
residential uses; the location and width of proposed or abutting
streets; and the proposed areas to be used for different purposes
within the development, including outdoor storage or display areas.
If the plan involves one phase of what eventually may be a larger
development, then the interrelationships of those phases shall be
shown.
(3) Landscaping and tree preservation.
§ 190-201 PALMER CODE § 190-201
186:808
(a) The width of any buffer yard and the heights, spacing and
general species of plants to be used for screening.
(b) General numbers, locations and types of landscaping to be
provided in off-street parking lots, along streets and in other
areas.
(c) The locations of individual and clusters of healthy trees with a
trunk diameter over six inches (measured four feet above the
surrounding ground level) that are proposed to be removed or
preserved. Locations of any "exceptional value trees" as
defined in § 190-164.
(d) The locations of any "tree protection area" required by
§ 190-164 of this ordinance, and a description of the proposed
methods to protect such area.
(4) Parking. The locations and numbers of parking spaces; the location
and widths of aisles; the location and sizes of off-street loading
areas. The method of calculating the off-street parking
requirement, based upon § 190-166.
(5) Lighting and signs. The height, location and approximate intensity
of exterior lighting. The sign area, height, location and general
method of lighting of signs.
(6) Sidewalks. The location of any proposed sidewalks (with width) and
curbing.
(7) Utilities. A note stating the general proposed method of providing
wastewater treatment and water supply (such as "public water and
public sewage services").
(8) Nuisances and safety. A description of any proposed industrial or
commercial operations or storage in sufficient detail to indicate
potential nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large trucks,
glare, air pollution, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant hazards to the public health and safety, together
with proposed methods to control such hazards and nuisances.
(9) Grading and stormwater.
(a) Proposed and existing contours if earth disturbance is
proposed.
(b) Identification of any slopes between 15% and 25% and greater
than 25% proposed to be impacted.
(c) Proposed method of managing stormwater runoff, complying
with Article X of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, regardless of whether the application would be a
subdivision or land development.
§ 190-201 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-201
186:809
(d) Delineation of any floodplains from the Official Floodplain
Maps.
(e) Areas of wetlands that may be affected by the proposed use.
(f) Concentrations of existing mature trees.
(10) A location map showing the relation of the project to surrounding
streets; and approximate lot lines of abutting lots within 50 feet of
the project, with identification of abutting land uses.
(11) Zoning district and major applicable requirements.
(12) Name, address and professional seal (if applicable) of the person
who prepared the site plan, the applicant and the owner of record
of the land.
(13) Such other data or information as the Zoning Officer deems is
reasonably necessary to determine compliance with Township
ordinances.
D. Site planning guidelines. The following advisory guidelines are
intended to assist applicants and the Township in developing wellplanned
developments.
(1) Natural features. Seek to minimize grading changes and removal of
mature trees. Seek to preserve the natural beauty of highly visible
areas. Seek to preserve land along creeks and steep hillsides.
(2) Circulation. Seek to separate pedestrian circulation from major
routes of vehicle traffic. Minimize the number of access points
along major roads. Avoid parking spaces backing into through
traffic routes. Ensure adequate capacity of driveways and drivethrough
lanes to avoid traffic backing onto streets.
(3) Utilities. Seek to place as many utility lines as possible
underground.
(4) Signs. Seek to minimize the lighting intensity of signs. Seek to
avoid signs with overly bright, less attractive colors. Consider use
of ground-mounted or wooden signs.
(5) Compatibility. Seek to locate noisier and less compatible uses (such
as loading docks) as far away from homes as possible. Seek to
screen out views of less attractive activities from streets and
homes.
E. Improvement requirements. Any use required to submit a site plan
under this section shall comply with Article X of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, entitled "Design Standards and
Required Improvements," regardless of whether the site plan involves a
subdivision or a land development.
§ 190-201 PALMER CODE § 190-202
186:810
§ 190-202. Minimum size of dwellings.
Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum of 1,000 square feet of
habitable, indoor, heated floor area, except such floor area may be as
follows:
§ 190-203. Traffic impact study.
A. Six hundred square feet for an apartment.
B. Seven hundred square feet for mobile/manufactured homes in an
approved mobile home park.
C. Five hundred square feet for dwelling units within a retirement village
or life care center.
A. Intent: to allow the Township to determine the safety and congestion
impacts, and related costs, of proposed major traffic generating uses; to
require that applicants respond with reasonable proposals to resolve
the negative traffic impacts that their proposed uses will cause on the
public; and to recognize that sufficient federal, state and municipal
funds are not available to resolve traffic problems caused by private
development.
B. Uses requiring traffic study. Any application for any of the following
new uses or expansion of existing uses shall be required to complete a
traffic study and include the findings in a written report. Such
requirement and report shall be based upon the aggregate total
development that can reasonably be expected in all phases of a
development.
(1) Residential: 80 or more new dwelling units.
(2) Commercial: 20,000 square feet or more of new or additional total
floor area.
(3) Office: 30,000 square feet or more of new or additional total floor
area.
(4) Industrial: 60,000 square feet or more of new or additional total
floor area or any truck terminal.
(5) Institutional: 30,000 square feet or more of new or additional total
floor area.
(6) Any use or combination of uses that would generally result greater
than 1,500 trips per day.
(7) Such uses where the Board of Supervisors determines that a traffic
study is needed to address a clearly accident-prone location.
C. Timing. Any required traffic study shall be submitted at the same time
or earlier as any preliminary plan, special exception, conditional use or
construction permit application, whichever is submitted earliest.
§ 190-202 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-203
186:811
D. Costs. The full costs of completing the study and of a review by the
Township Engineer or other Township representative shall be borne by
the applicant.
E. Study area. Prior to initiation of the traffic study, the traffic engineer or
planner shall meet with the Township Engineer to establish the area to
be studied. This area shall be limited to streets and intersections within
a maximum of one mile of the proposed project boundaries, except for a
use of more than 200,000 square feet of commercial floor area or any
use projected to generate more than 3,000 trips per day which shall
have a maximum study area of one mile from the project boundaries.
F. Joint studies. Joint traffic studies between different applicants are
strongly encouraged.
G. Fees. In place of individual traffic studies, the Township Supervisors
may require that an applicant provide a fee in lieu of a study. This fee
shall only be used towards the costs of traffic studies sponsored by the
Township. Any such fee shall be established by resolution or ordinance
of the Board of Supervisors.
H. Project description. Any study shall include a description of the
proposed development, its proposed access and the surrounding street
system. If a development is proposed to occur in stages, each stage
shall be described and taken into account in the study. If the applicant
owns other lands within the study area, reasonable assumptions shall
be made about how that land can be expected to be developed, and
shall be taken into account.
I. Existing traffic conditions. The traffic volumes and service levels during
the a.m. and p.m. peak hours shall be presented for all streets and
intersections in the study area that can reasonably be expected to be
significantly impacted. Traffic volumes shall be based upon actual
counts that occurred within the prior two years, and not upon state
estimates. The locations of all accidents reportable to the State Police
within the study area during a recent two-year period shall be noted.
J. Expected traffic generation. The study shall include an estimate of the
number of trips expected to be generated by the use and any future
stages during the a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Such estimates shall be
based upon the latest published estimates of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, or its successor entity, unless the applicant
provides the Township with estimates and supporting documentation
based upon actual traffic counts of closely similar developments in
Pennsylvania or New Jersey.
K. Projected effects. The study shall take into account not only the use
proposed by the applicant, but also other uses and developments that
have received building permits or preliminary subdivision or land
development approval from a municipality. The study shall project a.m.
and p.m. peak hour traffic volumes and levels of service on impacted
intersections and streets. If the traffic generation by the development
§ 190-203 PALMER CODE § 190-203
186:812
§ 190-204. Stormwater management.
All paved areas, uses and structures involving 3,000 square feet or more
of additional impervious coverage shall comply with the stormwater
management requirements of Article X of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, regardless of whether such paved area, use or
structure would be a subdivision or land development.
would be more than 50% greater during any hour other than the a.m.
or p.m. peak hour on adjacent streets, the study shall analyze both the
peak hours for the development and for adjacent streets. The study
shall project what directions the traffic generated will head towards.
L. Levels of service. The study shall estimate the levels of service (A, B, C,
D, E and F), for key traffic movements, including turning movements,
following the standards of the U. S. Department of Transportation.
M. Signal warrants. Heavily traveled intersections at entrances to the
development and other major unsignalized intersections in the study
area shall be studied to determine whether a traffic signal is warranted
by PennDOT criteria. Existing traffic signals that are significantly
impacted shall be studied to determine whether they are in need of
upgrading.
N. Needed improvements. The study may take into account traffic
improvements which are clearly funded and will occur within the next
four years. The study shall include suggestions for how each congested
or hazardous intersection in the study area should be improved to
reduce the hazard or congestion and a rough estimate of the cost of that
improvement.
O. Applicant's response. The applicant shall respond to the traffic study
with proposals on what traffic improvements, right-of-way dedications
or commitments of financing for specific projects the applicant
proposes to commit to resolve the negative traffic impacts of the
proposed development. Such improvements or financing may be staged
in relation to the stages of the development. The applicant may also
agree to commit towards the long-term support of a program to reduce
peak-hour traffic by private vehicles through programs such as van
pooling, support of mass transit or staggered work hours in place of
certain structural improvements.
P. Completion of improvements. Any traffic improvements that are
required as a condition of any approval under this ordinance or the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be in place or
sufficient funds committed in escrow acceptable to the Township prior
to the issuance of any needed occupancy permit, or within a staged
process agreed to at the time of approval.
§ 190-203 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-205
186:813
§ 190-205. Recreation land, open space and fees requirements.
See the requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The pre-existing recreation fee regulations of this section shall
continue to be in force for any use granted a zoning permit or building
permit at the time such regulation was in effect.
§ 190-206. Industrial and commercial driveways.
A driveway or accessway serving a principal business use shall be deemed
to be integral with such use and shall not be a permitted use in a residential
district. This restriction shall not apply to a driveway or accessway that will
be clearly limited to use by only emergency vehicles.
§ 190-205 PALMER CODE § 190-206
186:814
ARTICLE XX
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses
§ 190-207. Process for uses permitted by right with additional
requirements.
Each use that is listed in the applicable zoning district as a permitted
by right use and that also is listed in this Article XX shall comply with
the provisions in this Article in addition to the other requirements of this
ordinance. If two requirements specifically differ, the most restrictive
requirement shall apply. The determination of compliance shall be made by
the Zoning Officer. A site plan submission and review may also be required
under § 190-201.
§ 190-208. Process for conditional uses.
A. Purpose. Before a zoning permit can be issued for any use listed as a
conditional use in this ordinance, a site plan shall be submitted and the
proposed use shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
approved or disapproved by the Township Board of Supervisors. This
procedure is provided because of the considerable impact that these
uses tend to have on a community.
B. Procedure.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall deny a zoning permit for the proposed
development until written approval of the Board of Supervisors is
obtained.
(2) All applicants for a conditional use shall submit four sets of site
plans for the proposed use to the Zoning Officer as part of the
application for a zoning permit. The site plan requirement may be
waived by the Zoning Officer for uses not involving new
construction or expansion of buildings nor additional off-street
parking. Plans shall be submitted a minimum of 21 days prior to the
first Planning Commission meeting at which the plans are intended
to be discussed. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(3) All site plans shall contain the information listed in § 190-201,
unless otherwise stated.
(4) The Zoning Officer should forward one copy to the Planning
Commission within five days of receiving the submission, and the
Planning Commission after receiving such plans should consider
the matter at the next regular Planning Commission meeting.
(5) The Planning Commission shall be given an opportunity to provide
a written recommendation to the Board of Supervisors concerning
whether to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application. Such action may list proposed conditions. If
disapproval is recommended, the reasons should be stated. Any
recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be provided to
§ 190-207 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-208
186:815
the Board of Supervisors and be mailed to the last known address
of the applicant or hand delivered to the applicant.
(6) The conditional use applications shall be scheduled for a hearing at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors within
60 days of the date that the applicant filed his application for
conditional use with the Township. The Board of Supervisors shall
review the submission and the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, as well as the Township Engineer, along with any
other evidence presented at the time of hearing. At the close of the
hearing, the Board of Supervisors may decide to either approve the
application, disapprove the application, or approve the application
with conditions imposed. The hearing shall be stenographically
recorded. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(7) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be mailed to the applicant by ordinary mail at his or her last
known address not later than 45 days following the decision.
[Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(8) The applicant shall pay an application fee, as well as a deposit, in
accordance with the official fee schedule to be held in escrow to
cover the costs of a stenographer, advertising costs and other
reasonable costs incurred with having the plan reviewed by the
Township Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, and Board
of Supervisors. In addition, if an applicant appeals from the
decision of the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall be
responsible for paying for the costs of having a transcript of that
hearing produced and the Township shall pay for the cost of having
any copies made. (Fees to be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.) [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
C. Approval of conditional uses.
(1) Standards. The Board of Supervisors shall approve a proposed
conditional use if the Supervisors find adequate evidence that any
proposed use will meet:
(a) All of the standards listed in Subsections D and E.
(b) All of the specific standards for the proposed use listed in
§§ 190-210 and 190-211.
(c) All other applicable sections of this ordinance.
(2) Conditions. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors
may require such reasonable conditions and safeguards (in
addition to those expressed in this ordinance) as the Supervisors
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance
and to protect the public health and safety and to ensure
compatibility between differing land uses.
§ 190-208 PALMER CODE § 190-208
186:816
D. General standards. Each conditional use shall comply with all of the
following general standards:
(1) Conform with the spirit, purposes, intent and all applicable
requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Conform with all applicable provisions of all other Township
ordinances.
(3) Conform with all applicable state and federal laws, regulations and
requirements.
(4) Be suitable for the particular location in question.
(5) Not be detrimental to the public health, general welfare, safety or
morals.
(6) Not threaten significant damage to public or private property from
inadequate or improper stormwater management. This condition
shall not be basis of a decision under the Zoning Ordinance if the
use will be required to have a detailed stormwater management
plan approved by the Board of Supervisors under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
(7) Not significantly adversely threaten the desirable character of an
existing residential area.
(8) Not threaten a significant fire, explosive, public health or toxic
hazard or other hazard to public safety.
E. The following criteria shall be used as a guide in evaluating a proposed
conditional use:
(1) The presence of adjoining similar uses.
(2) The presence of an adjoining zoning district in which the use is
permitted.
(3) Sufficient area to effectively screen the conditional use from
adjacent uses that are not completely compatible.
(4) A lack of negative impacts on existing or potential permitted uses
of the district or neighboring areas, especially on abutting lots.
(5) The use of sufficient safeguards such as parking, traffic control,
screening and setbacks to resolve any potential adverse influences
the use may have on adjoining uses.
(6) See also Subsection F, regarding road capacity.
F. Road capacity, as a condition.
(1) Intent.
§ 190-208 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-208
186:817
§ 190-209. Process for reviewing special exceptions. [Amended
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(a) To ensure that the existing road network is able to handle
additional traffic from intensive types of development. This
section recognizes that state and federal funds are limited for
road improvements. This section is specifically based upon the
findings, goals, objectives and recommendations of the
Township Comprehensive Plan.
(b) This section specifically recognizes the threat of traffic hazards
that could be created by new left-hand turns onto minor
arterial roads at access points without traffic signals. It also
recognizes the many existing congested and hazardous
intersections as described in the Palmer Township
Comprehensive Plan, Background Studies and the Palmer
Township Transportation Plan.
(c) Of particular concern is the possibility of retail uses that would
generate intense traffic that would flow onto William Penn
Highway and Greenwood Avenue, a primarily residential
street. Also severe existing conflicts exist between residential
homes and commercial/generated traffic in the Seipsville area.
(2) A traffic impact report may be required by § 190-203 or be
volunteered by an applicant or by any interested party.
(3) The provisions of § 165-59M, entitled "Required traffic
improvements," of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, shall also apply to any conditional use
that involves construction of one or more new principal buildings.
(4) The Board of Supervisors shall review any professional traffic
studies that are presented. If these traffic studies provide
substantive evidence that the existing road system is unable to
handle the projected traffic at an acceptable level or that very
serious traffic hazards would be created, the Supervisors, after
reviewing any recommendations of the Planning Commission, the
Joint Planning Commission and the PA Department of
Transportation, may deny a conditional use application.
(5) In reviewing the ability of the road system to handle the projected
traffic, the Supervisors shall also consider commitments by a
development to partially or wholly fund needed road improvements
that would provide the needed road capacity and safety. Such
improvements may be funded in stages relating directly to the
stages of a development, with adequate provisions for
improvement guaranties.
§ 190-208 PALMER CODE § 190-209
186:818
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that could cause some potential conflicts with adjacent
uses or areas.
B. Procedure.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall deny a zoning permit for the proposed
development until written approval of the Zoning Hearing Board is
obtained.
(2) All applicants for a special exception use shall submit four sets of
site plans for the proposed use to the Zoning Hearing Board as part
of the application for a zoning permit. This may be waived by the
Zoning Officer for nonintensive home occupations and other uses
not involving new construction nor additional off-street parking.
(3) All site plans shall contain the information required in § 190-201,
except that engineering matters that will be addressed as part of a
future required land development or subdivision submittal need not
be provided in detail in a special exception application.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall forward one copy of the site plan to the
Planning Commission within five days of receiving the submission.
(5) The Zoning Officer shall, prior to the next regularly scheduled
Zoning Hearing Board meeting, review the plan to determine
compliance with this ordinance and submit a written report to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(6) All applications for special exceptions shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission of Palmer Township. The Planning
Commission shall be given an opportunity to provide a written
recommendation to the Zoning Hearing Board concerning whether
to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application.
Such action may list proposed conditions. If this approval is not
recommended, the reason should be stated. Any recommendation
of the Planning Commission shall be provided to the Zoning
Hearing Board and be mailed to the last known address of the
applicant or hand delivered to the applicant.
(7) The Board shall not decide the case without reviewing any reports
received from the Zoning Officer and Planning Commission that
may have been received. If such reports are not made, the Board
may still hold the hearing and decide the request.
(8) The Board shall hear and decide such request for a special
exception use under the procedures of Article XXI and the PA
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.237
237. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-209 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-209
186:819
§ 190-210. Additional requirements for conditional uses and special
exceptions. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-316]
(9) The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant by regular mail or in person within
45 days of the close of the hearing before the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(10) The applicant shall pay an application fee, as well as a deposit, in
accordance with the official fee schedule to be held in escrow to
cover the costs of a stenographer, advertising costs and other
reasonable costs incurred in connection with having the plan
reviewed by the Township Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer. Plans shall be submitted a minimum of 21 days prior to
the first Planning Commission meeting at which time the plans are
intended to be discussed. (Fees to be set by the Board of
Supervisors.)
C. Approval of special exception uses.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall approve any proposed special
exception use if it finds adequate evidence that any proposed use
will meet:
(a) All of the standards listed in § 190-208D and the guidelines in
§ 190-208E, which are hereby included by reference.
[Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
(b) All of the specific standards for the proposed use listed in
§§ 190-210 and 190-211.
(c) All other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
(2) In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those
expressed in this ordinance) as the Board may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this ordinance and to protect the public
health and safety and to ensure compatibility between differing
land uses.
D. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall automatically
become conditions of the building permit issued pursuant thereto, and
any failure to comply with said conditions shall be a violation of this
ordinance.
A. In addition to the general standards governing conditional uses and
special exceptions provided for in this ordinance, an applicant seeking
approval from the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors must
also demonstrate through the production of competent evidence that
the specific standards and conditions associated with the respective
individual uses have or will be satisfied.
§ 190-209 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:820
B. Additional requirements for conditional uses. In addition to the general
standards governing conditional uses, set forth in § 190-208, applicants
proposing to have approval of a conditional use application must satisfy
the following criteria for each of the following enumerated conditional
uses:
(1) Adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult live entertainment use.
(a) No such use shall be located within 500 linear feet of any
school, place of worship, public park, nature preserve, daycare
center or nursery school, public library, a LDR, MDR,
HDR, HDR-2, or C-R District or any site marked as a proposed
future park location on the Township Official Map.238
(b) No such use shall be located within 1,000 linear feet of any
existing adult bookstore, adult movie theater, massage parlor
or cabaret/live adult entertainment use.
(c) A forty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines in accordance with
Article XIX, but with plantings of twice the stated height.
(d) No obscene nor pornographic material or words shall be
placed in view of the general public. Definite precautions shall
be made to prohibit minors from entering the premises.
(e) The applicant must prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that such use would not in any way adversely
affect the character of the surrounding area, including
property values.
(f) No such use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or Township law. Any violation of this zoning
requirement involving a serious criminal offense that the
proprietor allows to occur shall be sufficient reason for the
Township to withdraw the zoning permit.
(g) See § 190-181, Signs prohibited in all districts.
(h) No such use shall be allowed in combination with the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(i) The use shall not include the sale or display of obscene
materials, as defined under the local community standards of
the Township.
(j) These uses are specifically prohibited in all districts except the
RA District.
(k) The use shall not include the sale or display of obscene
materials, as defined by state law.
238. The Official Map is on file in the township offices.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:821
(l) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(m) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate enclosed or
semi-enclosed booths or rooms of any kind are prohibited. No
room of any kind accessible to customers shall include less
than 150 square feet, except for a maximum of two rest rooms.
(n) All persons within the adult use shall wear nontransparent
garments that cover their genitals and female areola.
(o) All owners and partial owners for the adult use or the
shareholders of any corporation owning such use shall be
stated, together with the application for such use. Such
information shall list the full name, business and home address
and business and home telephone number. The application
shall also state the name, address and home telephone number
of the on-site manager, who shall be the primary person
responsible to ensure the day-to-day compliance with the
Township regulations. Any changes in such ownership or
manager shall be reported in writing to the Zoning Officer
within seven days.
(2) Airport, private or public; heliport. This use shall include air
landing strip, helipad, hangars, incidental maintenance and repair
and storage of fuel, provided the following regulations are met:
(a) Minimum lot area: 30 acres for an airport; five acres for a
heliport.
(b) The outside limits of the air landing strip shall be located 300
feet from any property line and from any public road.
(c) Runways shall be oriented to minimize the hazards and
disturbances posed by aircraft during takeoff and landing.
(d) The applicant shall show compliance with all regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, and shall have the approval of that agency and of any
other airstrip licensing agencies of the federal or state
government and the provisions of Section 706 of the Airport
Area Protection Standards.
(e) The flight paths proposed must be such that a noise hazard will
not be created to existing residences or approved residential
developments. The determination of what constitutes a noise
hazard shall be according to accepted standards in the
industry.
(f) No activity shall be permitted which will violate the regulations
of this ordinance or any other Township ordinance controlling
noise, dust, dirt, electrical disturbance, hazards or other
nuisances.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:822
(g) The end of any runway or heliport pad shall be a minimum of
1,000 feet from any existing residential use.
(h) All buildings associated with the airport, including hangars,
landing pads, warmup pads, refueling facilities, lights, etc.,
shall be placed at least 100 feet from the property line of the
lot.
(i) The applicant must show that the proposed facility will not
threaten the character of an existing residential neighborhood.
(j) The Board of Supervisors may place restrictions on the hours
of operation, maximum number of flights, and major paths of
approach as are deemed necessary and reasonable, provided
that such restrictions do not conflict with federal or state
safety regulations.
(3) Appropriate governmental facility.
(a) This use does not include: publicly owned recreation,
Township-owned use, office, nursing home, or solid waste
disposal facility.
(b) No government facility shall be allowed in an LDR, MDR, HDR
or HDR-2 District if the use has a primarily industrial
character.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the use will be compatible with the
surrounding uses.
(4) Auditorium, commercial or noncommercial, includes sports arena.
(a) A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure
and all off-street parking areas from any lot line of any
residential use or LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR II Districts.
(b) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property line shall be
minimized in accordance with § 190-61 of this ordinance.
(c) An applicant shall comply with the noise level standards of
§ 190-158.
(d) A commercial auditorium shall have a minimum lot area of one
acre per each 100 seats.
(e) The structure of a commercial auditorium shall be set back a
minimum of 400 feet from a residential lot line.
(f) Parking requirements. Such a use shall require one parking
space per four seats or one parking space per 250 square feet
of floor area accessible to patrons and/or users if seats are not
typically provided, plus one parking spot per employee.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:823
(g) The abovementioned provisions/conditions need not be
complied with if the proposed facility is owned by the Township
of Palmer or any agency of the Township.
(5) Auto wrecking. See "junkyard."
(6) Bottling industry. Central sewer service and central water service
shall be provided.
(7) Bus station/bus terminal/taxi terminal.
(a) The use shall be on a lot abutting an arterial or collector street
(as defined on the Official Street Classification Map).239
(b) The use shall provide an area for the loading and unloading of
buses separate from the required off-street parking areas.
(8) Car wash.
(a) Traffic flow and ingress - egress shall not cause traffic backups
on adjacent streets.
(b) Access points shall be limited to two on each lot.
(c) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be
clearly marked.
(d) Signs and outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with this
ordinance.
(e) Adequate provisions shall be made for proper and convenient
disposal of refuse.
(f) Central sewage service and central water service shall be
provided. On-site recycling of water shall be required.
(9) Commercial communications tower/antenna. This use is prohibited
in all residential zoning districts.
(a) A commercial communications tower shall be set back a
distance equivalent to half of the overall height of the tower
antenna from all property lines and street rights-of-way. The
applicant shall provide written certification from a professional
structural engineer stating that a tower over 35 feet in height
shall be constructed so as to collapse within the subject lot in
the event of a structural failure and/or severe windstorm.
(b) An applicant proposing to erect a new wireless
telecommunications tower shall provide documentary evidence
that a legitimate attempt has been made to locate the antenna
on existing buildings or structures. Such evidence shall include
a radio frequency engineering analysis of the potential
239. The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:824
suitability of existing building or structures in the search area
for such antennas and efforts to secure such locations proven
to have an acceptable correspondence between the wireless
telecommunications provider and the property owners of the
existing buildings or structures. The Township reserves the
right to engage a professional radio frequency engineer to
review such documentation. The fee for the professional radio
frequency engineer retained by the Township shall be paid for
out of the applicant's escrow funds.
(c) Applicants proposing to construct new wireless
telecommunications towers shall document the location of all
existing telecommunications towers within the Township of
Palmer and surrounding municipalities with coverage in the
Township, as well as the closest of such facilities in all
directions, and shall provide competent testimony by radio
frequency engineer regarding the suitability of a potential colocation
in light of the design of the wireless
telecommunications network. Where a suitable collocation on
an existing tower is found to exist, but an applicant is unable to
secure an agreement to collocate its equipment on such tower,
the applicant shall provide written evidence of correspondence
with the owner of such tower verifying the suitable space is not
available on the existing tower and giving the reasons
therefore.
(d) When an applicant proposing to construct a new wireless
telecommunications tower demonstrates a dissatisfaction with
the governing body that suitable locations on existing buildings
or structures either do not exist or are not available, the
applicant may erect a new telecommunications tower
according to the following requirements:
[1] Minimum lot size: two acres.
[2] Minimum setback of tower and equipment from any
property line and existing structure on the site: 1.0 x
height of tower and antenna.
[3] Maximum tower height and antenna with multiple
vendors: 140 feet.
(e) Antenna modifications, tower certification and abandonment.
[1] Operators of wireless telecommunications towers shall
provide to the Township of Palmer biennial reports from a
licensed professional engineer certifying the structural
integrity of the tower, together with all antennas mounted
thereon, and that such facilities meet the applicable
minimum safety requirements and applicable federal and
state radio frequency emission standards. Such reports
shall also be provided whenever antenna arrays are
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:825
modified and shall include a detailed listing of all antennas
and equipment so certified. Vendors shall also be required
to notify the Township of Palmer when the use of antennas
and/or equipment is discontinued.
[2] The landowner shall remove wireless telecommunications
towers that have not been in use for the wireless
telecommunications purposes for 12 months consecutively
or 12 months within any twenty-four-month period. This
removal shall occur within 90 days of the end of such
twelve-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be
cleaned, restored, and revegetated to blend with the
existing surrounding vegetation. The facility owner or
landowner shall post a bond in a form acceptable to the
Township Board of Supervisors or cash deposit at time of
site plan approval to cover the cost of tower removal and
site restoration. The amount of the bond or cash deposit
shall include anticipated cost escalations. Any and all
additional or unanticipated costs of the tower removal,
including the full cost in the event the bond has expired,
shall be the responsibility of the property owner or their
successors in title. The landowner's signature consenting
to the application shall indicate acceptance of such
responsibility under this subsection.
(f) Collocation required. Authorization for the construction of any
new wireless telecommunications tower shall be conditioned
on agreement by the tower owner that other wireless
telecommunications service providers will be permitted to
colocate antennas on the proposed tower and to collocate
equipment buildings within the limits of the structural and
radio frequency engineering requirements and at rates which
reflect the fair market value as determined by the Board of
Supervisors for such services. As part of any application for
new tower approval, the applicant shall document the extent to
which additional antennas could be accommodated, as well as
the ability to accommodate the equipment buildings for such
antennas within the equipment compound.
(g) Access. The equipment compound shall have improved access
driveways to a public street by means of a driveway
constructed in accordance with specifications acceptable to
the Township Engineer.
(h) Lighting. Security lighting shall be shielded and directed
downward and inward toward the equipment compound to
prevent direct light or glare from encroaching onto
neighboring properties and streets. Said lighting must be
activated by motion sensors and/or remote control to preclude
continuous lighting of the premises.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:826
(i) Soundproofing. All equipment, including emergency
generators, shall be located within a soundproof structure and
such that there will be no impact on existing sound levels
measured at the property lines. Mufflers for the generator's
exhaust shall have a sound-dampening device to be approved
by the Township.
(j) Visual compatibility requirements for the installation of
wireless telecommunications antennas.
[1] Wireless telecommunications antennas may be erected in/
on existing buildings or structures, and an equipment
compound may be constructed in support of such
antennas, consistent with the following requirements.
[2] Antenna arrays shall, wherever possible, be mounted on
existing buildings or structures but shall not extend
beyond the overall height of any such building or structure
by more than 20 feet.
[3] An equipment compound consisting of up to 750 square
feet in area may be erected in support of such antenna
arrays, provided:
[a] A chain link fence at least six feet and no more than
eight feet high shall surround the equipment
compound, which fence shall include a locking
security gate, as approved by the Township Engineer.
[b] The equipment compound shall be situated behind the
existing structures, buildings, or terrain features
which will shield the compound from public view; or
[c] The landscape buffer of 30 feet in width shall be
provided around the outside of the compound to
completely shield the building and fencing from public
view. (Note: It is not anticipated that the landscaping
will screen the tower structure). Landscaping shall
include evergreen trees at least 10 feet high at the
time of planting and planted in staggered double rows
15 feet on center.
[4] Antennas installed according to these provisions shall be
suitably finished and/or painted so as to minimize their
visual impact on the landscape. Depending on the
placement of the equipment, color shall be selected to be
consistent with the color scheme of the building or
structure on which the antennas are mounted in order
blend with the surrounding area. When this is not possible,
color selection shall be designed subject to the Board's
approval to minimize the visual impact of the antenna
arrays.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:827
[5] No wireless telecommunications antenna or equipment
compound may be constructed within 500 feet of any
residential use.
(k) Federal Communications Commission.
[1] Documentation that the commercial communications
company is licensed by the FCC shall be provided.
[2] Documentation of FCC approval for the proposed
commercial communications tower or antenna shall be
provided.
[3] Documentation demonstrating that the proposed
commercial communications tower or antenna complies
with all acceptable standards established by the FCC
governing human exposure to electro/magnetic or radio
frequency radiation shall be provided within 90 days of the
facility becoming operational. Such documentation shall
then be provided to the municipality on a biennial basis
from the date the facility becomes operational. The
municipality may secure the services of a qualified
independent radio frequency engineer to review the
documentation and conduct tests as necessary to verify
said documentation. The applicant's expert shall state in a
written report that the radio frequency radiation
measurements are accurate and either conform or not
conform to any and all FCC standards. Should the facility
not meet FCC standards, the municipality shall make a
formal complaint, in writing, to the FCC. The applicant
shall be copied on any complaint filed with the FCC by the
municipality.
(l) Coordination. The applicant for a proposed commercial tower
or antenna, located within a five-mile radius of an existing
airport, shall notify the airport, the FAA and PennDOT Bureau
of Aviation of its intent to place such structures. Any comments
received from the airport, the FAA and PennDOT Bureau of
Aviation shall be considered by the municipality in the
processing of the application for approval of the proposed
commercial communications tower or antenna.
(10) Commercial motor vehicle racetrack.
(a) Minimum lot size: 250 acres.
(b) This use shall not produce sound in excess of the noise levels
set forth in § 190-158 of this ordinance. This applies to noise
generated from engines or any amplifying device.
(c) Lighting shall not be perceptible beyond the property line.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:828
(d) The use shall also meet the other performance standards
within this ordinance pertaining to dust control.
(e) The use shall be completely surrounded by a buffer yard as
described in Article XIX, but with the plantings of a minimal
initial height of five feet abutting any residential district or lot.
Such planting shall be intended to have a minimum height of
seven feet within three years of planting.
(f) Area used for testing, warmup, or racing of race vehicle
engines shall be set back a minimum of 1,000 feet from a
building, including an existing dwelling unit, and 400 feet from
the boundary of all LDR, MDR, HDR and HDR-2 Districts.
(g) Parking requirements. One off-street parking space shall be
provided at one per four spectator seats (or one per 250 square
feet of floor area accessible to patrons and/or users if seats are
not typically provided) plus one off-street parking space for
each employee).
(h) The applicant must show that the proposed facility will not
threaten the character of an existing abutting residential
neighborhood.
(i) The Township may restrict the hours of operation.
(11) Cultural center/community center. This use shall include, but not
be limited to, an educational center, recreational facility, or other
similar facility operated by an educational, philanthropic, religious
institution, or homeowner's association, or a theater for the
performing arts or concert hall as an accessory use to a school and
shall be subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private, gainful business.
(b) No outdoor recreation area shall be closer than 50 feet to the
property line of any other use.
(c) Parking. No less than one off-street parking space for each of
the four seats provided for patrons use, or at least one offstreet
parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used
or intended to be used for service to customers, patrons,
clients, guests, or members, whichever requires the greater
number off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for
each employee.
(12) Drive-in (outdoor) theater.
(a) The use shall be on a lot abutting an arterial street or collector
street (as defined on the Official Street Classification Map240).
240. The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:829
(b) The use shall have a lot area of at least 15 acres.
(c) A buffer yard shall be provided complying with § 190-193.
(d) The use shall comply with the performance standards of Article
XVI specifically relating to noise, light and glare control.
(e) The movie screen shall be situated so that its face is not visible
from any public right-of-way.
(f) No structure, except an enclosure fence, shall be located
within 100 feet of any lot line; provided, however, that the
screen shall be located not less than 150 feet from any
residential lot line.
(g) Sufficient car stacking areas, deceleration lanes, sight distance
and lighting shall be provided for safe and expedient handling
of traffic. Stacking areas shall provide space for at least 25% of
theater capacity.
(h) A playground and snack shop will be permitted as an accessory
use.
(i) Films shall not be shown outdoors that are rated "X", or
otherwise regulated under § 190-210B(1).
(13) Financial institution. Financial institution shall include a bank,
savings and loan association, or other financial establishment.
(a) Any drive-through windows and approach lanes shall be
located to avoid traffic conflicts and hazards within the site and
along abutting streets.
(b) Where a drive-through window is proposed, a stacking lane(s)
shall be provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars. Total stacking
lane(s) shall not be used for parking lot circulation isles nor
shall it in any way conflict with through circulation of parking.
(14) Fuel oil company storage of flammable liquids.
(a) Mimimum lot area shall be two acres.
(b) No retail sales will be permitted on the premises.
(c) Such use shall be required to submit an impact statement
outlining the impact of the facility on the surrounding land
uses and the district. The impact statement must be deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors. Said impact
statements shall address the following issues:
[1] Air quality (control of emissions).
[2] Water quality (control of stormwater).
[3] Community appearance and safety.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:830
[4] Land use.
[5] Traffic and road safety.
[6] Historic features.
[7] Spill containment (width in and outside of diked area).
[8] Automated fire suppression or on-lot foam storage.
[9] Emergency incident plan.
(d) Such use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from a residential
property line.
(e) The use shall be in accordance with applicable federal, state
and local fire protection standards.
(f) Parking: See § 190-210B(33)(j).
(15) Golf course.
(a) Minimum lot area:
[1] Regulation, eighteen-hole: 150 acres.
[2] Executive eighteen-hole: 60 acres.
[3] Nine-hole: 50 acres.
[4] Par 3, eighteen-hole: 45 acres.
[5] Par 3: nine-hole: 25 acres.
(b) No fairway or green shall be located closer than 100 feet to an
existing residential lot or existing street right-of-way.
(c) A clubhouse and/or restaurant may be permitted as an
accessory use if located a minimum of 300 feet from the lot line
of an existing dwelling.
(d) A golf course shall not include any exterior lighting for the
purposes of nighttime golfing within the LDR, MDR, HDR or
HDR 2 Districts.
(e) The maximum building coverage shall be 10% and the
maximum impervious coverage 15%.
(f) No hole shall require play over a public or private street.
(g) Parking requirements: four spaces per hole, two spaces for
seats in clubhouse restaurant.
(16) Hospital. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use is
an establishment, licensed by the American Hospital Association,
which provides health services primarily for inpatient medical or
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:831
surgical care of the sick or injured, including related facilities,
such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities,
central service facilities, and staff offices as integral parts of the
establishment. This does not contemplate a building which is used
primarily for the care of mental infirmities. The hospital is subject
to the following additional provisions:
(a) The use shall be located on a lot with its main access onto an
arterial or collector street as defined by the Official Street
Classification Map.
(b) At least two access roads of at least 30 feet in width shall be
provided from abutting streets.
(c) The use shall have a minimum lot size of three acres.
(d) The site shall be served by public water and sewer.
(17) Hotel/motel.
(a) The use must have a direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
(b) Units in such facilities shall contain a minimum of 200 square
feet of floor space, with a minimum of two rooms, a bedroom
and a separate bathroom equipped with a flush water closet, a
lavatory basin, and a bathtub or shower, all properly connected
to a public water and sewer system.
(c) Recreation facilities primarily directed towards guests of the
use and a restaurant may be permitted as an accessory use to a
hotel or motel.
(d) A hotel or motel shall serve only temporary guests. A use that
is routinely inhabited by any persons for periods longer than 60
days shall be considered a boardinghouse and regulated as
such.
(18) Junkyard.
(a) Storage of organic material is prohibited.
(b) All stored materials shall be at least 200 feet from any
adjoining residential lot line or 100 feet from any other lot line
or existing street right-of-way.
(c) The site shall contain one entrance and one exit, each of which
is not less than 25 feet in width.
(d) The site shall be completely enclosed by a forty-foot-wide
buffer yard, regardless of zoning district, which complies with
the standards of Article XIX, but with trees and shrubs of an
initial minimum height of five feet.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:832
(e) The burning or incineration of vehicles or stored materials
shall be prohibited.
(f) All junkyards shall also comply with all other township
ordinances.
(g) All junkyards shall be surrounded by a solid wood, chain link
metal or fiberglass fence or decorative brick wall to prevent
uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent
properties. Such barrier shall be not less than eight feet in
height and maintained in good condition.
(h) No materials stored within a junkyard shall be visible from
abutting residential lot lines. This shall be accomplished by
fencing that is compatible with the character of the area and
with the screening within the buffer yard.
(i) No use shall produce noise or dust in violation of Article XVI.
(19) Livestock, raising of.
(a) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(b) No new barns, animal shelters, stables or feed yards or manure
storage areas or additions thereto shall be located closer than
500 feet to existing residential uses or LDR, MDR, HDR or
HDR-2 District boundaries and to existing restaurant and office
uses and no closer than 150 feet to all other exterior lot lines.
(20) Mineral extraction (includes but is not limited to open pit mining).
(a) The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions
hazardous or otherwise adverse to the value and productive
use and enjoyment of adjacent properties or to the character of
the surrounding area.
(b) The site shall be reclaimed to a nonhazardous state permitting
some economically productive future use. The extracting
activities and resulting condition of the site shall not result in
environmental degradation of the surrounding area. The
reclamation plan shall include a phasing plan that ties the
timing of initiation of certain excavation activities in certain
areas to specific reclamation achievements of other areas.
(c) A buffer yard shall completely enclose the site, regardless of
zoning district, complying with the standards of § 190-194
(except such buffer yard shall be at least 50 feet in width).
Such buffer yard may be incorporated into any earth berm. Any
extracting activities shall be set back from all exterior lot lines
(including existing street rights-of-way) a minimum of 100 feet
and all dwellings a minimum of 250 feet (or such greater
distance as may be required by site conditions) to protect
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:833
adjacent properties as determined necessary by the Board of
Supervisors.
(d) Unique or environmentally significant natural features and
significant historic or architectural structures and sites shall
be protected from disruption or adverse effects from quarrying
and/or mining activities.
(e) The proposal shall be submitted to the County Conservation
District for a review. The Township may require reasonable
measures as are necessary to prevent serious soil erosion and
sedimentation or groundwater pollution.
(21) Mobile/manufactured home.
(a) Any mobile/manufactured home placed anywhere in the
Township shall have been constructed in accordance with the
Safety and Construction Standards of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(b) The use shall have the site graded to provide a stable and welldrained
area.
(c) The use shall have the hitch mechanism removed. The axles
and wheels shall either be removed or screened from view.
(d) The use shall be placed on a permanent foundation as
described by the following, or according to another system that
complies with the Township Building Code241 or that is
specifically currently recommended in writing by the
manufacturer of the home:
[1] The foundation system shall consist of ten-inch diameter
concrete piers, concrete footing perpendicular to the main
longitudinal frame, or equivalent, and shall be installed
from ground level to below the frost line (36 inches
minimum). This foundation system shall be placed on
approximately eight-foot centers (unless another length is
specified by the manufacturer) along each of the two main
longitudinal frames for each section of the home with no
more than three feet overhang at each end of the section.
[2] Eyebolts 1/2 inch in diameter by 12 inches long shall be
cast in place at each corner and at two midpoints in the
concrete piers, concrete footing or equivalent. Concrete
blocks shall be used to support the home on the foundation
system and wood shims may be used for final leveling. The
concrete support blocks shall not be wider than the
support foundation.
241. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:834
[3] The mobile/manufactured home shall be securely
anchored or tied down with cable and turn buckles or
equivalent connecting the frame to the cast-in-place
eyebolts on at least four corners and two midpoints. The
tiedown shall also be in accordance with the
manufacturers' recommendations furnished with each
home.
[4] Homes shall not be placed more than four feet above the
supporting ground area.
(e) The use shall be enclosed from the bottom of the home to the
ground or stand using either industry recommended skirting
material compatible with the home or masonry walls
underneath the home with backfilling of soil to result in the
ground level being flush with the first floor elevation, with a
sufficient opening for routine maintenance of utility
connections.
(f) The use shall have a pitched roof.
(g) The use shall comply with the requirements of § 190-202
relating to dwelling size.
(h) The use should be located with the longest side facing the
public street.
(22) Mobile home/manufactured home park.
(a) The use shall have a minimum tract size of 15 acres, a
maximum overall density of no more than five mobile homes
per acre, and a maximum tract size of 100 acres.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have both central sewer and water
service, unless on a lot one acre or larger and has approved
water and septic.
(c) The use shall have a thirty-foot-wide buffer yard with
evergreen screening meeting the requirements of § 190-194.
See the shade tree requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. See § 190-194.
(d) The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(e) All mobile homes shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
another mobile home and 70 feet from any residential lot line.
(f) Setback distances measured from the future and existing rightof-
way line shall be as follows:
[1] From major arterial streets: 80 feet.
[2] From minor arterial streets: 50 feet.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:835
[3] From public collector and local streets: 30 feet.
[4] From private streets, access drives and parking courts: 20
feet.
(g) The common open space requirements of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance shall apply. If a mobile home
park is not restricted to older persons, this recreation area
shall include a developed children's playground with
equipment approved by the Township Recreation Board and an
open grass free play area. If the mobile home park is restricted
to older persons, the recreation area shall be developed with
paths and benches. The recreation area shall be landscaped.
(23) Distribution centers. See § 190-210B(33). The standards listed for
trucking company terminal shall apply to distribution centers.
(24) Public utility. Such use shall include a transformer station,
pumping station, relay station, power generator, tower,
(transmission or relay) substation, and any similar or related
installation, not including a public incinerator and public or private
landfill. The applicant must establish compliance with the following
provisions:
(a) Such installation is essential to serve the Township of Palmer.
(b) No public business office or any storage yard or storage
building is operated in connection with the use.
(c) No facility nor projecting area thereof as viewed in the plan
view shall occupy greater than 10% of the property upon which
it is located.
(d) A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided along all property
lines.
(e) There shall be an impact statement which shall evaluate the
impact of the proposed land use on the district and on the
surrounding land uses. The impact statement must be deemed
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors. Said statement shall
address the following issues:
[1] Air quality.
[2] Water quality.
[3] Community appearance.
[4] Vegetation.
[5] Land use.
[6] Traffic and road safety.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:836
[7] Historical features.
(f) Unless preempted by the Pennsylvania Public Utilities
Commission, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that the use would be compatible with
surrounding uses.
(g) Parking: no less than two off-street parking spaces or one
space per employee, whichever requires the greater number of
spaces.
(25) Recycling collection center.
(a) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of solid waste
disposal facility.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures to prevent the attraction of
insects or rodents and to avoid any fire hazards.
(c) Such facility shall have adequate provision for servicing by
truck and off-street parking.
(d) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 190-194 shall be provided between this use and any directly
abutting residence or LDR, MDR or HDR or HDR-2 District.
(e) This use may be an accessory use to a commercial use, a
municipal use or a place of worship, subject to the limitations
of this section.
(f) Materials to be collected shall be of the same general
character as the following materials: paper, cardboard,
aluminum, fabric and glass, yard waste, and scrap metal.
(26) Sanitary landfill, waste energy plants, transfer stations.
(a) Landfills.
[1] A landfill shall be owned and operated by Palmer Township
or a municipal authority designated by Palmer Township to
operate it.
[2] The minimum lot area shall be 100 acres.
[3] The construction and operation of a sanitary landfill shall
not be permitted unless a permit for such landfill has been
issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the landfill is constructed and operated in
full compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
and if the provisions of this subsection are less restrictive
than any present or future rules or regulations of the
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:837
Department, the more restrictive department rules and
regulations shall supercede and control in the operation of
such solid waste landfill.
[4] A solid waste landfill operation shall be under the direction
at all times of a responsible individual who is qualified by
experience or training to operate a landfill.
[5] Burning of solid waste is prohibited at a landfill. Special
measures shall be taken to prevent fires by means and
devices mutually agreeable to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the
Township.
[6] Gaseous and particulate emissions from the landfill site
shall conform to the prevailing federal, state and local air
pollution control codes and regulations.
[7] Direct access shall be taken from an arterial or collector
highway. No more than one access road shall be
constructed to the entrance to the landfill. The access road
shall be an all-weather paved surface road negotiable by
and capable of supporting loaded solid waste collection
vehicles. All existing public roads shall be kept mud-free.
[8] A vehicle cleaning area shall be provided on site. All
vehicles and trucks leaving the landfill shall be cleaned.
Runoff from the vehicle cleaning area shall be controlled
and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal,
state and/or Township standards. All water used in the
operation shall be recycled.
[9] An equipment cleaning area shall be provided on site. All
equipment used to grade and compact solid waste at the
landfill shall be cleaned daily. Runoff from the equipment
cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in
accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or
Township standards. All water used in the operation shall
be recycled.
[10] Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times
when an attendant is on duty. Unloading of waste shall be
continuously supervised. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every solid
waste plan fill shall be protected by locked barricades,
fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny
access to the area at unauthorized times or locations. Such
barricade, fence or gate shall be at least six feet high and
shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted in a
uniform color.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:838
[11]No site activities shall be permitted on Sundays or legal
holidays. Dumping shall be permitted only between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. No vehicles shall be
staged or parked at the entrance and/or access road of the
landfill prior to 6:30 a.m. Overnight parking shall be
prohibited.
[12] Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris. The
entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter
of the landfill shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis.
[13] Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including
but not limited to, highly flammable materials, explosives,
corrosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials,
shall not be disposed of in a solid waste landfill.
[14] Disposal of sewage liquids and solids and other liquids
shall be specifically prohibited in a solid waste landfill.
[15] Salvaging of materials as permitted by law shall be
conducted by the operator only and shall be organized so
that it will not interfere with the prompt sanitary disposal
of waste or increase unsightly conditions or health
hazards. The storage of salvage shall be controlled in a
manner that will not permit the inhabitation or
reproduction of deleterious vectors.
[16] The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded
and provided with drainage facilities to minimize runoff
onto and into the fill, to prevent erosion or washing of the
fill, to drain off rainwater onto the fill, and to prevent the
collection of standing water. The operator shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 75 and Chapter 102 of
Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, and applicable Township
ordinances so that there is no adverse off-site impact from
the drainage of surface water. Cracks in, depressions in,
and/or erosion of covers shall be repaired daily.
[17] Operation of any solid waste landfill shall at all times be in
full compliance with the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,
Act 157 of 1980, as amended.
[18] An operation permit shall be obtained from the Township
on an annual basis on or before June 1.
[19] A final inspection of the entire site shall be made by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
the Township and their authorized representatives to
determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications before the earthmoving equipment is
removed from the site. Any necessary corrective work
shall be performed before the solid waste landfill project is
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:839
accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made for
the repair of all cracks, eroded and uneven areas in the
final cover during the first two years following completion
of the solid waste landfill. A bond shall be posted to ensure
that all corrective work is completed.
[20] Initial application for a solid waste landfill shall be
accompanied by impact statements. A plan for the reuse of
the land shall be submitted, in writing, to the Palmer
Township Board of Supervisors at the time of application
for permit. The plan shall be in compliance with the
prevailing zoning at the time of the application.
[21] Maximum active dumping areas shall be three acres.
Continued operation of the landfill shall be subject to
compliance with all state and Township regulations
pertaining to landfill.
[22]No operation activity, use or occupation of any type shall
be carried on within 300 feet of any property line of the
landfill or within 300 feet of any street right-of-way. In
addition, a landfill should not be located within 300 feet of
any residential zoning district or occupied residential
dwelling unit.
[23] The storage of fuel to be used on the landfill site shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and township
regulations.
[24] A chain link fence with a minimum height of 15 feet shall
be erected along all boundary lines of the area which is
approved for operational use as a sanitary landfill by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
The fence shall not contain openings greater than four
square inches and shall contain, at all entrances, gates
which arc locked except during the operation hours.
[25] A fifty-foot wide buffer yard shall surround completely all
areas approved for operational use as a sanitary landfill by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The buffer yard shall consist of a dense
evergreen screen and is to be located and maintained
along all boundary lines of the landfill, except at the
entrances. The selected evergreens shall have a minimum
height of 12 feet and shall be staggered on twelve-foot
centers.
[26] The landfill shall contain an on-site scale, and all solid
waste materials delivered to the site shall be weighed and
recorded pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act, as amended. All weigh receipts shall be
submitted to the Township on a quarterly basis.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:840
(b) Resource recovery facilities, composting plants, waste to
energy plants, and transfer stations.
[1] Resource recovery facilities, composting plants, waste to
energy plants and transfer stations shall be owned and
operated by the Township of Palmer or a municipal
authority designated by the Township to operate it.
[2] The minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
[3] Parking area shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line.
[4] Operation of the facility shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection and the
provisions of this ordinance. In the event that any of the
provisions of this ordinance are less restrictive than any
present or future rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the more
restrictive Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations shall supercede and control.
[5] Gaseous and particulate emissions from this facility shall
conform to the prevailing federal, state, and local air
pollution control codes and regulations. All exhaust air
from the facility shall be captured and treated in a
pollution control device (e.g., carbon absorber, scrubber,
etc., of such efficiency that there is no odor detected at the
discharge of the control device.)
[6] Direct access shall be taken from an arterial or collector
highway. No more than one access road shall be
constructed to the entrance of the area. The access road
shall be an all-weather paved surface road negotiable by or
capable of supporting loaded collection vehicles. All
existing public roads shall be kept mud-free.
[7] A vehicle cleaning area shall be provided on site. All
vehicles leaving the facility shall be cleaned. Runoff from
the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in
accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or
Township standards. All water shall be recycled.
[8] An equipment cleaning area shall be provided on site.
Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall be
controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent
federal, state, and/or Township standards.
[9] Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times
when an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:841
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every resource
recovery facility and transfer station shall be protected by
locked barricades, fences, gates, or other positive means
designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times
or locations. Such barricade, fence or gate shall be at least
six feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly
painted in a uniform color.
[10]No site activity shall be permitted on legal holidays.
Dumping shall be permitted only between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. No vehicles shall be staged or
parked at the entrance and/or access road of the landfill
prior to 6:30 a.m. Overnight parking shall be prohibited.
[11] Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris. The
entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter
of the facility shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis.
[12] Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including
but not limited to, highly flammable materials, explosives,
corrosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials,
shall not be disposed of at the facility.
[13] Disposal of sewage liquids and solids and other liquids
shall be specifically prohibited.
[14] All parts of the process unloading, handling and storage of
municipal solid waste shall occur within the building.
There shall be a four-inch curb around the unloading area
to capture all liquid (leachate). All liquid within the
unloading area must be controlled and disposed of in
accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or
Township standards. However, certain separated
recyclable materials such as glass, aluminum and other
materials may be stored outdoors. The storage of paper
shall be within the building. Any materials stored outdoors
shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from any
adjacent streets or property. No materials shall be placed
or deposited to a height greater than the height of the
fence or wall herein prescribed.
[15]No municipal solid waste shall be stored at a transfer
station for more than 72 hours.
[16] A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste
during a facility shutdown must be submitted to the
municipality and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
[17]Waste from the resource recovery facility, composting or
waste to energy process (such as, but not limited to ash
from an incinerator) shall be stored in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried from the site by wind or
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:842
water. This process waste shall be located at least 200 feet
from any property line and stored in leakproof containers.
Such process waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary
resource recovery facility approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or in another
manner approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
[18] Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any
materials are not permitted under this use.
[19]No use shall emit noise in such quantity as to be audible
beyond its lot lines.
[20] An operational permit shall be renewed on an annual basis
on or before June 1.
[21]No operation, activity, use, or occupation of any type shall
be carried on within 200 feet of any property line or facility
or within 200 feet of any street right-of-way. In addition, a
facility shall not be located within 300 feet of any
residential zoning district or occupied residential dwelling
unit.
[22] The facility shall be under the direction at all times of a
responsible individual who is qualified by experience or
training to operate such a facility.
[23] The storage of fuel to be used at the facility site shall be in
accordance with all applicable state and Township
regulations.
[24] A chain link fence with a minimum height of 15 feet shall
be erected along all boundary lines of the area which is
approved for the operational use by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The fence shall
not contain openings greater than four square inches and
shall contain, at all entrances, gates which are locked
except during operating hours.
[25] A fifty-foot wide buffer yard shall surround completely all
areas approved for operational use as a sanitary landfill by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The buffer yard shall consist of a dense
evergreen screen and is to be located and maintained
along all boundary lines of the facility, except at the
entrances. The selected evergreens shall have a minimum
height of six feet and shall be staggered on ten-foot
centers.
[26] The facility shall include an on-site scale, and all solid
waste materials delivered to the site shall be weighed and
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:843
recorded pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act, as amended. All weight receipts shall be
submitted to the Township on a quarterly basis.
(27) School, public or private. [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-369]
(a) The minimum tract area shall be 10 acres. In the event that the
tract area of a site falls below the minimum tract requirement,
then further conditional use approval shall need to be obtained
from the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Access to and from the proposed site shall be onto an arterial
or collector road as defined by the Official Street Classification
Map or via a route to an arterial or collector road as approved
by the Township.
(c) Outdoor play areas shall be screened so as to protect adjacent
residential neighborhoods from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances.
(d) Accessory uses and/or structures may be located on separate
lots within the primary tract.
(e) The tract shall provide for an off-street bus management and
vehicular drop-off area to accommodate the delivery and pickup
of students at the site as set forth on a plan reviewed by the
Township Engineer and ultimately approved by the Township.
(f) Adequate provisions for pedestrian access to the site shall be
provided to the satisfaction of the Township.
(g) Any vehicle maintenance area shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] All repair and paint work shall be performed within an
enclosed building.
[2] All provisions shall be made to prevent noise, odor,
vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent lots.
[3] Outdoor storage of autos and other vehicles shall only be
in back of the front yard line and shall be no closer than 20
feet to side and rear lot lines.
[4] Outdoor storage of auto parts and junk shall be prohibited.
[5] Service bay doors shall not face abutting existing primarily
residential uses in an LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District.
(h) To the extent the applicant proposes any storage of materials
as an accessory use, the applicant must comply with the offstreet
loading requirements set forth in § 190-170 of this
ordinance.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:844
(i) Any portion of the buildings on the tract which are below the
one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be limited to storage
use only.
(j) The applicant must demonstrate that all buildings on the tract
shall be accessible in the event of the one-hundred-year storm.
(k) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township that the proposed structures on the tract shall be
located at a safe distance away from hazardous materials or
toxic substances on neighboring properties.
(28) Self-storage development.
(a) All storage units shall be water-resistant and meet Township
building codes.242
(b) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles,
campers and boats on trailers parked on paved areas. All such
items stored out of doors must be licensed and inspected (if
applicable).
(c) Trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or flammable materials,
hazardous substances, animal, animal carcasses or skins, or
similar items shall not be stored, except for garbage that is
generated on-site.
(d) No items or vehicles shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or driveway areas.
(e) Commercial repairing of boats, vehicles, trailers, lawn mowers
or any similar equipment shall not be permitted, unless such
use is also permitted.
(f) Adequate lighting shall be provided to illuminate the area, but
directed away or shielded to direct light away from adjacent
uses.
(g) All outdoor storage areas shall be adequately screened from
view from arterial streets, collector streets and residential lot
lines.
(h) The use may include a single-family dwelling unit for the
housing of an operator/caretaker and his/her family.
(29) Slaughterhouse.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) The buildings where slaughters take place shall not be located
closer than 300 feet to any lot lines except the dwelling of the
owner or lessee, and no closer than 600 feet to an existing
242. Editor's Note: See Chapter 55, Building Code.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:845
dwelling or the boundary of an LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-2
District.
(c) The slaughterhouse shall comply with all applicable state and
federal regulations.
(d) The facility must be served by public water and public sewer.
(e) All surface water runoff from the site must be treated before
being discharged to a surface water receptor.
(30) Solid waste disposal area or facility.
(a) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the proposed use has been included in the
approved Solid Waste Plan of the County of Northampton.
(b) Recycling collection centers are not regulated under this term,
although any lawful solid waste disposal facility may include a
recycling collection center.
(c) All solid waste shall be at least 300 feet from any public
highway, street or exterior lot line.
(d) The area to be approved for a solid waste disposal area shall be
a minimum of 500 feet from any LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-2
District or any existing residential use that the applicant does
not have an option to buy.
(e) The site shall contain a sufficient number of access points,
each of which is not less than 30 feet in width. All entrances
shall be secured by a gate.
(f) Any burning or incineration shall be carried out in a completely
enclosed incinerator approved by the DEP, and all material to
be incinerated shall be stored in an enclosed structure.
(g) The site shall be selected and designed by a registered
professional engineer with proven experience in solid waste
disposal planning and operation. The operation and day-to-day
maintenance of the solid waste disposal area shall comply with
all applicable state and federal regulations.
(h) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
(i) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the existing street network can handle the
additional truck traffic, especially without bringing trash
hauling trucks through residential areas.
(j) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the proposed use would not impact negatively
on residential homes or neighborhoods.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:846
(k) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the use would not be a hazard to groundwater
quality, create noxious odors or in any way violate the
performance standards of Article XIV.
(l) Adequate fencing, screening, earth berms, and landscaping
shall be required by the Board of Supervisors.
(m) A minimum lot area of 50 acres is required for any solid waste
facility other than a resource recovery facility. For a resource
recovery facility, a minimum lot area of 15 acres shall be
required.
(n) The applicant shall provide such information as necessary for
the Board of Supervisors to determine that no significant
health or environmental hazard shall be created. See also
§ 190-165, Studies to determine conformance to performance
standards.
(o) A copy of all correspondence to and from the Pennsylvania DEP
concerning the proposed use and its operations shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Zoning Officer at such time.
Compliance with state and federal regulations shall be an
ongoing condition of any township approval.
(p) Under the authority of State Act 101 of 1988,243 the Board of
Supervisors may establish such reasonable limits on hours of
operations of uses that are perceptible from residential lot
lines to ensure compatibility with such uses.
(31) Tank farm. The use shall meet the applicable outdoor storage
control provisions of § 190-156 and standards for such use of the
National Fire Protection Association.
(32) Treatment center.
(a) The applicant shall provide a written description of all of the
types of residents the use is intended to include over the life of
the permit. Any future additions or modifications to this list
shall require approval by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that such use will involve adequate supervision
and security measures to protect public safety. The Board of
Supervisors may impose specific conditions regarding the type
of security system to be in place to prevent any potential
threats to the community at large from residents leaving the
facility without supervision.
243. See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:847
(c) The Board of Supervisors may place conditions on the general
use if necessary to protect public safety.
(d) A treatment center may occur as an accessory use to a
permitted and approved hospital that has a minimum lot area
of 20 acres.
(e) Any expansion of the facility structures or number of occupants
shall be subject to conditional use review and approval.
(f) The facility may not house adults convicted of a crime or
juveniles adjudicated delinquent.
(g) The Board of Supervisors may limit the number of occupants to
be housed within the facility.
(33) Trucking company terminal.
(a) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(b) The use shall only be located along a minor arterial or collector
road with direct access to a limited access highway. The major
potential routes of heavy truck traffic must not pass through
predominantly residential areas. Any existing roadway which
will receive additional truck traffic shall be analyzed by the
applicant to determine the pavement's structural adequacy to
support the increased vehicular loading. Pavement structure
upgrades shall be required as determined to be necessary by
the Township Engineer.
(c) All truck parking, outdoor storage or loading or unloading
areas shall be separated from public streets and any abutting
dwelling or residential zoned boundary by a sixty-foot buffer
yard within the provisions of § 190-194. In addition, any
tractor-trailer parking, outdoor storage and/or loading/
unloading areas that are visible from and are within 300 feet of
exterior lot lines of the use shall be separated from the lot lines
by a stabilized, landscaped earthen berm. The berm shall meet
the following conditions:
[1] The average height shall be a minimum of either eight feet
above adjacent average ground level (disregarding
drainage channels) outside the berm or one foot above the
associated parking/storage/loading area, whichever is
higher.
[2] The top of the berm shall not have a single continuous
height but shall vary in height (one to two feet height
variations). The top of the berm shall have a minimum
width of five feet.
[3] The berm shall have a maximum side slope of three
horizontal to one vertical.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:848
[4] The berm shall be covered by topsoil and a properly
maintained "all-seasons" natural ground cover, such as an
appropriate grass.
(d) Any access road, truck parking, outdoor storage, or loading/
unloading areas shall be a minimum of 300 feet from a
principally residential use or residential zone boundary.
(e) The use shall be located within a one-mile radius of an
interchange to Rt. 33.
(f) The use shall include a system to contain, separate and
properly dispose of any fuel, oils, or similar pollutants that may
spill or leak where such substances are stored or where
vehicles are fueled, repaired, or maintained. This system shall
be in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations,
including but not limited to International Plumbing Code-2000,
NPDES, PADEP, NFPA, etc.
(g) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 80
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(h) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
(i) All truck parking, outdoor storage or loading and unloading
areas shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from any existing
residential building.
(j) Parking: no less than 10 off-street parking spaces for every
nine employees, or one space for every 470 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever requires the greater number of spaces,
plus one space for each company vehicle normally stored on
the premises. All parking shall be screened in accordance with
this ordinance.
(34)Warehouse or wholesale sales.
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum standards
of this ordinance and in unique situations shall be provided
according to maximum standards of the industry for the
specific type of warehouse.
(b) Truck or rail access and operations shall not conflict with the
convenience and safety of auto traffic and parking.
(c) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or flammable
materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or
skins or similar items shall be permitted.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:849
(d) Uses that would involve more than 40 tractor-trailer trips in
any twenty-four-hour period shall be required to meet the
additional standards in this section for trucking company
terminal. A trip shall be defined as one arrival at or one
departure from the facility.
(35) Mental health care facility.
(a) Applicant shall provide a written description of the types of
residents and the services provided at the facility. Any future
additions or modifications to this list shall require the Board of
Supervisors approval, as a conditional use.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that such use will involve adequate supervision
and security measures to protect public safety. The Board of
Supervisors may impose specific conditions regarding the type
of security system to be in place to prevent any potential
threats to the community at large from residents leaving the
facility without permission and supervision.
(c) The Board of Supervisors may place conditions on the general
use, if necessary, to protect public safety.
(d) Applicant will be responsible to meet any and all applicable
federal and state regulations.
(e) All residents must be diagnosed with a mental infirmity by a
licensed physician.
(f) This facility may not house individuals who have been
convicted of a crime or adjudicated delinquent.
(36) Active adult development. Any active adult development shall meet
the following requirements: [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-315; amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-327]
(a) Purposes. To provide housing and related private recreational
facilities for persons primarily age 55 and older. To recognize,
that compared to housing that is not age-restricted, the
average household of persons aged 55 and older without minor
children does not create burdens upon the public school
system, creates little demand for athletic fields, generates less
traffic, involves lower water and sewage flows and needs fewer
parking spaces.
(b) The following dwelling types shall be allowed within an active
adult development: single-family detached dwellings, singlefamily
semidetached dwellings and townhouses. A minimum of
30% of the total dwelling units shall be single-family detached
dwellings. A maximum of 20% of the total dwelling units shall
be townhouses. To ensure compatibility, only single-family
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:850
dwelling units shall be allowed within 300 feet from an existing
single-family detached dwelling. This three-hundred-feet
provision shall only apply from single-family detached
dwellings that existed on the effective date of this ordinance.
(c) An active adult development shall require the condominium
association to maintain commonly owned areas, private streets
and other common facilities. All residents of the development
shall be required to pay necessary fees to the condominium
association, with a proper enforcement mechanism as provided
by state law.
(d) All internal streets shall be privately owned and maintained.
The cartway shall be a minimum of 28 feet in width. Curb shall
be required. Sidewalks shall be required along primary streets
on one side of the street. Curb and sidewalk shall be required
along existing public streets adjacent to the active adult
development.
(e) Each dwelling unit shall be owned as a unit within a
condominium without individual lot lines.
(f) Each dwelling unit shall be served by public water and public
sewage services.
(g) The minimum tract size shall be 30 acres, which shall be
controlled by a single entity at the time of the subdivision and
land development application.
(h) Perimeter planting areas. The perimeter of an active adult
development tract adjacent to public streets shall be a
landscape planting and lawn area with a minimum width of 20
feet along the length of such public streets. This planting area
shall be outside of any required future/ultimate street right-ofway
but may overlap a required setback. No buildings shall be
permitted in the planting area. The quality, type, size and
spacing of the plantings shall be in accordance with
§ 190-194D. This planting area shall observe the clear sight
triangle requirements of § 190-194C. This planting area shall
follow a planting plan that is submitted to the Township for
approval. This planting area shall be maintained by the
condominium association.
(i) Density.
[1] The maximum density shall be determined based upon the
following calculations, with areas measured in acres:
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:851
Total lot area of all lots within the
tract, not including existing rights-ofways
of existing public streets
= _____
Delete area within the future street
rights-of-ways abutting existing
streets that is required to be
dedicated
- _____
Delete area within the one-hundredyear
floodplain, according to official
FEMA/FIA maps
- _____
Delete areas with a natural slope
greater than 15 percent covering a
contiguous area of one acre or greater
- _____
Delete areas with overhead electric
rights-of-way
- _____
Equals net buildable area = _____
To determine the maximum total
allowed number of dwelling units
within the tract, the buildable area in
acres shall be multiplied by the
maximum density of 4.35 dwelling
units per acre.
= _____
[2] Areas occupied by recreational uses and buildings for
residents, proposed new internal streets and easements
shall not be deleted from the total lot area for the purposes
of determining maximum density.
(j) An active adult development shall not include any commercial
uses serving the public.
(k) Each dwelling unit in an active adult development shall be
limited by deed restriction, by condition of subdivision and
land development approval and by any lease to occupancy by at
least one person age 55 or older and to prohibit occupancy by
anyone under the age of 19.
(l) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum setback of 40 feet
from the ultimate/future right-of-way of any public street and
30 feet from the edge of cartway of any private street. The
following minimum separation distances shall apply between
the walls of buildings: 15 feet between the sides of buildings,
25 feet between the rear and the side of a building, and 50 feet
between the rears of buildings.
(m) Dwelling units shall not be allowed to have detached accessory
buildings or private household swimming pools.
(n) Recreation facilities; sidewalks.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:852
[1] Recreation facilities, if any, shall be privately owned by
and privately maintained by the condominium association
and shall not be dedicated to the Township.
[2] Sidewalks provided for in Subsection B(36)(d) shall be
maintained by the Condominium Association.
(o) All driveways from dwellings shall enter onto an internal street
or parking court system within the development. No new
driveway for a dwelling shall enter directly onto an existing
public street.
(p) The maximum building height shall be 2.5 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is more restrictive.
(q) Preliminary architectural renderings shall be provided of
typical dwellings units within the development at the time of
submission of the preliminary subdivision and land
development plan.
(r) A minimum of four off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit. Two of these spaces may be located in
garages, while two additional spaces may be located on
driveways.
(37) Funeral home. [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-329]
(a) The use shall have the minimum lot area of one acre.
(b) Signs shall be limited to one identification sign for each street
frontage and must meet all other requirements of this
ordinance.
(c) Off-street parking: One space per five seats in rooms intended
to be used at one time for visitors, plus one space for each
employee.
(d) The parking lot shall be permitted only in the rear of the main
building and shall not occupy front or side yard areas.
(38) Life care center. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-380]
(a) The maximum gross density within a life care center shall not
exceed five dwelling units per buildable acre. For the purposes
of this section, four beds for patient, resident and/or staff
person use provided within the life care facility shall be
deemed the equivalent of one dwelling unit. [Amended
4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-392]
(b) A minimum tract area of six acres is required.
(c) Area and bulk regulations:
[1] Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:853
[2] Lot width: a minimum of 120 feet at the building setback
line, except a minimum of 200 feet for any use having
direct individual vehicular access onto a minor arterial
road.
[3] Lot depth: a minimum of 100 feet.
[4] Lot coverage: a maximum of 25% for buildings and 65%
total impervious coverage.
[5] Front yard setback.
[a] Fronting major arterial streets: not permitted.
[b] Fronting minor arterial streets: 50 feet minimum.
[c] Fronting collector streets: 40 feet minimum.
[d] Fronting local streets: 30 feet minimum.
[6] Side yard setback. There shall be two side yards, each with
a minimum width of 25 feet.
[7] Rear yard setback. a minimum of 50 feet.
[8] Parking lot setback. All parking spaces shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from all buildings, except for garage or
carport entrances and buildings raised to allow parking
beneath the structure.
[9] Height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more
restrictive.
[10] External property line building setback. Life care centers
and their permitted accessory structures shall be set back
from all exterior lot lines of a tract a minimum distance of
30 feet, except a minimum distance of 100 feet shall be
required from a lot line of an existing single-family
detached dwelling. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-392]
(d) Support facilities. A life care center may provide dwelling units
in any combination of single- or multiple-family dwellings and
shall include a continuum of care and services, including
independent living, assisted living and skilled nursing home
facilities. Additional facilities provided as part of the life care
center may include:
[1] Any retail facilities shall be for the use of residents and
their guests only. No outside advertising is permitted. The
retail uses may occupy a maximum of 10% of the total floor
area and shall be limited to the following uses:
barbershop, beauty parlor, pharmacy (as an adjunct to the
life care nursing facility), commissary, newsstand, gift
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:854
shop, snack bar/coffee shop, thrift shop and handicraft
shop. A sit-down restaurant open to the general public
may also be allowed as an accessory use if completely
integrated with the overall development and not within
a freestanding structure. [Amended 4-27-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-392]
[2] Nursing home. Any nursing home shall be designated to
eventually primarily serve the residents of the life care
center. Long-term nursing beds within this facility shall
not exceed one bed per three dwelling units.
[3] Other noncommercial support facilities may include
lounge areas, reading rooms, craft rooms, common dining
facilities, activity rooms, library, community center,
recreation rooms and similar uses.
(e) Recreation area. At least 35% of the site shall be maintained as
open areas, which shall not include detention basins, parking
lots, accessory buildings or any impervious surfaces except
those used for recreational purposes (including paved trails).
At least 20% of the site, which may be considered part of the
open areas, shall be developed for passive recreation. This
area shall include outdoor sitting areas and pedestrian walks.
No outdoor sitting areas shall be located on slopes in excess of
8%.
(f) Transportation. The developer of a life care center shall
provide for a transportation service that will be provided to the
residents of the life care center to reach essential services,
unless the site is serviced by the public bus system. The life
care center should also include a covered bus stop or other
appropriate area for the loading and unloading of bus
passengers.
(g) Parking. 0.5 space per resident /bed, plus one per each staff
person.
(39) Shopping center. [Added 6-29-2010 by Ord.No. 2010-394]
(a) The use shall front on an arterial street
(b) Additional area and bulk regulations shall be as follows:
[1] Lot area: five acres minimum.
[2] Side yard setback: 80 feet minimum from the lot line of an
existing residential use.
(c) The site shall utilize interior access drives to the greatest
extent possible to minimize the number of driveways entering
onto an arterial street. The applicant shall prove that all
proposed driveways are placed in the most logical and
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:855
reasonable locations, considering impacts upon abutting
streets and on nearby residential uses. The Board of
Supervisors may require that no new traffic access that would
involve left-hand turns onto and off an arterial street shall
be permitted if reasonable access could be provided using
another street deemed adequate by the Board of Supervisors,
except at an intersection where a traffic signal exists or will be
provided as part of the shopping center use.
(d) Where a drive-through window is proposed for any use within
the shopping center, a stacking lane shall be provided to serve
a minimum of 10 cars. The stacking lane shall connect only to
internal access drives and parking lots, shall not have direct
access drives and parking lots and shall not have direct access
from the street. The stacking lane shall not be used as a
parking lot circulation aisle nor shall it in any way conflict with
the circulation of traffic through the parking lot.
(e) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between the existing
sidewalk and the front of the shopping center. If there is no
existing sidewalk, one shall be provided along the street
frontage.
(f) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between multiple
buildings in a shopping center.
(g) No loading areas or dumpsters shall be provided within the
required front yard area. Trash dumpsters shall be well
screened from view of streets or dwellings by appropriate
evergreen planting, fencing or walls.
(h) Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with § 190-194D.
C. Additional requirements for special exceptions. In addition to the
general standards governing special exception uses set forth in
§ 190-209, applicants proposing to have approval of a special exception
application must satisfy the following criteria for each of the following
enumerated special exception uses:
(1) Adult day-care centers/nursing homes.
(a) The use shall be fully licensed by the state, if applicable. For
uses serving senior citizens, see State Department of Aging
Regulations for Older Adult Daily Living Centers.
(b) The use shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(c) The use shall include 50 square feet of interior floor space for
each person cared for.
(d) The use shall not meet the definition of a treatment center.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:856
(e) There shall be no more than 200 beds per facility. The density
shall not exceed more than one resident or bed per 100 square
feet of the total lot area.
(f) The use shall not be related to rehabilitation of convicted
felons, treatment of criminally insane or treatment for serious
drug or alcohol addiction.
(g) Off-street parking: for a nursing home, parking shall be one
space per six beds, plus one for each 1.2 employees; for an
adult day-care center, one space for every 10 adults, with
spaces designed for safe and convenient dropoff and pickup,
plus one space for each employee.
(2) Animal hospital/veterinarian office.
(a) A minimum lot size of at least one acre shall be required for
those animal hospitals treating small animals such as cats,
birds or snakes. The minimum lot size of three acres shall be
required for those animal hospitals treating large animals such
as cattle, horses or pigs.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed or provided care
shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines. Buildings
shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated
within the buildings cannot be perceived at the lot lines.
(c) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals so long
as a double evergreen screen at least six feet in height is
provided around the runs. No outdoor runs shall be permitted
within the LDR, MDR, HDR, or HDR-2 Districts.
(d) Parking: no less than one off-street parking space for every 120
square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every
employee. All parking shall be screened in accordance with
this ordinance.
(3) Auto repair garage.
(a) All repair and paint work shall be performed within an
enclosed building.
(b) All provisions shall be made to prevent noise, odor, vibration,
light or electrical interference to adjacent lots.
(c) Outdoor storage of autos and other vehicles shall not exceed
the indoor repair area, shall only be in back of the front yard
line and shall be no closer than 20 feet to side and rear lot
lines.
(d) Outdoor storage of auto parts and junk shall be prohibited.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:857
(e) Any vehicle on the premises longer than seven days shall be
deemed a stored vehicle. No vehicle shall be stored in excess of
60 days.
(f) Service bay doors shall not face abutting existing primarily
residential uses in an LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District.
(4) Auto service station.
(a) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from any future street
right-of-way or 50 feet from the street center line, whichever is
greater.
(c) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be located
within a building.
(d) Full body paint spraying or body or fender work shall not be
permitted.
(e) Automobiles that are taken to a service station for outside
storage because of an accident may remain no longer than 60
days from the day vehicle arrives at the station.
(f) Adequate stacking capacity shall be provided to prevent traffic
from backing onto public streets.
(5) Auto, boat or manufactured home sales.
(a) No vehicle or home on display shall occupy any part of the
existing or future street right-of-way, paved areas setback or
required parking areas for customers.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be 10 acres for automotive sales/
recreational vehicles and manufactured homes; five acres for
all others.
(c) Lighting: see § 190-161. All outside lighting shall be directed in
such a way as not to create a nuisance to any adjacent
property, and all lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as
to protect the street or highway and adjoining property from
direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind downward
and from the perimeter toward the building.
(d) Such use shall be set back from the right-of-way a minimum of
100 feet, including sales parking.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast use.
(a) In a residential district, a maximum of four guest rooms shall
be provided, with a maximum of four persons within in any one
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:858
guest room. No more than six guest rooms may be provided in
all other districts.
(b) Off-street parking: one parking space shall be provided for
each guest room. All parking spaces shall be located either to
the rear of the main dwelling or screened from the roadway
and adjoining properties by fencing or natural vegetation.
(c) At least one bathroom shall be provided for use per two guest
rooms.
(d) The use shall be carried on primarily by members of the
immediate family, which must reside on the premises.
Nonresident employees shall be permitted.
(e) There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any
guest room. Food shall be served only to guests on the
premises.
(f) The maximum uninterrupted length of stay shall be 14 days.
(g) The use of any amenities provided such as swimming pools or
tennis courts shall be restricted in use to guests of the
establishment.
(h) There shall be no use of show windows or any type of display or
advertising visible from outside the premises, except for a
single sign no larger than two square feet in size constructed
and placed in accordance with Article XVIII.
(i) No external alterations or changes to the exterior structure
shall be permitted except as required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry or for safety reasons as
required by any other governmental agency.
(j) The use may not be established until there is compliance with
all Township rules and regulations.
(k) Any existing on-lot septic system shall be recertified as being
adequate, in accordance with state regulations.
(l) The use shall be in a principal building constructed prior to
January 1, 1940.
(7) Betting use.
(a) The use shall be located abutting an arterial or collector street,
as defined by the Official Street Classification Map.244
(b) Minimum lot area: three acres.
244. The Official Street Classification Map is on file in the Township Offices.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:859
(c) Minimum building setback from the lot line of any place of
worship or residential zoning district: 300 feet.
(d) Parking: see § 190-166.
(8) Boardinghouse.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum setback from all lot lines: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum density: five bedrooms or 10 persons per acre,
whichever is more restrictive.
(e) Each sleeping room shall be limited to two persons each.
(f) Parking: one off-street space per adult resident.
(g) Interior space: a minimum of 300 square feet of interior floor
space per resident.
(h) Maximum number of residents: 20.
(9) Campground.
(a) The minimum lot area shall be two acres and the maximum
number of campsites shall be 30 campsites.
(b) Use shall have a maximum impervious coverage of 10%.
(c) Such use shall provide a minimum area of 1,200 square feet
per each campsite for tent or recreational vehicle.
(d) Such use shall provide public water and sewer facilities in
accordance with all applicable regulations by Palmer Township
Sewer Authority.
(e) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
would project perceptible sound in excess of the noise levels of
§ 190-158 of this ordinance.
(f) The lighting shall not be perceptible beyond the property lines.
(g) Sleeping quarters or tent sites shall not be within the onehundred-
year floodplain.
(h) Off-street parking: there shall be one parking space for each
campsite, plus one parking space for each employee.
(10) Cemetery.
(a) Area and bulk regulations.
[1] The minimum hot size shall be 10 acres.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:860
[2] For all accessory buildings, the setback line requirements
shall be the same as for single-family detached dwellings
in the zone in which the cemetery is located.
[3] A twenty-foot buffer strip unoccupied, except for
landscaping and walkways, shall be provided between the
building or burial site and the cemetery property line.
[4] The side yard for all accessory buildings shall be the same
as that required for dwellings in the zone in which the
cemetery is located.
[5] All structures and grave sites shall be set back a minimum
of 50 feet from a residential lot line, 10 feet from any
internal driveway and 20 feet from any other lot line.
(b) Design standards.
[1] The maximum height of accessory buildings, including
dwelling units where permitted, shall be three stories or
35 feet.
[2] A crematorium shall be allowed as a special exception
accessory use only in the RA District and is prohibited
from all other districts.
[3] For all entrance features, including gates, fountains,
statuary, identification signs and alike:
[a] There shall be no more than two identification signs at
each entrance.
[b] The main portion of entrance features shall be located
at least 10 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of
any public street.
[4] Off-street parking.
[a] For accessory building other than chapels, no less
than one space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
[b] For chapels, no less than one space for each 100
square feet of floor area of the auditorium or three
fixed seats, whichever is greater.
(11) Commercial crop bulk storage as a principal use.
(a) The applicant shall show that adequate measures will be in
effect to control any explosive hazards.
(b) The applicable outdoor storage control provisions of
§ 190-211E(3) shall be met.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:861
(12) Commercial indoor recreation. This use may include bowling
alleys, skating rink(s), billiard halls, movie theaters, theaters, or
other similar uses subject to the following additional regulations:
(a) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
will project audible sound in excess of the sound levels of
§ 190-158 of this ordinance.
(b) Lighting shall be allowed in accordance with § 190-161.
(c) Off-street parking:
[1] Theater: one space for every three seats in the auditorium,
plus one space for every employee.
[2] Bowling alley: five spaces for every bowling lane, plus one
parking space for every employee.
[3] Other uses: one space for every 120 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one space for each employee. All parking
shall be screened in accordance with this ordinance.
(13) Commercial outdoor recreation. These uses shall include golf
driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or similar uses. These
regulations shall be in addition to any outdoor recreational use
which is otherwise specifically addressed in § 190-210B or C.
(a) The uses cannot generate noise above the maximum noise
levels established in § 190-158 of this ordinance.
(b) Lighting shall be in accordance with § 190-161.
(14) Commercial stable or riding academy.
(a) The use shall be conducted on a lot no smaller than seven acres
in size.
(b) No new barns that are used to hold animals, animal shelters,
stables, feed yards, or manure storage areas shall be located
closer than 500 feet to all dwellings except the dwelling of the
owner or lessee or any LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II District
boundaries.
(c) No additions to existing barns that are used to hold animals,
animal shelters, stables, feed yards or manure storage areas
will be located closer than 150 feet to an LDR, MDR, HDR or
HDR-II District boundary or an abutting lot line of a dwelling
(except the dwelling of the owner or lessee) or within 50 feet of
any other lot line.
(d) No more than two horses per acre shall be permitted.
(15) Conversion to residential use and conversions increasing the
number of dwelling units.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:862
(a) The use shall meet the applicable minimum lot area, yard,
building area, off-street parking and other applicable
requirements for the district.
(b) Applicable state firesafety requirements shall be met.
(c) Any on-lot septic system or well shall be recertified.
(d) The resulting residential use shall be a permitted use in the
district.
(e) Single-family detached dwellings which are converted must
maintain the appearance of a single-family detached dwelling
with a single front entrance. Additional entrances may be
placed on the side or rear of the structure. The dwelling units
may internally share the single-family front entrance. Exterior
stairways and fire escapes shall be located on the rear wall,
unless such is not feasible, in which case they shall be located
on the side wall.
(f) The conversion of a single-family detached dwelling into two
units shall not be allowed if it would require a second front
entrance or an outside fire escape on a front wall or on a side
wall facing a street.
(g) Except as may be necessary for purposes of safety in
accordance with the preceding subsection, there shall be no
major structural change in the exterior of a previously
residential building in connection with the conversion. After
conversion, any previously residential building shall retain
substantially the same structural appearance it had before
such conversion.
(h) Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(i) Off-street parking shall be located to the side or rear of the
converted structure.
(j) Off-street parking lots with three or more spaces shall be
buffered from abutting residences with appropriate evergreen
planting of a minimum three feet in height.
(k) Trash receptacles shall not be visible from the street or
abutting properties except on scheduled pickup days.
(l) The minimum floor area requirements of § 190-202 shall be
met.
(m) The additional requirements for conversion of a single-family
detached residence into two dwelling units contained in
§ 190-211 shall be applicable.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:863
(n) A site plan submittal to the Township Zoning Officer shall be
required. See § 190-201. Submittals under the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall not be
required for conversion of an individual building on an existing
individual lot into up to three dwelling units.
(o) To be considered for a conversion, any proposed alteration
must be confined to the interior of an already existing
structural shell.
(p) Any proposal to extend the sides or increase the height of an
existing structure (except for necessary mechanical equipment
and emergency and handicapped access) shall not be
considered a conversion and shall be required to meet the
appropriate provisions established in that district for that
particular use.
(16) Day-care center, child. (See also as an accessory use in § 190-211.)
(a) No outdoor play area shall be closer than 40 feet to any
abutting dwelling, without such owner's written consent.
(b) The outdoor recreation area shall be enclosed with a fortyeight-
inch-high fence and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from
any rear lot line. The recreation area shall be screened so as to
protect adjoining properties and shall provide adequate shade
for the children.
(c) No structure shall be located nearer than 100 feet from any
residential property line.
(d) The use shall comply with applicable state Department of
Public Welfare regulations.
(e) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article
XVII shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(f) Where otherwise permitted in a residential district, a
maximum of 20 children may be cared for at one site at any one
time.
(g) The use shall include fencing between any outdoor play areas
and any street.
(h) Outside play areas in a residential district shall be limited to
use between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(i) The use shall not be conducted in a dwelling that is physically
attached to another dwelling.
(17) Exercise club.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:864
(a) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
will project audible sound beyond the property line.
(b) Lighting perceptible beyond the property line shall be allowed
in accordance with § 190-161.
(c) The use shall include adequate fencing surrounding any
outdoor racket sports.
(d) Off-street parking: No less than one space for each five persons
of total design capacity of the facility or at least one parking
space for each 50 square feet of floor area used or intended to
be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or
members, whichever requires the greater number of spaces,
plus one additional space for each employee.
(18) (Reserved)245
(19) Group home.
(a) As of 1993, a "group home" is defined in Article II of this
ordinance as follows: The use of any lawful dwelling unit which
meets all of the following criteria:
[1] Involves the care of the maximum number of persons
permitted by the "group home" standards of § 190-210,
and meets all other standards of such section.
[2] Involves persons functioning as a common household.
[3] Involves providing nonroutine support services and
oversight to persons who need such assistance to avoid
being placed within an institution, because of physical
disability, old age, mental retardation or other handicap*
as defined by applicable federal law.
*NOTE: As of 1992, the Federal Fair Housing Act defined
"handicap" as follows: "1) a physical or mental
impairment which substantially limits one or more of such
person's major life activities, 2) a record of having such
an impairment or 3) being regarded as having such an
impairment, but such term does not include current,
illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
defined in Section 802 of Title 21."
[4] Does not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
[5] Does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who
could reasonably be considered a threat to the physical
safety of others or are prone to any of the following:
245. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(18), Funeral homes, was repealed 1-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-329.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:865
psychoactive substance use disorders resulting from
current illegal use of drugs, pedophilia, voyeurism, other
sexual behavior disorders or pyromania.]
(b) The following maximum number of persons shall reside in a
group home, not including persons clearly employed as care
providers/caseworkers/supervisors for the residents:
[1] Single-family detached dwelling with a minimum lot area
of 20,000 square feet and minimum building setbacks from
all lot lines of 15 feet: five persons.
[2] Single-family detached dwelling with minimum lot area of
one acre and minimum building setbacks from all lot lines
of 25 feet: seven persons.
[3] Any other lawful dwelling unit: four persons.
(c) Supervision. There shall be adequate supervision as needed by
an adequate number of person(s) trained in the field for which
the group home is intended. The Zoning Hearing Board may
require twenty-four hour, seven-day supervision if needed for
the intended type of residents.
(d) Counseling. Any medical or counseling services provided on
the lot shall be limited to residents.
(e) Off-street parking. One space shall be provided for each
employee on duty at any one time, plus one space for every two
residents reasonably expected to be capable of driving a
vehicle.
(f) The use shall not be related to criminal rehabilitation of adults
or juveniles, treatment of the criminally insane or treatment
for current alcohol or drug addiction.
(g) Appearance. If the group home is within a residential district,
the building shall be maintained and/or constructed to ensure
that it is closely similar in appearance, condition and character
to the other residential structures in the area. No exterior
signs shall identify the type of use.
(h) Certification. The use shall be licensed, certified or otherwise
officially approved under an applicable state, county or federal
program for such housing. A copy of such license, certification
or approval shall be filed with the Township and shall be
required to be shown to the Zoning Officer in the future upon
request. If applicable, the operator shall also provide evidence
of approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
(i) The operator of the group home shall notify the Township
within 14 days if there is a change in the general type of
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:866
clients, the sponsoring agency, the maximum number of
residents or if an applicable certification/license expires, is
suspended or is withdrawn.
(j) Registration. The group home shall register its location,
general type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents
and sponsoring agency with the Township. Such information
shall be available for public review upon request.
(k) Off-street parking areas for more than three vehicles shall be
buffered from adjacent existing single-family dwellings by a
planting screen meeting the requirements of § 190-61.
(l) Septic. If a group home will use an on-lot septic system and will
involve six or more persons routinely on the premises at any
one time, the septic system shall be required to be reviewed by
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to determine if it is
adequate.
(m) Employees of the group home shall be prohibited from having
visitors on the premises, unless such visitation is necessary for
the operation of the group home and except for emergencies.
(n) The use shall provide illuminated exit signs, emergency battery
powered lighting and a minimum of two ABC-rated fire
extinguishers.
(o) For a group home, the Zoning Hearing Board shall limit its
review and decision to the specific requirements of this
§ 190-210, other specific requirements of township ordinances
and whether the use would be a threat to public health and
safety.
(20) Gun club/outdoor firearms target range.
(a) All outdoor target ranges shall have an earth barrier behind
the target area which is of sufficient height and thickness to
adequately provide for the public safety.
(b) The use shall comply with National Rifle Association standards
and other applicable federal, state and local regulations.
(c) The use shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any
residential lot line.
(d) The use shall fully comply with the noise standards of
§ 190-158.
(e) The use must clearly not result in a hazard to life or property.
(f) The use shall be completely fenced in and be properly posted.
(21)Kennel.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:867
(a) Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed overnight and all
runs shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential lot
line.
(c) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at a
residential lot line.
(d) Outdoor runs may be provided so long as an evergreen screen
at least six feet in height is provided between the runs and any
residential lot line and provided that some form of visual
screening is used between the runs to cut down on barking. No
animals shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 8:00 p.m.
to 8:00 a.m.
(e) The applicant must show conformance with the state law
regulating kennels.
(f) A kennel may be used for breeding within the requirements of
this ordinance.
(g) The total number of animals on the property shall not exceed
100.
(h) Cross-reference with "animal hospital."
(22) Laundry/laundromat. Water shall be provided by public water and
public sewage shall be provided.
(23) (Reserved)246
(24) Nursery school. See day-care center in this section for additional
requirements.
(25) Nursing home.
(a) Adult day-care center requirements apply to this use.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(c) A minimum of 20% of the site shall be suitable for and
developed as recreation, including outdoor sitting areas, paved
trails, landscaping and pedestrian walks.
(26) Personal care center.
(a) The standards for nursing homes (and/or life care facilities)
shall apply to this section.
(27) Picnic grove, private.
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(23), Life-care facility, was repealed 8-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-380. See now § 190-210B(38).
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:868
(a) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
will project sound audible beyond the boundaries of the
property.
(b) No lighting shall be permitted which will be perceptible on the
adjacent property.
(c) Any activity area or parking area used between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be set back a minimum of 250
feet from any residential lot line.
(28) Place of worship.
(a) The parsonage, weekly religious education rooms, meeting
rooms, day-care center and bus storage area may be allowed as
accessory uses, provided these uses are of such a character
and intensity that they are clearly accessory uses to the place
of worship.
(b) Minimum lot area: two acres in a residential district, one acre
in a nonresidential district.
(29) Recycling collection center.
(a) This use shall be bound by the requirements of solid waste
disposal facility and sanitary landfill, waste energy plant or
solid waste transfer facility found in this ordinance.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures to prevent the attraction of
insects or rodents and to avoid any fire hazards.
(c) Such facility shall have adequate provisions for servicing by
truck and off-street parking.
(d) Materials to be collected shall be of the same general
character as the following materials: paper, cardboard,
aluminum, fabric and glass, yard waste, and scrap metal.
(30) Retirement village.
(a) All of the requirements of the HDR District shall be met, except
the maximum dwelling unit density may be increased by 15%,
before the addition of any density bonuses.
(b) A maximum of 25% of the dwelling units shall include three or
more bedrooms.
(c) The residents must be at least 55 years of age (other than the
spouse of a person age 55 or older), with no children routinely
living in the development under the age of 16.
(d) Community center.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:869
[1] If a retirement village includes more than 50 dwelling
units, a community center for the residents of the
development shall be provided with the following facilities:
[a] A multipurpose room.
[b] Equipped craft shop.
[c] Rest room facilities.
[2] Such center may include: library, laundry room, exercise
room, kitchen, pantry, restaurant/cafeteria limited to
residents and their guests or similar facilities.
(e) Prior to final approval of the plans, the applicant shall prove to
the Board of Supervisors that legal arrangements will ensure
the adherence of the age restrictions.
(f) A minimum tract area of three acres is required.
(g) See also § 190-201.
(31) Roadside produce market.
(a) The use shall be an accessory use incidental to a principal
agricultural use, agricultural industry or orchard.
(b) Only horticultural, dairy or agricultural products, where a
minimum of 50% of the products offered for sale were grown or
raised on the premises owned or leased by the operator of the
market, maybe sold from the stand.
(c) Any newly constructed or expanded building or outdoor area
where products are displayed or sold shall be at least 50 feet
from intersecting rights-of-way of streets, 30 feet from the
cartway of any street and 30 feet from any other property line.
(d) Access to the tract must be controlled by physical means to
limit access to two points. The access points shall be no more
than 24 feet wide. Must meet driveway requirements of
ordinance.
(e) Parking shall be provided in compliance with the provisions of
Article XXVII.
(f) All buildings erected for this use (not including portions of a
permanent dwelling or barn) shall be disassembled during
seasons when products are not offered for sale.
(g) No temporary buildings shall remain standing for more than
six months of any year.
(h) A maximum of 800 square feet of area shall be used for such
use.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:870
(32) Taxi terminal. This use is subject to the provisions of bus terminals
found in § 190-210B.
(33) College and/or trade school.
(a) No structure shall be located nearer than 100 feet from any
residential property line.
(b) Off-street parking: no less than one space per faculty member
or employee, plus two spaces per three students. Parking area
shall be adequately screened when situated next to lands for or
in residential use.
(c) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres, plus one acre for each
100 students of projected maximum enrollment of the school.
(34) Farm equipment/building materials sales, equipment storage,
service and repair and storage area.
(a) Such use shall have a permanent screen of stockade fencing
and landscaping in accordance with this ordinance.
(b) Parking: No less than 10 off-street parking spaces for every
nine employees, or one space for every 470 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever requires the greater number of parking
spaces, plus one space for every company vehicle that is stored
on the premises. All parking shall be screened in accordance
with this ordinance.
(35) Conference/convention center. Further regulations for this use are
found under "auditorium, community/cultural center."
(36) Professional services. Professional services shall include the offices
of a physician, lawyer, optometrist, accountant, clergyman, teacher,
dentist, architect, engineer, insurance agent, real estate broker,
and manufacturers representative in similar professional offices
which do not include the actual storage, exchange or delivery of
merchandise on the premises as subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
(b) No office building shall include:
[1] A storefront.
[2] A store window.
[3] Any retail commercial characteristics which detract
materially from the character of the district surrounding
the neighborhood.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-210
186:871
(c) No structure designed for office use erected or renovated after
the effective date of this ordinance shall include any dwelling
unit or units.
(d) Off-street parking: no less than one space for every 120 square
feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each employee. All
parking shall be screened in accordance with this ordinance.
(37) Medical office/clinic. Such use shall include a building or buildings
with multiple offices for one or more physicians, optometrists or
dentists or similar medical professionals for examination or
treatment of persons as outpatients and laboratories incidental
thereto and are subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
(b) No office building shall include:
[1] A storefront.
[2] A store window.
[3] Any retail commercial characteristics which detract
materially from the character from the district or
surrounding neighborhood.
(c) Off-street parking: one off-street parking space for each 120
square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every
employee. All parking shall be screened in accordance with
this ordinance.
(d) This use does not include treatment centers or mental care
facilities.
(38) Membership clubs.
(a) The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
(b) The use shall be for members and their authorized guests only.
(c) Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened and isolated
so as to provide a buffer to adjacent residences from
inappropriate noise, light, and other disturbances.
(d) Off-street parking: one space for every five members of total
design capacity of the facility or at least one space for each 50
square feet of floor area used or intended to be used for service
to customers, patrons, clients, guests or members, whichever
requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus
one additional space for each employee.
(39) Nature preserve.
§ 190-210 PALMER CODE § 190-210
186:872
§ 190-211. Additional requirements for accessory uses.
(a) No outdoor active recreational areas shall be located within
100 feet of any residential lot lines or 50 feet from
nonresidential lot lines.
(b) Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened and isolated
so as to provide a buffer to adjacent residences from
inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances.
(c) Off-street parking: No less than one space for each four seats
provided for patron use, or at least one space for each 50
square feet of floor area used or intended to be used for service
to customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members, whichever
requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus
one additional space for each employee.
(40) Restaurant. Such use shall include cafeterias and eating
establishments in which the principal business is the sale of foods
and/or beverages in ready-to-consume state for consumption either
within the restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption off
the premises, provided:
(a) The use must have direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
(b) There shall be only one point of ingress and only one point of
egress per collector or arterial street.
(c) Where a drive-through window is proposed, a stacking lane
shall be provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars. Stacking lane
shall not be used for parking lot circulation isles nor shall it in
anyway conflict with through circulation of parking.
(d) A pedestrian walkway shall be provided between the existing
sidewalk and the entrance of the restaurant. If there is no
sidewalk, one shall be provided along the street frontage.
(e) The use shall screen all trash containers from view from
streets or adjacent property.
(f) The use shall provide landscaping on all areas not covered by
buildings, structures, parking areas, or access driveways.
(g) The use may provide an outdoor menu board with a maximum
sign area of 50 square feet (beyond the sign restrictions
established by this ordinance) if drive-through service is
provided from within the building to customers in their
vehicles.
(h) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside the restaurant for
patron use.
§ 190-210 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:873
A. In general. An accessory use on the same lot and reasonably
customarily incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted by
right, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
B. Yard requirements. Every accessory use shall comply with the yard and
coverage regulations for the district in which it is located, except as
otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance.
C. Specific uses permitted.
(1) All of the following uses shall be permitted by right as accessory
uses in all districts within the applicable requirements of this
section and this ordinance unless otherwise stated (see also list of
permitted by right accessory uses under residential accessory uses
within this § 190-211):
(a) Accessory use to businesses.
(b) Air-conditioning unit, central outdoor.
(c) Bus shelter for public buses or school buses.
(d) Farm pond.
(e) Fence, wall and hedge.
(f) Keeping of pets.
(g) Noncommercial recreational facility for household use or for
residents of a development (including tennis courts).
(h) Swimming pool, household.
(i) Recreational vehicle storage and utility trailer storage.
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(j) Residential accessory building, structure or use.
(k) Satellite antennas.
(l) Solar energy system.
(m) Temporary structure or use.
(n) Unit for care of relative.
(o) Windmill.
(p) Woodpiles.
(2) The following accessory uses shall only be permitted in a district if
specifically listed in the "permitted accessory use" section of that
district:
(a) Commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display.
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:874
(b) Roadside produce market.
(c) Heliport.
D. The applicable provisions of this section shall regulate all such uses in
all districts, if permitted, whether or not they are specifically
referenced under the uses listed in each district.
E. Special standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Accessory uses to permitted businesses. The following accessory
uses are permitted by right in all districts for any principal
commercial, office, institutional or industrial business, provided
that their use is limited to employees only and their children and
occasional guests or visitors: cafeteria, child day-care center,
noncommercial recreation facilities.
(2) Air-conditioning unit, central outdoor.
(a) The use shall be a permitted by right accessory use in all
districts, provided that the use complies with the noise
standards of § 190-158.
(b) In the LDR, MDR or HDR Districts, all air-conditioning units
exterior to a use shall be located a minimum of 20 feet, if
reasonable, from all existing dwellings other than that of the
owner.
(3) Commercial or industrial outdoor storage and display.
(a) Location. The use shall not occupy any part of the existing or
future street right-of-way, area intended or designed for
pedestrian use, required parking area or part of the required
parking lot setback (see § 190-166G).
(b) Size. The use shall occupy an area less than 1/2 the existing
building coverage. A special exception may be authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board for no more than 50% of the lot area
to be used for outdoor storage or display, if necessary for the
proposed use and if adequate screening and landscaping is
provided.
(c) No outside industrial storage shall be located:
[1] On land with an average slope in excess of 10%.
[2] Within 200 feet of an existing right-of-way of a public
street, unless the storage is completely screened from
view by buildings, fencing, landscaping or berming.
(d) Tires. No lot shall include more than 5% of the total lot area in
the storage of vehicle tires. No pile of tires shall reach a height
greater than 20 feet above the average ground level. A pile of
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:875
tires shall cover a maximum of 5,000 square feet and be
separated by 60 feet from any other pile of tires. These
restrictions shall also apply to tire storage as a principal use.
(4) Conversion of an existing single-family detached house into a
dwelling with an accessory apartment (see also "unit for care of
relative" within this § 190-211).
(a) All requirements listed under "conversions to residential use"
under § 190-210 apply, except that § 190-202 shall not apply.
(b) One of the dwelling units shall be owner-occupied or occupied
by a relative of the owner for a minimum period of 36 months
following the conversion.
(c) The dwelling as it preexists shall have a total minimum
enclosed habitable heated floor area of 1,500 square feet. After
conversion, each dwelling unit shall include a minimum of 600
square feet of such floor area.
(d) Up to four off-street parking spaces may be required by the
Zoning Hearing Board if deemed necessary. Such spaces shall
be located to the rear or side of the residence and/or within a
residential style driveway. If such required spaces cannot be
accommodated without placing more parking in the required
front yard beyond what can be accommodated within a
residential-style driveway, then such finding shall be sufficient
reason for refusing the application, to protect the character of
a residential neighborhood.
(5) Day-care center, child, as an accessory use (see also in § 190-210 as
a principal use).
(a) The numeric restrictions for this use shall only apply to
children who are not related (as defined in Article II) to the
primary operator of the use. This ordinance does not regulate
the care of children who are related to the primary operator of
the use.
[1] Three to six children may be cared for at one time in a
single-family detached dwelling on a lot with a minimum of
1,000 square feet of safe usable open space.
[2] Any other dwelling unit may include the care of a
maximum of two children.
(b) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than child safety and cosmetic improvements.
(c) For uses involving more than six children as described in
Subsection E(5)(a) above, the standards of § 190-210C(l)
pertaining to adult day-care centers/nursing homes as a
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:876
principal use shall apply, if permitted in that district.
[Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-346]
(d) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(e) Smoke detectors shall be provided throughout the building and
at least one fully charged ABC-rated fire extinguisher shall be
provided.
(f) Any outdoor area on the lot routinely used for outdoor play by
small children shall be surrounded by a secure fence with a
minimum height of four feet. See also the fence requirements
of this § 190-210.
(g) The use shall provide a convenient parking area for persons
delivering and waiting for children, so as not to interfere with
the existing traffic patterns and the ingress/egress of
neighboring property owners to their own lots.
(6) Dwelling unit as an accessory use to a nonresidential use.
(a) No more than one dwelling unit shall be permitted for any
nonresidential principal use.
(b) The floor area of the dwelling unit shall not exceed the floor
area of the nonresidential use (if primarily within a building) or
50% of the ground area of the nonresidential use (if primarily
outdoor).
(7) Fences, walls and hedges.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, these uses shall be allowed in all
districts.
(b) Setback from roads. No fence, structure, wall or continuous
hedge shall be located within the existing right-of-way of a
public street. In addition, the sight distance requirements of
§ 190-194C shall be satisfied.
(c) Fences.
[1] Any fence located in the required front yard of a use in the
LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II Districts or of any primarily
residential use shall have a minimum ratio of 1:1 of open to
structural areas and shall not exceed four feet in height.
Such fences shall be of split-rail or picket-fence type of
wood construction.
[2] Fences may be located on a lot line.
[3] A fence that is not regulated under Subsection E(7)(c)[1]
above or Subsection E(7)(c)[4] below may have a height of
up to six feet and may be solid.
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:877
[4] For nonresidential principal uses or within the RA
districts, fences may have a maximum height of nine feet.
[5] A fence of up to 10 feet may be allowed in a rear yard in
any district for the sole purpose of enclosing a court for
racquet sports.
[6] If one side of a fence is more finished or flatter than
another side of a fence and the fence faces onto an
abutting dwelling or street, then the more finished or
flatter side should face onto the abutting dwelling or
street.
[7] Barbed wire or electrified fences shall not be used
surrounding a dwelling.
(d) Walls. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
[1] Any walls should be architecturally compatible with the
structure and the landscape.
[2] Any wall higher than three feet in the required front yard
of a residential use in the LDR, MDR or HDR District shall
require a special exception and shall be permitted only if
compatible with the character of the area.
[3] Walls may be one foot in height for every two feet they are
set back from a lot line, up to a maximum height of six feet.
(e) Gates. All fences, walls or continuous hedges more than three
feet in height shall be equipped with gates or other suitable
passageways at intervals of not more than 250 feet.
(f) Engineered retaining walls. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-420]
[1] Engineered retaining walls are permitted in all districts as
necessary.
[2] Engineered plans for proposed retaining walls shall be
submitted and reviewed to the satisfaction of the
Township, including but not limited to geotechnical
engineering and building code review.
(8) Garage and yard sales. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 261]
(a) The use shall include only the occasional noncommercial sale
of household goods and furniture and items of a similar
character. Such sales shall not include wholesale sales or sales
by outside vendors or nonresidents.
(b) The use shall not occur a maximum of more than four days in
any one calendar year.
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:878
(c) Excluding the occasional allowable garage or yard sale as
noted in Subsection E(8)(a) and Subsection (b) above, the
outside storage or sales of any junk, goods or materials not
clearly incidental to the residential use in any yard in any
residential district is prohibited, unless specifically permitted
elsewhere in this ordinance. Any item shall be deemed to be
stored if it is on the property for more than 48 hours.
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(9) Heliport. See "airport" in § 190-209.
(10) Home occupation. See definitions in Article II.
(a) The following standards shall apply to both light and general
home occupations:
[1] The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove
that the standards of this section will be met, especially
regarding possible nuisances and truck traffic. Based upon
the potential nuisances of a proposed home occupation,
the Zoning Hearing Board may determine that a particular
type or intensity of use is unsuitable to be a home
occupation or that the proposed lot area or setbacks are
not sufficient.
[2] The home occupation shall be conducted completely
indoors and may be within a principal or accessory
residential building. The total amount of floor area of all
buildings used for a home occupation shall not be greater
than 25% of the total floor area of the principal dwelling
unit.
[3] There shall be no outdoor operations or outdoor storage of
materials, products or equipment.
[4] Signs and displays. There shall be no use of show windows,
business displays or advertising visible from outside the
premises, except as is specifically permitted for a general
home occupation. There shall be no use of vehicular signs,
as defined in § 190-173. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-395]
[5] Truck traffic. The use shall not require the parking of,
delivery by or servicing by a commercial vehicle with a
PennDOT registration of Class 5 or higher. The parking of
trucks on and abutting the lot shall comply with § 190-169
of this ordinance. [Amended 6-29-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-395]
[6] Uses permitted as a home occupation include but are not
limited to art studio, office, barbershop, beauty shop,
custom sewing, tax preparation or musical instruction.
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:879
[7] The following uses shall not be permitted as a home
occupation: veterinarian office, stable, kennel, funeral
parlor, retail store, restaurant, auto repair, trucking
company terminal or animal grooming.
[8] Nuisances. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted
that produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare,
electrical interference or radio or electromagnetic
interference beyond the boundary of the property. Only
general types and sizes of machinery that are typically
found in dwellings for hobby or domestic purposes shall be
permitted. No use shall generate noise or glare in excess
of what is typical in a residential neighborhood.
[9] The use shall also comply with all environmental and
nuisance control regulations of this ordinance, including
Article XVI.
[10] Parking. See § 190-166. If additional parking is needed
beyond what can be accommodated using appropriate onstreet
spaces and a residential-style driveway, then when
feasible parking may be required in the rear of the home.
The Board may reject a general home occupation if the use
would require substantial amounts of parking that would
adversely affect the residential character of a lot.
[11] Building appearance. The exterior of the building and the
lot shall not be changed in such a way as to decrease its
residential appearance, except for permitted parking
spaces and the permitted sign.
[12] Hours. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a way
that is perceptible from beyond the lot line between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. This time limit shall also
apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles on the
property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining
residents.
[13] Hazardous substances. The use shall not involve the
storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types and amounts commonly
found in a dwelling. The use shall not involve the use or
storage of toxic substances.
[14] Advertising. The address or hours of the home occupation
shall not be advertised in such a way that would encourage
customers or salespersons to come to the property without
an appointment.
[15] Law or medical office. The main office of a medical doctor,
chiropractor, dentist or attorney shall only be allowed as a
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:880
home occupation if the property abuts an arterial street
and has a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
[16] Hazardous substances. The applicant shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Township that the intended method
of handling and disposal of hazardous materials will
comply with all federal and state laws and regulations.
(b) General home occupation. In addition to the standards in
Subsection E(10)(a) above, the following shall apply to a
general home occupation:
[1] Signage. See § 190-179J. [Amended 7-1-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-320]
[2] Number of employees. A total maximum of two persons
shall work on the premises with at least one being a
resident thereof. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
[3] Instruction. Any instruction or tutoring shall be limited to
a maximum of four students on the property at any one
time and six students on the property on any day.
[4] Barber/beautician. Any barber, beautician, hair stylist or
similar personal service use shall only be permitted as a
home occupation if only one person may work on the
premises, who must be a permanent resident of the
dwelling, and there is a ten-foot minimum building setback
from all residential lot lines.
[5] If the home occupation involves work occurring on a
vehicle(s), such vehicle(s) shall not be parked on the lot or
on abutting streets overnight.
[6] Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than 10
vehicles per day or the parking of more than four vehicles
of nonresidents at any one time.
(c) Home occupation, light. In addition to the standards in
Subsection E(10)(a) above, the following standards shall apply
to a light home occupation:
[1] Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than four
vehicles per day. The use shall not require a need for
parking beyond what is typically provided for a dwelling.
[2] Only persons who are permanent residents of the dwelling
shall work on the premises.
[3] No sign shall identify the business.
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:881
(11)Keeping of pets. (NOTE: This does not pertain to the raising of
livestock as a principal use, which is regulated by § 190-209.)
(a) This is a permitted by right accessory use in all districts unless
otherwise stated.
(b) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner that it creates a serious nuisance (including noise or
smell) or a health hazard or a safety hazard.
(c) In the LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II Districts, a maximum of
three dogs and/or four cats may be kept, except that a
combined maximum of 12 dogs and/or cats shall apply if the
nearest dwelling (other than that of the owner of the pets) is at
least 300 feet from any area in which the animals are regularly
kept. No numerical restriction shall apply to cats and dogs less
than five months of age. The noncommercial keeping of dogs
and cats is not restricted within other districts except by
Subsection E(10)(b) above. [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-311]
(d) In the LDR, MDR, HDR or HDR-II Districts, any outside animal
shelter or exercise pen shall be suitably enclosed if the dogs
are not chained. This area shall not be within the required
front or accessory side yards and shall be located whenever
possible at least 30 feet from any adjacent dwelling.
[Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(e) In any zoning district it is permitted to maintain pigeons and
fowl up to a total of 12, provided that it is in the rear yard, it is
on a noncommercial basis and is strictly as an incidental use,
the area in which the fowl or pigeons are kept is enclosed by a
fence that will contain them, all parts of which are at least 50
feet from any lot line and is not closer than 100 feet to the
nearest dwelling other than that of the owner.
(f) In any zoning district it is permitted to maintain up to two
horses, provided that no building, corral, fence or stable is less
than 100 feet from any lot line and is not closer than 200 feet to
the nearest existing dwelling other than that of the owner
unless stricter requirements apply. These restrictions do not
apply in the RA, PIC or PO/IP Districts.
(g) Keeping of more than the specified number of cats or dogs or
for commercial purposes shall be considered a kennel.
(h) Keeping of more than the specified number of pigeons or fowl
shall be considered "raising of livestock."
(i) Keeping of more than the specified number of horses shall be
considered a "stable."
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:882
(j) Exotic animals; see regulations in Article XXIII. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-338]
(12) Noncommercial swimming pool. See "swimming pool, household"
in this section.
(13) Nursery school. See "day-care center" as an accessory use to a
residential use.
(14) Recreational vehicle storage and utility trailer storage as an
accessory use. A maximum of one recreation vehicle or utility
trailer may be stored outdoors on a lot. Such recreational vehicle or
utility trailer shall be licensed, uninhabited, in transportable
condition and meet the following limitations: [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-311]
(a) A recreation vehicle or utility trailer longer than 16 feet (not
including hitch) shall not be stored or parked within the
required front yard during a total of more than 24 hours in any
seven-day period.
(b) A recreation vehicle or utility trailer shall be set back a
minimum of eight feet from an abutting lot line containing a
single-family detached dwelling.
(c) Any recreational vehicle or utility trailer that is unlicensed or
not in transportable condition shall only be permitted within an
enclosed building.
(d) One recreational vehicle or utility trailer may be inhabited as a
temporary accessory residence to a single-family detached
dwelling for a period of four days once in a calendar year.
(15) Residential accessory building, structure or use. The following, and
closely related uses, are permitted residential accessory buildings,
structures or uses in all districts, provided that all of the
requirements of this § 190-211 are complied with. See also the
definition of "accessory use."
(a) Accessory building (including private vehicle garage).
[1] No accessory building shall be located within a required
front yard or within a required side or rear yard for an
accessory use.
[2] Accessory buildings may be located as follows, within the
other requirements of this ordinance:
[a] An accessory building to a principally residential use
on a lot of less than two acres shall:
[i] Have a maximum height of 15 feet.
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:883
[ii] Have a total maximum floor area equal to 10% of
the total lot area of the lot or 800 square feet,
whichever is more restrictive.
[b] On any lot of less than 30,000 square feet within an
LDR, MDR or HDR District, no more than two
accessory buildings shall be permitted.
(b) Garage sale.
(c) Nonhousehold swimming pools.
(d) Keeping of pets.
(e) Fences, walls and hedges.
(f) Day care, child as an accessory use.
(g) Home gardening or greenhouse.
(h) Storage of a recreational vehicle.
(i) Solar energy system.
(j) Windmill.
(k) Farm pond.
(l) Tennis court.
(m) Satellite antenna.
(n) Amateur radio antennas. These shall be limited to federally
licensed operators and shall be set back one foot from lot lines
for each foot of total height above ground level over 40 feet, up
to a maximum height of 75 feet in a residential district.
(o) Patios. See § 190-194.
(p) Unit for care of relative.
(q) Raised wood decks, which shall be considered a structure and
shall comply with setback requirements.
(r) Skateboard ramps, bicycle ramps and similar ramps for sports
or athletics.
[1] Any such ramp that is on a residential lot shall meet the
following requirements:
[a] Shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any
residential lot line (see definition in Article II).
[b] Shall have a maximum height of five feet.
[c] Shall have a maximum length of 15 feet.
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:884
[d] Shall not require a zoning permit.
[e] Shall not be used in a way that a nuisance is created to
neighboring residents.
[f] Shall not be located within the required front yard,
unless the ramp is clearly portable and regularly
moved indoors when not in use.
[2] The owner of the property shall be responsible to ensure
that standard safety measures are used. The Township
does not assume responsibility to review the safety of the
ramp to users of the ramp or spectators.
(16) Roadside produce market. The same requirements apply as for a
principal use. See § 190-209.
(17) Satellite antennas.
(a) Intent: to provide for reception of satellite communications,
while assuring that such uses will not detract from the
character of any area or adversely affect property values. This
section recognizes that if not properly installed, a satellite
antenna may create a threat to the safety of persons and
property. This section recognizes that if not properly screened
and sited, satellite antennas could result in visual blight and
disturb the character of residential neighborhoods. This
section also recognizes that satellite antennas have the threat
of being substantially more of a nuisance and a visual blight
than most other forms of electronic antenna. The reasons for
this special concern about satellite antenna include the usual
solidness of the structure (which makes it more visible), the
occasional desire to place satellite antenna on front yards and
the fronts of roofs and the overall size of satellite antenna
compared to most other noncommercial antenna.
(b) Satellite antennas shall be a permitted by right accessory use
in all districts for all uses subject to the following restrictions.
(c) Location.
[1] In an LDR, MDR or HDR District, no satellite antenna shall
be located between a residential use and the front lot line,
nor on a corner lot between a residential use and any
publicly-owned street (other than an alley).
[2] In all districts, a satellite antennae shall comply with the
setback requirements of an accessory use.
[3] No satellite antenna with a diameter greater than three
feet shall be placed on the roof of a structure in an LDR,
MDR or HDR District, but may be roof-mounted in any
other district.
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:885
(d) Size and height.
[1] A satellite antenna shall have a maximum diameter of nine
feet in an LDR, MDR or HDR District and 20 feet in any
other district.
[2] A satellite antenna shall have a maximum possible height
of 11 feet above the average ground level in an LDR, MDR
or HDR District.
[3] In any district other than LDR, MDR or HDR, a satellite
antenna shall have a maximum height if ground-mounted
of 25 feet above the average ground level or 20 feet above
the highest point of a roof if roof-mounted.
(e) Colors. Earth tones are strongly encouraged.
(f) Large lot exemption. If a satellite antenna is to be located a
minimum of 200 feet from all exterior lot lines, the
requirements of this section shall not be binding, other than
the total height requirements.
(g) Mobile stands. Satellite antenna on mobile stands are
prohibited except as may be initially needed to determine the
best location for an antenna.
(h) Transmission. No satellite antenna provided for under this
section shall be used for the transmission of electronic signals.
(i) Wind resistance. See BOCA requirements.
(18) Skateboard ramps. See "residential accessory structures" in this
section.
(19) Swimming pool, household. See definition in Article II.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, this use shall be a permitted
accessory use in all districts.
(b) Permit. A zoning permit shall be required to locate or construct
a swimming pool. If the lot is not served by public sewage
service, the pools must be located a minimum of 10 feet from a
septic drain field and tank.
(c) The pool shall be used by occupants of a principal use of the
property and their occasional guests, with no commercial use.
(d) The use shall be located only in the rear yard or side yard of the
lot on which it is located, outside of the accessory use setbacks.
(e) The structural sides of the pool that contain the water shall not
be located closer than 10 feet to any residential lot line. No
deck or patio of a pool shall be located closer than five feet to a
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:886
residential lot line. The structural sides of the pool sides shall
be at least five feet from any basement.
(f) The swimming pool area or the entire property on which it is
located shall be so walled or fenced or include such sides of an
aboveground pool as to prevent uncontrolled access by
children from the street or from adjacent properties. Said
barrier shall not be less than four feet in height and shall be
maintained in good condition.
(g) Water. If the water for such pool is supplied from a private well,
there shall be no cross-connection with the public water supply
system. If the water for such pool is supplied from the public
water supply system, the inlet shall be above the overflow level
of said pool.
(h) Drainage. A pool shall only be drained in a way that does not
create erosion or flooding of neighboring properties.
(i) Noise. No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted
which will project sound in excess of the noise levels of Article
XVI of this ordinance.
(j) Lighting. Lighting perceptible beyond the lot line shall be
minimized.
(20) Temporary structure or use. See § 190-199.
(21) Tennis court.
(a) A tennis court shall not be located in front of a residential and
shall not be located within any required accessory setback
areas.
(b) No lighting shall shine directly beyond a boundary of the lot
where the tennis court is located.
(c) A tennis court shall not be located over a drainage field of an
on-lot sewage disposal system.
(22) Unit for care of relative.
(a) See definition in Article II.
(b) The use shall be restricted to occupancy by a relative (as
defined by Article II) of a permanent resident of the principal
dwelling unit on the property.
(c) Such relative shall need care and supervision because of old
age, disability, handicap or illness.
(d) Such dwelling unit shall be designed and installed in such a
way that the unit can easily be reconverted into part of the
principal dwelling unit after such relative no longer lives
§ 190-211 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-211
186:887
within it. Once such unit is no longer occupied by such relative,
the dwelling shall be reconverted into part of the principal
dwelling unit or be completely removed.
(e) The occupants of the principal dwelling unit shall report any
change in the adult occupants of the unit to the Zoning Officer.
See also the Township ordinance that requires the annual
reporting of the names of tenants for tax purposes.
(f) Once an apartment under this section is required to be
removed, there shall be no physical evidence visible from the
exterior to the lot lines that such apartment existed.
(g) Such apartment shall not decrease the single-family residential
exterior appearance of a dwelling.
(h) Such apartment shall not have its own exterior separate
entrances.
(23)Woodpiles in residential districts.
(a) Woodpiles shall be a permitted by right accessory and principal
use in all districts subject to the following requirements.
(b) In the LDR, MDR or HDR Districts, outdoor woodpiles shall
have a maximum height of seven feet and shall not cover more
than 3% of the total lot area.
§ 190-211 PALMER CODE § 190-211
186:888
ARTICLE XXI
Administration
§ 190-212. General procedure for permits.
§ 190-213. Permits and certificates.
A. Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, expansion or site
alteration or changes in use of a building or lot shall apply to the Zoning
Officer for a zoning permit by completing the appropriate application
form and by submitting the required fee.
B. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either
issue the permit under this ordinance or refuse the permit indicating
the reason. If specifically requested in writing by an applicant, reasons
for a refusal shall then be stated in writing. Certain activities require
review and/or approval of the Zoning Hearing Board and/or of the
Board of Supervisors, and/or the recommendations of the Planning
Commission.
C. Appeal. If refused a Permit by the Zoning Officer, the PA Municipalities
Planning Code247 provides for appeals processes to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
D. After the permit under this ordinance has been received by the
applicant, the applicant may undertake the action permitted by the
permit under this ordinance, within other Township ordinances.
However, it is recommended that applicants wait 30 days to begin
construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by another party to
have the permit revoked. Any commencement of construction or a use
within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the risk of the applicant.
E. Occupancy permit.
(1) Upon completion of the above actions, the applicant shall apply to
the Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit, where such permit is
required.
(2) If the Zoning Officer finds the actions of the applicant are in
compliance with the zoning permit, approved plans and any other
required Township permits, an occupancy permit shall be issued to
allow the premises to be occupied.
A. Zoning permit required. Any of the following activities or any other
activity regulated by this ordinance shall only be carried out after
receipt of a zoning permit, all applicable fees have been paid and in
compliance with this ordinance: [Amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
247. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-212 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-213
186:889
(1) Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign.
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure or
area of land.
(3) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
B. Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance to
existing structures that do not infringe upon a required setback may be
made without a permit under this ordinance, if such work does not
involve a change in use or an expansion, construction or placement of a
structure and does not involve any other activity regulated by this
ordinance.
C. Types of uses.
(1) Permitted by right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit
under this ordinance in response to an application for a use that is
"permitted by right" if it meets all of the requirements of this
ordinance, including any specific additional requirements listed for
that use in §§ 190-21 and 190-22.
(2) Special exception use or use requiring a variance. A permit under
this ordinance for a use requiring a special exception or variance
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written order of
the Zoning Hearing Board after a hearing. See § 190-5 concerning
interpretations by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Conditional use. A permit under this ordinance for a conditional use
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written order of
the Board of Supervisors, after the Planning Commission has been
given an opportunity to review the application.
D. Applications.
(1) Any request for a decision or variance by the Zoning Hearing Board
or an appeal to the Board of a determination of the Zoning Officer
or a request for a zoning permit shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the Township. Such completed application, with any
required fees, and with any required site plans or other required
information, shall be submitted to a Township employee
responsible for processing such application. The applicant is
responsible to ensure that a responsible Township official notes the
date of the official receipt on the application.
(2) Six copies of a site plan shall be submitted if an application
requires action by the Zoning Hearing Board, and three copies
shall be submitted if action by the Board is not required. Such site
plan shall be drawn to scale.
(3) Any application to the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board
shall include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
§ 190-213 PALMER CODE § 190-213
186:890
determines that a site plan or such information is unnecessary to
determine compliance with this ordinance:
(a) The location and dimensions of the lot.
(b) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas and locations of existing
and proposed uses of areas of land.
(c) The name and address of the applicant or appellant.
(d) The name and address of the owner of the affected property.
(e) A description of the proposed use of the property.
(f) Locations of individual or clusters of healthy trees over six
inches in trunk diameter (measured four feet above the
adjacent ground level) proposed to be removed or preserved,
and if applicable, the location of a tree protection area to
protect the roots of such trees (see § 190-164 of this
ordinance).
(g) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this ordinance.
(h) All other applicable information listed on the official Township
application form.
(4) Submittals to the Board. An application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary for determination of whether the
proposal complies with this ordinance:
(a) The information listed in Subsection D(3) above.
(b) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements.
(c) A description of the proposed nonresidential operations and
storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential nuisances and
hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare, odors, dust,
fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public
health and safety hazards.
(d) If a nonresidential use is proposed within close proximity to
dwellings, a description of hours of operation.
(e) A listing of any sections of this ordinances being appealed, with
the reasons for any appeal.
(5) The Zoning Officer may submit a copy of any plan and application
to any appropriate agencies and/or individuals (such as the
§ 190-213 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-213
186:891
Planning Commission or Township Engineer) for review and
comment.
(6) Other laws. The Zoning Officer may delay issuance of a permit
under this ordinance if the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
such a use would violate another Township, state or federal law or
regulation, until the applicant proves compliance. However, if the
applicant proves that the proper application(s) for a state or federal
approval have been duly submitted, then a permit under this
ordinance may be issued conditioned upon such future state or
federal approval.
(7) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or their specifically
authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written permission of
the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see definition of
"landowner" in Article II).
E. Issuance of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer should issue or refuse an application for a
zoning permit for a permitted by right use within 15 days after the
date a complete application is received, except as specifically
provided for in this ordinance (such as if a site plan review is
required) and except if an extension is granted by the applicant.
(2) At least three copies of any permit required under this ordinance
shall be made.
(3) One copy of any such permit shall be retained in Township files and
one copy shall be retained by the applicant. A copy of any such
permit shall be shown by the applicant to the Zoning Officer upon
the Zoning Officer's request.
(4) Changes to approved plans.
(a) After the issuance of a permit and/or approval of a site plan
under this ordinance by the Township, such approved
application and/or site plan shall not be changed without the
written consent of the Zoning Officer.
(b) Changes to a site plan approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
as a special exception use or by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use shall require reapproval of the changes by such
bodies if the Zoning Officer determines that such changes
significantly affect matters that were within their approval.
Such approval by the Hearing Board or the Supervisors is not
required for minor technical adjustments or corrections of
information that do not affect the significant features of the
site plan and the intensity of the use, as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
§ 190-213 PALMER CODE § 190-213
186:892
(5) Expiration of permits. A zoning permit shall expire after one year
from the date of issuance, unless:
(a) Such work begins within such time and is duly continued; or
(b) Such permit is extended by the Zoning Officer for an additional
ninety-day period.
(6) Within 12 months after the initiation of work under a zoning
permit, when such permit involves new construction or expansion
of a building, the exterior of the building shall be completely
finished, the lot shall be brought up to grade, the surrounding
ground level shall be smoothed and no stockpiles of earth shall
remain around the building.
F. Revocation of permits. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in case
of:
(1) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application
or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. (The
Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for penalties for providing
false information to a municipal employee in the carrying out of his/
her duties.)
(2) Violation of any condition lawfully imposed upon a special
exception or conditional use.
(3) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in such a
way that does not comply with this ordinance or an approved site
plan or approved permit application.
(4) Any other just cause set forth in this ordinance.
G. Temporary permit. See § 190-199.
H. Certificate of use and occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building,
sign and/or land or portion thereof for which a permit is required
herein until a certificate of use and occupancy for such structure,
building, sign and/or land or portion thereof has been issued by the
Zoning Officer.
(2) The applicant shall apply for a certificate of use and occupancy
using forms supplied by the Township.
(3) The application shall state the intended use and/or occupancy of
any structure, building, sign and/or land or portion thereof.
(4) The appropriate Township staff person should inspect the
structure, building, sign or land within 10 days after receiving
notification that the work provided for in the permit application has
been completed. If such staff person is satisfied that such work is in
§ 190-213 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-213
186:893
§ 190-214. Zoning Officer.
compliance with the permit and Township regulations, the
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued.
(5) The applicant shall keep the original or a true copy of the
certificate of use and occupancy available for official inspection at
all times.
(6) Temporary certificates. Upon request of the holder of a zoning
permit, the Township staff may issue a temporary certificate of use
and occupancy for a structure, building, sign and/or land or portion
thereof before all of the work covered by a permit has been
completed, if such portion(s) may be used or occupied safely prior
to full completion of the work without endangering public health,
safety or welfare. For temporary uses, see § 190-199.
I. Other permits. See other applicable Township ordinances concerning
other required permits, such as electrical and plumbing codes.248
J. Certificate of nonconforming use or structure.
(1) The Zoning Officer may, but is not required to, identify and register
nonconforming uses and structures.
(2) When specifically requested by the landowner, and when sufficient
evidence is provided by the landowner of such fact, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a certificate of nonconformity. Such certificate
shall state that a lot or structure is legally nonconforming, to the
best knowledge of the Zoning Officer.
A. Appointment.
(1) The Zoning Officer(s) shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. The Zoning Officer(s) shall not hold any elective office
within the Township, but may hold other appointed offices. Such
Zoning Officer(s) may include a Deputy Zoning Officer, who may
exercise all of the powers of the Zoning Officer.
(2) The compensation for the Zoning Officers shall be determined by
the Board of Supervisors. The Zoning Officer(s) shall continue to
serve until such time as the Board of Supervisors may declare
otherwise.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Administer the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Receive and examine all applications required under the terms of
this ordinance and issue or refuse permits within this ordinance.
248. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Electrical Code, and Ch. 124, Plumbing, respectively.
§ 190-213 PALMER CODE § 190-214
186:894
§ 190-215. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
(3) Receive complaints of violation of this ordinance and issue a
written notice of violation to any person violating any provision of
this ordinance.
(4) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions and interpretations issued, of variances granted by the
Board, of complaints received, of inspections made, of reports
rendered and of notice or orders issued, and make all required
inspections and perform all other duties as called for in this
ordinance.
(5) Delegate to any Palmer Township Code Enforcement Officer or
police officer the authority to enforce specific provisions of this
ordinance.
C. The Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any activity
which does not conform to this ordinance or all other ordinances of the
Township.
A. Appointment. [Amended 11-29-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-404]
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall be continued and shall consist of
five residents appointed by the Board of Supervisors, unless a
differing number of members is authorized by another valid
Township ordinance. Alternate members may be appointed within
the provisions of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.249
(2) Board members shall serve terms of five years, so fixed that the
term of office of no more than one member expires each year.
B. Vacancies. The Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of
any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only
for the unexpired portion of a term.
C. Removal of members. See Section 905 of the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.250
D. Organization.
(1) Officers. The Board shall elect officers from its own membership.
Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
(2) Quorum. For the conduct of any hearing and taking of any action a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the
Board, except that the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its
own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board, as provided by the
PA Municipalities Planning Code.
249. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10905.
§ 190-214 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-215
186:895
(3) Rules. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with all applicable Township ordinances
and state law.
(4) Fees. See § 190-220.
E. Zoning Hearing Board functions. In addition to any other
responsibilities stated in the PA Municipalities Planning Code, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for the following:
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
the appellant (a person affected or any agency of the Township)
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed
procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any valid
provision of this ordinance.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in Subsection G.
(2) Challenge to the validity of the ordinance or map.
(a) The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this
ordinance filed with the Board, in writing, by the landowner
affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any person
aggrieved.
(b) After the conclusion of the hearing(s), the Board shall decide
all questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of
fact, within the time limits of the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.
(3) Variance.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Board in writing by any landowner (or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner).
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law. (As of 1993, the Municipalities
Planning Code provided that all of the following findings must
be made, where relevant:
[1] There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot
size or shape or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
§ 190-215 PALMER CODE § 190-215
186:896
[2] Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
[3] Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
[4] The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
[5] The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(c) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance.
(4) Special exception.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Board in writing by any landowner (or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner), as provided
in this ordinance and in accordance with such standards and
criteria contained in this ordinance and the procedures in
§ 190-209.
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this ordinance, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this ordinance.
(5) Hearings. See § 190-216.
(6) Records and reports. The staff to the Board shall keep full public
records of its business.
(7) Court appeals. In the case of an appeal from the Board to the Court
of Common Pleas, the appellant shall make the return required by
law and should promptly notify the Township Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor of such appeal.
(8) Appeal by the Zoning Officer. See § 190-217. [Amended 7-1-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-320]
F. Applications to the Board. See § 190-213D.
§ 190-215 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-215
186:897
G. Time limitations for appeals. The time limitations for appeals shall be as
follows:
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any appeal with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after the decision by the Zoning
Officer that is being appealed has been officially issued or appeal
with the County Court of Common Pleas later than 30 days after a
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board has been officially issued,
except as may be provided under Section 914.1 of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.251
(2) The failure of an aggrieved person other than the landowner to
appeal an adverse decision directly related to a preliminary
subdivision or land development plan shall preclude an appeal from
a final plan approval except in the case where the final submission
substantially deviates from the approved preliminary plan.
(3) This thirty-day time limit for appeals shall not apply to the
revocation of a permit by the Township under § 190-213F.
H. Stay of proceedings. See Section 916 of the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.252
I. Time limitations on permits and variances.
(1) After a variance is approved or approval is officially authorized
under this ordinance, then a permit shall be secured by the
applicant within six months after the date of such approval or
authorization. Such action under such permit shall then begin
within 12 months of the issuance of the permit. For completion
deadlines for exterior work, see § 190-213E(6).
(2) If the applicant submits complete plans for a required site plan
review or subdivision or land development approval or special
exception or conditional use approval that is related to the variance
or issuance of a permit under this ordinance within the above time
limits, then such time limits shall begin after such plan review is
completed or such plan approval is granted.
(3) For good cause the Zoning Officer may, upon application in writing
stating the reasons therefore, extend in writing the application
period to up to 18 months.
(4) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits within the
above time period or after obtaining the permit fails to diligently
commence substantial construction within 12 months or allows
interruptions in substantial construction of longer than six months,
it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant has waived,
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
252. Editor's Note: Section 916 was repealed December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, § 98. For
provisions regarding stay of proceedings, see now 53 P.S. § 10915.1
§ 190-215 PALMER CODE § 190-215
186:898
§ 190-216. Board hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following:
withdrawn or abandoned the approval, and the Board may, after 10
days' minimum written notice, rescind or revoke all such approvals,
variances and permits if the Board finds that such rescission or
revocation is justified.
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by Section 107 of
the PA Municipalities Planning Code.253 The notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that such notice is
posted and remains posted until the hearing.
(3) Persons given notice. Written notice shall be given to the applicant
and the Zoning Officer. Notice should be given to the Planning
Commission, Board of Supervisors and owners of record of
property abutting or directly across the street from the lot lines of
the subject property. Also, such notice shall be given to any other
person or group (including civic or community organizations) who
has made a written timely request for such notice. Any such notices
should be mailed or delivered by a Township representative to the
last address known to the Township. Such notice should be
intended to be received at least five days prior to the hearing date.
(4) Adjacent municipalities. In any matter which relates to a property
which lies within 500 feet of the boundary of another municipality,
except boundaries separated by a perennial river, and which the
Township staff determines may have a significant impact on that
municipality, the Township staff should transmit to the offices of the
adjacent municipality a copy of the official notice of the public
hearing on such matter at least seven days prior to the hearing
date. Representatives of any adjacent municipality shall have the
right to appear and be heard at the public hearing.
(5) Fees. The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, establish a
reasonable fee schedule, based on cost, to be paid by the applicant
for any notice required by this ordinance and those persons
requesting any notice not required by this ordinance.
B. Parties in hearings.
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 190-215 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-216
186:899
(1) The parties to a hearing shall be the Township, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board, and any other person including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Board.
(2) The Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to
be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms
provided by the Board for that purpose.
C. Oaths and subpoenas. The chair of the Board or Hearing Officer shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents reasonably needed by and
requested by the parties.
D. Representation by counsel. The parties shall have the right to be
represented by legal counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to
respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine
adverse witnesses on relevant issues.
E. Evidence and record. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
The Board or the hearing officer, as applicable, shall keep a record of
the proceedings as required by state law.
F. Communications outside of hearings.
(1) The Board shall not meet with, visit the site with or directly
communicate specifically on the matter with the applicant or any
officially protesting party or their representatives in connection
with any issue involved, except if opportunity is provided for the
applicant and any officially protesting party to participate.
(2) The Board shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to examine and contest the material so noticed. This
restriction shall not apply to advice from the Board's solicitor.
G. Advisory reviews. The Zoning Hearing Board may request that the
Planning Commission or Township Engineer provide an advisory review
on any matter before the Board. Such review may also be volunteered
by the Planning Commission.
H. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this ordinance shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time. A request for a hearing by an applicant shall not be accepted prior
to submission of a duly filed application.
I. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision or make written findings
(when no decision is called for) on each application within 45 days
§ 190-216 PALMER CODE § 190-216
186:900
§ 190-217. Appeals.
§ 190-218. Amendments to this ordinance.
after the last hearing on that application before the Board, unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) Any conclusion based on any provision of the PA Municipalities
Planning Code or of this ordinance shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on.
J. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision or a copy of the findings
(when no decision is called for), shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the applicant or his/her representative or their last known address
not later than the time limit established by Section 907 of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.254
A. In general. All appeals of this ordinance or any action of the Board of
Supervisors, the Zoning Officer or the Board under this ordinance shall
conform with Article X-A of the State Municipalities Planning Code.255
B. Procedural defects in enactment. Allegations that this ordinance or any
amendment was enacted in a procedural defective manner shall be
appealed directly to the court and be filed not later than 30 days from
the intended effective date of the ordinance or amendment.
C. To the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals to the Board shall comply with
§ 190-216.
A. Board of Supervisors may amend, challenge or repeal any or all
portions of this ordinance on its own motion or upon agreeing to hear a
written request of any person, entity or the Planning Commission.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, following the
procedural requirements of the State Municipalities Planning Code,256
including public notice.
C. Review of amendments.
(1) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by or under
the direction of the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors
shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at
least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10907.
255. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-216 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-218
186:901
and permit the Commission an opportunity to provide
recommendations.
(2) JPC review. The Township shall submit the proposed amendment to
the Joint Planning Commission (JPC) for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment. No
action shall be taken by the Board of Supervisors until any JPC
comments are received, unless 30 days pass without such
comments being received.
D. Changes after a hearing. If, after any public hearing held upon an
amendment, the proposed amendment is revised or further revised to
include or exclude land previously not affected by it, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public
notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
E. Application for ordinance amendment. Any request for amendment of
the Zoning Ordinance (including supplement, change or repeal) by any
person or entity (other than the Township staff, Planning Commission,
Board of Supervisors or committee appointed by the Board of
Supervisors or under the direct oversight of such entity) shall include
the following:
(1) A statement of why the change would be in the best interests of the
Township.
(2) A statement addressing any adverse affects on adjacent residences.
(3) A statement addressing any major traffic access or congestion
concerns.
(4) A map showing the proposed boundaries of any proposed map
changes, the existing zoning of the land and of adjacent lands and
the current uses of adjacent lots.
(5) A statement explaining proposed extensions and major
improvements, if needed, of public water and sewer systems to
serve the land area.
(6) An escrow account to fund actual costs of legal advertisements and
professional reviews of the proposed amendment.
F. Traffic impacts of zoning amendments. The Planning Commission or the
Board of Supervisors may require an applicant for a zoning amendment
to fund a traffic impact study following standard methods and
completed by a qualified traffic engineer. Such a study shall take into
account the entire land area proposed for a change, with an emphasis
on the net projected traffic increases from the proposed amendment
compared to the existing zoning, based upon reasonable assumptions
about the intensity and type of development.
G. Notification of proposed Zoning Map amendment. If a Zoning Map
amendment is requested by a private entity and is not considered at the
§ 190-218 PALMER CODE § 190-218
186:902
§ 190-219. Curative amendments.
§ 190-220. Filing fees and costs.
§ 190-221. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
See Sections 616 and 617 of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.258
§ 190-222. Liability.
same public hearing as Zoning Map amendments proposed by Township
officials, then at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the proposed
change, the applicant shall send or have delivered, in person, written
notice of the proposed change including the hearing date and time and
a Township official to contact for more information. Such notice shall be
provided to all owners of record of all property proposed to be rezoned
(other than the applicant) and all property directly abutting the land to
be rezoned.
H. Time guideline on reviewing amendment. If a zoning amendment is
properly requested in writing and submitted together with any required
fees to the Zoning Officer outside of the curative amendment process,
the Planning Commission should hold an initial public meeting on such
proposed amendment within 60 days of receiving such request, unless
the Commission determines at a regular meeting that such request is
not worthy of further consideration.
A. Submittal. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of this ordinance which prohibits or restricts the
use or development of land in which he has an interest may submit a
curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a written request
that this challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as
provided in the PA Municipalities Planning Code.257
B. Curative fees. For a curative amendment request, the applicant shall
pay the Township all fees required under the applicable Township fee
schedule and, at a minimum, shall compensate the Township for all
actual expenses for legal advertising.
A. Fee schedule. The Board of Supervisors has established by resolution a
schedule of fees and a collection procedure relating to all applications
filed pertaining to this ordinance. The fee schedule may be based upon
the type of application and the breadth of the proposed development
(such as acreage, numbers of lots and type of use) to most accurately
reflect the Township's actual costs.
B. No application or appeal shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
257. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
258. Editor's Note: Section 616 was repealed December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, § 59. For
provisions regarding enforcement notice, see 53 P.S. § 10616.1. Also, see 53 P.S. § 10617.
§ 190-218 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-222
186:903
§ 190-223. Public utility exemptions.
See Section 619 of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.259
A. Neither the approval nor the granting of any review, issuance of permit
or approval related to construction, activity within the floodplain, site
plan review, subdivision or land development approval, erosion control,
stormwater runoff, activity on steep slopes or any other review or
permit of this ordinance, by an officer, employee, consultant or agency
of the Township, shall constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty
of any kind by the Township, or its employees, officials, consultants or
agencies, of the practicality or safety of any structure, use or
subdivision and shall create no liability upon, nor a cause of action
against, such public body, official, consultant or employee for any
damage that may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this ordinance,
the Township shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit for valid cause shown.
259. Editor's Note: See § 10619.
§ 190-222 PALMER CODE § 190-223
186:904
ARTICLE XXII
Traditional Village Option
§ 190-224. Purpose. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
The purpose of the regulations contained in this article is to encourage
a pedestrian scale of development and smart growth principles, with
characteristics found in traditional villages, including identifiable
neighborhoods, front porches, modest setbacks, community social centers,
interconnected streets, central open spaces, sidewalks, shade trees,
pathways through interconnected open spaces, significant landscaping and
limited or no parking in the required front yard.
§ 190-225. Applicability.
A. The term "traditional village" shall mean a subdivision or land
development meeting the traditional village option requirements of this
Article XXII and all other applicable Township requirements.
B. The "traditional village" incentives and reduced standards in this article
shall be permitted by right within a subdivision or land development
that meets all of the requirements of this article, in addition to all
requirements of other applicable Township ordinances and this Zoning
Ordinance. All provisions of this ordinance and other Township
ordinances shall apply except those provisions specifically permitted by
this article to be modified.
C. This article shall apply only to a subdivision or land development that
involves a minimum of 10 acres and a minimum of 40 principal uses
(which may include 40 dwelling units). [Amended 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-389]
D. A traditional village shall only apply within the following zoning
districts: HDR, MDR, LDR, C-R and PO/B.
E. A traditional village may include any of the following uses. (If a use is
listed as conditional or special exception in the applicable district, such
approval shall continue to be required within a traditional village):
(1) Dwelling types permitted in the applicable district.
(2) Places of worship.
(3) Permitted home occupations.
(4) Customarily incidental accessory structures and uses.
(5) Public or private primary or secondary schools.
(6) Nursing homes or personal care centers.
(7) U.S. Postal Service facilities or facilities leased for postal
substations.
§ 190-224 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-225
186:905
§ 190-226. Incentives.
If a traditional village meets all of the standards of this article, then the
following incentives may be permitted:
(8) Child day-care centers as a principal or accessory use.
(9) Township-owned uses.
(10) Such commercial uses as are specifically listed as permitted by this
Article.
A. Lot area. The minimum lot area or minimum average lot area per
dwelling unit (as applicable) that would otherwise be permitted may be
decreased by 15%.
(1) Lot area used for nonresidential principal uses and their accessory
uses shall not be used as the basis for calculating density of
residential uses.
(2) Infrastructure density bonus. In addition to the decreased
minimum lot area or minimum average lot per dwelling unit set
forth in § 190-226A(1) above, the Board of Supervisors may allow,
as a conditional use approved by the Board of Supervisors after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, an increase in the
total number of dwelling units permitted by § 190-226A(1), up to,
but not exceeding, 25%, upon finding that the development
provides the Township with significant infrastructure
improvements that would not otherwise be required for the
proposed development. These infrastructure improvements shall
address regional or off-site traffic concerns, regional stormwater
controls or other infrastructure improvements of a substantial
nature, as may be identified through the Township Comprehensive
Plan, regional transportation plan, Township Capital Improvements
Plan or other infrastructure improvement needs that would not
otherwise be required by this ordinance. The density bonus
calculation identified in this section shall apply to the overall tract
of land prior to any subdivision thereof. [Added 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-389]
(a) As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of
Supervisors may waive any restrictions on the number of
dwelling units permitted within a single acre, as may apply
under § 190-54E(2), in accordance with this subsection. In no
case shall the net density for the development exceed 15 units
per acre for low-rise or mid-rise apartments or 10 units per
acre for townhouses. [Amended 1-29-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-420]
(b) Eligible contributions to infrastructure improvement may take
the form of either the actual construction of the identified
improvements or a payment to the Township in the amount of
§ 190-225 PALMER CODE § 190-226
186:906
the determined improvement value. As part of the conditional
use approval, the Board of Supervisors shall determine the
required form of the improvements.
(c) Infrastructure improvements provided in exchange for bonus
density are in addition to any on-site or off-site transportation
or infrastructure improvements required under the Zoning
Ordinance or Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.260
Any bonus dwelling units shall be included in the calculation of
recreation fees or any other improvement requirements which
are calculated on a per-unit basis.
B. Lot width. The minimum lot width that would otherwise be permitted
under the applicable district regulations may be decreased by:
(1) Twenty percent if all vehicle off-street parking spaces are located
more than 25 feet from the right-of-way of a public street and if all
vehicle garages are entered from driveways from the rear of the
lot.
(2) Ten percent in all other cases.
C. Setbacks.
(1) The minimum side and rear principal building setbacks that would
otherwise be permitted may be decreased by 15%, except all
setback requirements in the applicable district regulations shall
still apply abutting the exterior lot lines of the traditional village.
(2) The minimum front yard principal building setbacks along a local
street may be reduced to 20 feet, a maximum of 10 feet of which
may include an unenclosed front porch. (Variation in front yard
setbacks is encouraged.)
(3) Permitted accessory structures for low-rise or mid-rise apartment
buildings may be set back from any exterior lot lines of a tract a
minimum distance of 10 feet, except a minimum distance of 80 feet
shall be required from the lot line of an existing single-family
detached dwelling. A minimum twenty-foot-wide buffer yard with
screening, as described in § 190-194D, shall be provided between
any such structure and any abutting existing single-family
detached dwelling. The buffer yard and screening shall be the
responsibility of the developer of low-rise or mid-rise apartments.
[Added 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-389; amended
1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
D. Place of worship. If a traditional village also includes a minimum of 20
dwelling units, then any place of worship within such subdivision or
land development may have a minimum lot area of 60% of what would
otherwise be required.
260. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-226 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-226
186:907
E. Businesses. A maximum of one commercial business establishment, in
addition to a day-care center, may be developed within the subdivision
or land development for each 50 dwelling units.
(1) Each such establishment shall have a maximum total floor area of
3,000 square feet.
(2) Such business establishments shall be limited to types that would
be permitted within a PRD.
(3) The building of each business establishment shall be setback a
minimum of 75 feet from the lot line of any existing or approved
single-family detached or single-family semidetached dwelling.
(4) Principal business uses shall not have vehicle access involving lefthand
turns directly onto a minor arterial street, except where a
traffic signal will be available.
(5) No drive-through uses shall be permitted, other than for a financial
institution.
(6) When more than one business use is permitted, such uses may be
located on one lot with attached building walls.
(7) No outdoor storage or display shall be permitted.
F. Street widths. All newly built local streets that would be abutted on
both sides by a development approved under this article may have a
minimum street right-of-way width and a minimum cartway width of
15% less than what would otherwise be required, except as provided in
Subsection F(1) below.
(1) On-street parking. As a conditional use approved by the Board of
Supervisors, after a recommendation by the Planning Commission,
an applicant may place a maximum of 50% of the required off-street
parking using on-street spaces parallel to the curb along a local
street bounded on both sides by a traditional village, provided that
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that such parking would be sufficient and safe and that the cartway
would be sufficiently wide to allow for such parking.
(2) Off-street parking for apartment uses. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in this ordinance, the following off-street parking
regulations shall apply to apartment uses within the Traditional
Village Option. All uses other than apartment uses shall comply
with the general parking regulations of this ordinance. [Added
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-389]
(a) All one-bedroom apartment units shall provide 1.5 parking
spaces per unit.
(b) All apartment units with two or more bedrooms shall provide
two parking spaces per unit.
§ 190-226 PALMER CODE § 190-226
186:908
§ 190-227. Standards.
A traditional village shall meet all of the following standards:
G. Lot coverage. The maximum building coverage and the maximum
impervious coverage may each be 10% points higher than what would
otherwise be required.
A. Front porches. All dwelling units with a first floor abutting a street
[other than low-rise (garden) apartments and mid-rise apartments]
shall include an unenclosed front porch covered by a permanent roof,
with such porch having a minimum floor area of 80 square feet. Such
porch shall not be enclosed in the future. [Amended 1-29-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-420]
B. Street trees.
(1) A traditional village shall have street trees along all existing and
proposed public or private streets, with such trees meeting the
requirements of § 165-73 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (SALDO).
(2) The placement of such trees in relation to the curb and sidewalk
shall be subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors under the
SALDO.
(3) The minimum trunk width shall be 2 1/2 inches instead of two
inches required in the SALDO.
(4) Such trees shall be planted a minimum average of 40 feet apart per
side of a street instead of the 50 feet required in the SALDO.
C. Open space. A traditional village shall have a centrally located common
open space of a minimum 20,000 square feet. If such development has
more than 100 dwelling units, then such open space shall include a
minimum total of two acres, which may be split between one or two
such locations.
(1) Such required minimum area of open space shall not have a lengthto-
depth ratio of greater than 3:1.
(2) Such open space shall be well-landscaped following a plan
approved by the Township that will eventually create a canopy of
primarily deciduous shade trees.
(3) Such open space shall include concrete, brick and/or decorative
paving pattern paths and sturdy weather-resistant wood or
wrought iron benches (or materials that in the determination of the
Zoning Officer closely resemble such materials).
(4) The maintenance of all common open space shall comply with one
of the methods of ownership and maintenance specified in the
single-family cluster option regulations in § 190-231. The applicant
§ 190-226 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-227
186:909
shall specify what proposed improvements are proposed to the
common open space.
(5) Such open space required under this section shall not include
slopes of greater than 15%.
(6) Such open space under this section shall be in addition to any open
space or recreation fees required by other sections of this
ordinance or the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO).
(7) A traditional village shall include common open space within the
requirements of the SALDO instead of the payment of recreation
fees, unless the applicant and Board of Supervisors specifically
mutually agree that the common open space would not serve any
valid public purpose within the traditional village. The applicant
shall provide a pathway system within the required open space that
is resistant to erosion. See "pathways" in Subsection D below.
D. Curbs, sidewalks and pathways.
(1) A traditional village shall have curbs and sidewalks abutting all
streets, except that under § 165-69 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, the Board of Supervisors may approve an
alternate pathway system in place of part or all of the sidewalk
system.
(2) See § 165-69B(1) of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, which provides the Township with the authority to
require bicycle or pedestrian pathways. Such pathways should be
required to connect a traditional village with other residential
developments that are not connected by local streets and any
nearby schools, parks or shopping areas.
E. Design controls. The applicant shall provide a copy of the substance of
proposed deed restrictions and covenants for the development. Such
restrictions should, but is not required to, include controls on the types
of materials and overall styles of buildings. The applicant may wish to
establish a design review board of residents.
F. Parking/vehicle access.
(1) No dwelling unit shall have an individual driveway from a public
street onto the required front yard of the lot. Dwellings are strongly
encouraged to only have vehicle access from alleys in the rear,
preferably with detached garages for single-family detached
dwellings.
(a) Any such alleys shall have a minimum cartway width of 12 feet
and shall be paved to Township standards that would apply to a
local public street, unless the Board of Supervisors permit a
§ 190-227 PALMER CODE § 190-227
186:910
modification under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(b) Any such alleys shall be maintained by a legally binding
homeowners' association. The legal form of such maintenance
commitments shall be subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, based upon review by the Township Solicitor.
(2) A maximum of 30% of the required front yard of any use may be
paved and/or used for vehicle parking.
(3) A nonresidential principal use or permitted apartment building
shall not include off-street parking spaces within 15 feet of the
curbline of a street, unless a stricter requirement is established by
another section of this ordinance.
G. Street connections. See § 165-59C(1), Street continuations, of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(1) Generally, a development under this article should have streets that
are interconnected to other abutting existing or potential
developments, through-street extensions, stub streets or
reservation of a right-of-way for a future extension.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets are permitted, but should not be used
excessively. A "grid" system, modified to account for natural
features, is encouraged.
H. Lighting. Any streetlight poles provided by a developer and any private
lighting poles within a traditional village under this Article shall have a
maximum height of 25 feet. Decorative styles of streetlight poles are
strongly encouraged.
I. Central place. One or more permitted nonresidential uses are
encouraged to be placed near the required central open space to create
a central focus for the development.
J. Bus shelters. The Board of Supervisors may require a traditional village
to provide a Plexiglas bus shelter for the public and/or school children.
Any shelter intended for the public shall be installed in cooperation with
the public bus system along an existing or proposed route. Any shelter
intended for school children shall be sited in cooperation with the
school district.
K. Floodplains and steep slopes. Buildings within a traditional village shall
comply with the applicable sections of §§ 190-150 and 190-154.
[Amended 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-389]
(1) The uses listed under § 190-154I may be requested as part of the
conditional use application for a traditional village (in which case,
all references to "special exceptions" and the "Zoning Hearing
Board" in § 190-154I shall be deemed to be references to
§ 190-227 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-227
186:911
"conditional uses" and the "Board of Supervisors," respectively).
[Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
L. Setbacks. No nonresidential principal building within a traditional
village shall be set back less than 50 feet from an exterior lot line of the
traditional village.
(1) Section 190-54BB shall also apply with respect to the minimum
building setback from the boundary of any HI, LI, PIC or PO/IP
District. [Added 1-29-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-420]
M. Tree preservation. The site design of the traditional village shall
carefully consider and maximize the preservation of healthy attractive
trees with a trunk width of six inches or more at a height of four feet
above the natural ground level.
§ 190-227 PALMER CODE § 190-227
186:912
ARTICLE XXIII
Requirements for Exotic Animals261
[Added 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-338]
§ 190-228. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Those persons empowered by the
Township to implement and enforce this ordinance.
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any nonhuman vertebrate or invertebrate species of
the animal kingdom which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious, or naturally
inclined to do harm, however domesticated, including but not limited to the
following:
Class Mammalia.
Order Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, deer, not
cattle or swine or sheep or goats).
(1)
Order Carnivora.
Family Felidae (lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots,
servals, not domestic cats).
(a)
Family Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domestic
dogs).
(b)
(c) Family Ursidae (all bears).
Family Mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martins, minks, excluding
domesticated ferrets, in accordance with § 190-230B hereof).
(d)
(e) Family Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis).
(f) Family Hyaenidae (hyenas).
(g) Family Viverridae (civets, genets, mongooses).
(2)
(3) Order Edentatia (anteaters, armadillos, sloths).
Order Marsupialia (opossums, kangaroos, wallabies, not sugar
gliders).
(4)
Order Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, not horses or donkeys
or mules).
(5)
(6) Order Primates (lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas).
(7) Order Proboscidae (elephants).
A.
261. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIII, Single-Family Cluster Option, was repealed 2-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 282.
§ 190-228 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-228
186:913
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, trade
or professional association, firm, limited liability company, joint venture,
association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, and any officer, member,
shareholder, director, employee, agent or representative thereof.
POSSESSOR — Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, harbors, brings
into the state, has in one's possession, acts as a custodian, or has custody
or control of an exotic animal.
§ 190-229. Keeping, breeding, selling and exchanging of exotic
animals prohibited.
§ 190-230. Exemptions.
Order Rodentia (squirrels, beavers, porcupines, not guinea pigs, or
rats or mice, or gerbils or hamsters).
(8)
Class Reptilia.
Order Squamata:
Family Varanidae (only water monitors and crocodile
monitors).
(a)
(b) Family Iguanaidae (only green iguanas and rock iguanas).
Family Boidae (all species whose adult length has the potential
to exceed eight feet in length).
(c)
(d) Family Colubridae (only boomslangs and African twig snakes).
Family Elapidae (such as coral snakes, cobras, mambas, etc.),
all species.
(e)
(f) Family Nactricidae (only keelback snakes).
Family Viperidae (such as cooperheads, cottonmouths,
rattlesnakes, etc.), all species.
(g)
(1)
B.
Order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials, etc.),
all species.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, breed,
bring into the Township, have in one's possession, act as custodian, or
have custody or control of an exotic animal, except in compliance with
this act.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, adopt or transfer to
the wild any exotic animal, subject to the exemptions set forth in
§ 190-230 hereof.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in conduct which places or
may place another person in danger of an attack by an exotic animal.
A. The provisions of this act shall not apply to:
§ 190-228 PALMER CODE § 190-230
186:914
(1) Any holder of a personal possession permit pursuant to this
ordinance;
(2) Any duly incorporated nonprofit animal protection organization
housing an exotic animal at the written request of the animal
control authority;
(3) Any animal control or law enforcement agencies or officers acting
under the authority of this act;
(4) Any licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics;
(5) Any licensed wildlife sanctuary;
(6) Any licensed or accredited research or medical institution;
(7) Any licensed or accredited educational institution;
(8) Any licensed circus or amusement show; or
(9) Any licensed person temporarily transporting exotic animals
through the Township, if the transit time is not more than 96 hours,
and which provides proper cages, fences and other protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring
the public or causing a health hazard due to fecal matter, or
otherwise.
B. Domesticated ferrets are permitted as house pets, provided that the
following requirements are met:
(1) Ferrets must be descented.
(2) Ferrets must be spayed or neutered.
(3) Ferrets are to be vaccinated, except as otherwise provided herein.
Vaccination documents or a statement from a licensed veterinarian
advising against vaccination shall be furnished upon request.
(4) No breeding of ferrets is permitted.
(5) Ferrets are not to be at large when outdoors.
C. Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs are permitted as house pets, provided that
the following requirements are met:
(1) The pet owner is to obtain a document from a licensed veterinarian
or a nationally recognized registry certifying that the pet is a
Vietnamese Potbellied Pig.
(2) No more than two Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs are permitted and
shall be primarily indoor pets.
(3) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs are to be spayed or neutered.
(4) No breeding of Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs is permitted.
§ 190-230 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-230
186:915
§ 190-231. Personal possession permit required for possessor.
(5) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs are not to be at large when outdoors.
(6) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs are to be vaccinated, except as
otherwise provided herein. Vaccination documents or a statement
from a licensed veterinarian advising against vaccination shall be
furnished upon request.
A. A person may obtain a personal possession permit for an exotic animal
only if the following are met:
(1) The person was in legal possession of an exotic animal prior to the
effective date of this act and is the legal possessor of the exotic
animal; and
(2) The person applies for and is granted a personal possession permit
as set forth under this section for each such exotic animal in the
person's possession by the date which is six months from the
effective date of this ordinance.
B. Persons who meet the requirements set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall annually obtain a personal possession permit. From and
after the effective date of this ordinance, no new exotic animal shall be
brought into possession under authority of a personal possession
permit.
C. An applicant shall file an application to receive a personal possession
permit with the Animal Control Authority on forms provided by the
Animal Control Authority. The application shall include the following:
(1) A written statement which sets forth the following information:
(a) The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
applicant.
(b) The description of each exotic animal the applicant possesses,
including the scientific name, name, sex, age, color, weight,
and any distinguishing marks or coloration that would aid in
the identification of such animal.
(c) A photograph of the exotic animal.
(d) The exact location where the exotic animal is to be kept.
(e) The names, addresses, and telephone number of the person
from whom the applicant obtained the exotic animal, if known.
(f) The name, address, and phone number of the veterinarian
providing veterinary care to the exotic animal and a certificate
of good health from the possessor's veterinarian.
(2) A certification in writing and notarized by a notary public that:
§ 190-230 PALMER CODE § 190-231
186:916
(a) The applicant is 18 years of age or older.
(b) The applicant has not been convicted of or found responsible
for violating a local or state law prohibiting cruelty, neglect, or
mistreatment of an animal.
(c) The facility and the conditions in which the exotic animal will
be kept are in compliance with this act.
(d) The applicant has regularly provided veterinary care to the
exotic animal when needed and will provide such care in the
future.
(e) Proof that a licensed veterinarian has spayed or neutered the
exotic animal or, if no proof can be made, a statement that the
animal has been spayed or neutered as made by an examining
physician. In the alternative, if a licensed veterinarian has
determined that the spay or neuter procedure would endanger
the well-being of the exotic animal, a statement of such
licensed veterinarian to that effect.
(3) A plan for the quick and safe recapture of the exotic animal if the
exotic animal escapes and for the destruction of the exotic animal if
such recapture is not possible.
(4) Proof of a policy for liability insurance in an amount of not less than
$250,000 for each occurrence for liability damages for destruction
of or damage to property and death or bodily injury to a person
caused by the exotic animal. The possessor of an exotic animal shall
provide proof of such policy for liability insurance to the Animal
Control Authority on an annual basis.
(5) Any additional information the Animal Control Authority may deem
necessary to carry out the provisions of this act.
(6) Fees for application, issuance, and renewal of a personal
possession permit as established by the Animal Control Authority in
order to recover the costs associated with the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance. The fees collected under this
section may be used only to administer and enforce this ordinance.
D. A permit shall not be granted unless the Animal Control Authority finds
that all of the requirements set forth in this section have been met.
E. The personal possession permit shall set forth all of the following
information:
(1) The name, address, phone number, and date of birth of the permit
holder.
(2) The address, if different than above, where the exotic animal(s) will
be kept.
§ 190-231 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-231
186:917
§ 190-232. Care and treatment of exotic animals held under a
personal possession permit.
§ 190-233. Notification.
(3) The name, number, sex, species, age of the exotic animal(s), and
any distinguishing marks or coloration that would aid in the
identification of the animal.
(4) The name, address, and phone number of the veterinarian who
provides veterinary care to the exotic animal(s) named on the
permit.
(5) Any other relevant information the Animal Control Authority may
deem necessary.
F. The Animal Control Authority shall keep records of who is carrying a
valid permit. A permit holder shall notify the Animal Control Authority
of any changes of the information stated on the permit, which shall
include the death of the exotic animal.
A. An exotic animal shall not be tethered, leashed, chained outdoors, or
allowed to run at large.
B. An exotic animal shall not be mistreated, neglected, abandoned or
deprived of necessary food, water, and sustenance.
C. A person transporting an exotic animal in a vehicle shall keep the
animal securely caged in the vehicle at all times.
D. The possessor shall contact the Animal Control Authority, a wildlife
sanctuary or other organization maintained for the benefit of such
animals if the possessor can no longer care for the exotic animal, prior
to euthanasia of the exotic animal.
A. The possessor of an exotic animal shall have continuously posted and
displayed at each possible entrance onto the premises where an exotic
animal is kept a conspicuous sign, clearly legible, and easily readable
by the public, warning that there is an exotic animal on the premises. In
addition, the possessor shall conspicuously display a sign with a
warning symbol that informs children of the presence of an exotic
animal.
B. If any exotic animal unintentionally escapes, the possessor of the exotic
animal shall immediately contact a law enforcement officer of the
Township where the possessor resides to report the escape or release.
The possessor is liable for all expenses associated with efforts to
recapture the animal.
§ 190-231 PALMER CODE § 190-234
186:918
§ 190-234. Public contact.
The permittee shall not bring an exotic animal to any public property or a
commercial retail establishment unless the permittee is bringing the animal
to a licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian clinic.
§ 190-235. Enforcement of article; inspection.
§ 190-236. Denial of personal possession permit; appeal.
§ 190-236.1. Confiscation and disposition of exotic animals.
A. The Animal Control Authority, its staff, its agents, local law enforcement
agents, or county sheriffs are authorized and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. The possessor of an exotic animal, at all reasonable times, shall allow
the Animal Control Authority, its staff, and its agents to enter the
premises where the animal is kept to ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
A. If the Animal Control Authority finds that an applicant for an original or
renewal of a personal possession permit does not meet the
requirements set forth herein, the Animal Control Authority shall deny
the applicant a personal possession permit and give the applicant
written notice of the denial and the reasons for the denial.
B. If the Animal Control Authority finds that a person has not complied
with this ordinance, the Animal Control Authority may suspend or
revoke the personal possession permit and give the possessor written
notice of the suspension or revocation and the reasons for the
suspension or revocation.
C. A person who is denied a personal possession permit, denied a renewal
of a personal possession permit, or who has had a permit suspended or
revoked may appeal the decision to the Court of Common Pleas for the
precinct in which the animal is located or the municipal court in the
municipality in which the animal is located no later than the 15th day
after the permit is denied, suspended, or revoked. The decision of the
court may not be appealed.
A. The Animal Control Authority may immediately confiscate any exotic
animal if the animal is kept in contravention of this ordinance. The
possessor is liable for the costs of confiscation, placement and care for
the exotic animal until the time of the return to the possessor or until
the animal has been relocated to an approved facility.
B. If an exotic animal is confiscated due to the animal being kept in
contravention of this ordinance, the possessor must post a security
bond with the Animal Control Authority in an amount sufficient to
guarantee payment of all reasonable expenses expected to be incurred
in caring and providing for the animal, including but not limited to the
§ 190-234 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-236.1
186:919
§ 190-236.2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 190-236.3. Effective date.
§ 190-236.4. Powers and duties of Animal Control Authority.
Any officer whose duty it is to enforce this ordinance or any officer
investigating any alleged violation of this ordinance shall have the power
and duty to:
estimated cost of feeding, medical care, and housing for a least 30
days. The security bond or cash shall not prevent the Animal Control
Authority from disposing of the animal at the end of the 30 days
unless the person claiming the animal posts an additional security bond
or cash with the Animal Control Authority to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses expected to be incurred in caring and providing
for the animal for an additional 30 days, and does so prior to the
expiration of the first thirty-day period. The amount of the security bond
or cash shall be determined by the Animal Control Authority and based
on the current rate to feed, provide medical care, and house the animal.
C. If the possessor of a confiscated exotic animal cannot be located or if a
confiscated exotic animal remains unclaimed, the Animal Control
Authority, at its discretion, may contact a licensed facility or individual
and allow the animal to be adopted by such facility or individual, or may
euthanize the animal.
D. If the exotic animal cannot be taken up or recaptured safely by the
Animal Control Authority or if proper and safe housing cannot be found,
the Animal Control Authority may immediately euthanize the animal.
E. An exotic animal may be returned to the possessor only if, to the
satisfaction of the Animal Control Authority, the possessor has a
personal permit, has corrected the conditions resulting in the
confiscation, and has paid the cost of placement and care of the animal
while under the care and control of the Animal Control Authority.
A. Except as provided by this section, this ordinance takes effect on the
date the ordinance is signed into law.
B. Not later than six months from the effective date of this ordinance, the
Animal Control Authority shall implement and administer the
prohibitions of the keeping of exotic animals under this ordinance,
including but not limited to the creation of the personal possession
permit program established by this ordinance, orders relating to
applications for personal possession permit and renewals, fees for
permits and renewals, and the form and content of the application.
C. A person shall have until the date which is six months from the effective
date of this ordinance to obtain a personal possession permit.
§ 190-236.1 PALMER CODE § 190-236.4
186:920
A. Enforce all provisions of this ordinance relating to exotic animals and
arrest any person who has violated any of the provisions of this
ordinance while in pursuit of that person immediately following the
violation.
B. Go upon any land or water outside of buildings, posted or otherwise, in
the performance of the officer's duty.
C. Secure, execute and serve all warrants and subpoenas for suspected
violations of this ordinance.
D. Carry firearms or other weapons, concealed or otherwise, in the
performance of the officer's duties.
E. Purchase and resell exotic animals, or any part thereof, for the purpose
of securing evidence.
F. Stop and inspect, examine or search, at any time or place, any person or
means of transportation or its attachment or occupants, or any clothing
worn by any person, or any bag, clothing or container within the
Township upon reasonable suspicion of a violation of this ordinance and
upon presentation of official identification and statement regarding the
purpose of the inspection or search.
G. When making an arrest or an investigation or when found in the
execution of a search warrant, seize and take possession of any exotic
animals held in possession and any equipment or evidence related to
the possession of such exotic animals within the Township.
H. Demand and secure assistance when the officer deems it necessary.
I. Demand and secure identification from any person.
J. Require the holder of any personal possession permit required by this
ordinance to sign the holder's name on a separate piece of paper in the
presence of the requesting officer.
§ 190-236.4 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-236.4
186:921

ARTICLE XXIV
(Reserved)262
§ 190-237. (Reserved)
§ 190-238. (Reserved)
§ 190-239. (Reserved)
§ 190-240. (Reserved)
§ 190-241. (Reserved)
§ 190-242. (Reserved)
§ 190-243. (Reserved)
§ 190-244. (Reserved)
§ 190-245. (Reserved)
§ 190-246. (Reserved)
262. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIV, Planned Residential Development, was repealed
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 282.
§ 190-237 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-246
186:923

ARTICLE XXV
Route 248 Overlay District
[Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288; amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
§ 190-247. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Route 248 Overlay District
Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are shown in the
exhibit.263
§ 190-248. Purpose.
The purpose of the Route 248 Overlay District is to manage growth and
development along Route 248 and create a safe and visually unified
streetscape. The overlay district is intended to improve the design
standards of the corridor, while maintaining the base district use standards
and respecting the landowners in and around the Route 248 corridor. It
aims to facilitate the development of a safe and viable corridor that links
a variety of uses through streetscape amenities, design standards, and
coordinated signage.
§ 190-249. Community development objectives.
A. To facilitate safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular travel along the
Route 248 corridor by managing land uses and traffic conflicts and
decreasing curb cuts.
B. To establish more effective building and parking lot orientations for the
corridor.
C. To encourage greater interest in architectural quality and public
amenities by proactively managing the streetscape and character of the
corridor.
D. To develop coordinated streetscape amenities along the corridor,
including sidewalks, streetlighting, landscaping, and signage.
E. To build upon and improve the Route 248 corridor by establishing
guidelines and standards for future development, reuse, and
expansions; evaluate undeveloped parcels for their highest and best
use; and design new developments so that they contribute to and have a
relationship to the community as a whole.
F. To set standards for home conversions that will maintain the character
of the structure.
G. To avoid uses which impose upon neighboring residential pockets and
negatively impact the character of the area.
263. Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-247 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-249
186:925
§ 190-250. Permitted by right uses.
§ 190-251. Conditional uses.
§ 190-252. Area and bulk regulations.
H. To establish backyard buffers which protect adjoining residential uses
from excessive light and glare, noise, or parking.
A. Uses shall be permitted in the Route 248 Overlay District as defined
within the respective base zoning districts.
A. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the Route 248 Overlay District as
defined within the respective base zoning districts.
B. Regulations in this article must be followed upon change of use and/or
replacement with the same use. All conversions under this article shall
be considered land developments, thereby conforming to the Palmer
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.264
C. Additional uses permitted as conditional within the boundaries of the
Route 248 Overlay District shall include:
(1) In residential districts, home conversions from residential to
professional office space with low traffic volumes, not to exceed
3,000 square feet. Professional offices shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Doctors offices.
(b) Dentists offices.
(c) Public accountants offices.
(d) Architectural offices.
(e) Engineering and planning offices.
(f) Law offices.
(g) Therapists and counselors offices.
(h) Insurance offices.
(i) Real estate offices.
A. Lot area: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
B. Lot width: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
C. Building and impervious coverage: shall follow respective base zoning
district regulations.
264. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-249 PALMER CODE § 190-252
186:926
§ 190-253. Landscaping, screening, and buffer yards.
D. Front yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
E. Side yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
F. Rear yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
G. Height: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
H. Trash dumpsters. Dumpster and storage bins shall be screened (to 90%
opaqueness) on three sides by evergreen planting, fencing, and/or
walls. Screening shall block view of dumpster from streets and
dwellings.
A. Screening and buffer yard requirements. (Also see §§ 190-194 and
190-195.)
(1) Rear yard buffer. All buffer yard vegetation must be detailed on site
plans.
(a) Rear yard buffer strips shall be provided for all nonresidential
and multifamily residential uses abutting a residential use or
zoning district.
(b) Rear yard buffers shall include a minimum twenty-foot-wide
landscaping strip to act as a visual screen. The buffer shall be
provided by the developer or property owner along the Route
248 corridor for all new land developments, replacement with
the same use and/or changes of uses, and for buildings
reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the assessed tax
value or for buildings expanded by 10% of the square footage
or more.
(c) Per every 40 lineal feet of perimeter, the landscaping strip shall
contain a combination of one deciduous tree having a caliper of
not less than three inches and a height of 10 feet at the time of
planting and two evergreen trees having a height of not less
than six feet at time of planting, plus five shrubs, per 40 lineal
feet of perimeter. The deciduous trees, evergreen trees, and
shrubs shall be chosen from the list of plant types for Palmer
Township provided in SALDO § 165-73. Trees and shrubs shall
be creatively planted within the ten-foot landscaping strip to
include staggered placement and/or clustering.
(d) In addition to the required landscaped buffer, rear yards shall
include a permanent continuous fence, with a minimum height
of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet, maintained in
good repair, and set back from the property line to include
§ 190-252 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-253
186:927
§ 190-254. Streetscape performance regulations.
trees placed between the fence and the property line. At least
80% of the total surface shall be opaque, with exception of
the first four inches between the ground and the fence. For
purpose of the buffer yard, chain link fences are not permitted.
(e) All building mechanical systems such as air-conditioning units,
exhaust systems, satellite dishes, elevator housing, and
dumpsters shall be integrated into the overall design and
character of the building. Landscaping and other screening
devices, including decorative fencing, shall be used to soften
the view of these features from adjoining properties.
(f) The rear buffer shall be installed and permanently maintained
by the applicant and successive landowners. Plants that are
needed to form the visual screen, which die or are removed,
shall be replaced by the landowner within five months of
notification by the Township.
(2) Parking areas.
(a) Where paved vehicular areas occur in a side yard that abuts a
residential district or use, such paved areas shall have a
permanent continuous row of bushes, four feet high at the time
of planting, with sufficient density to block car lights from
shining into the adjoining property. Upon written approval
from the adjoining (i.e., affected) property owner, a four-foot
fence with 90% opaqueness may be substituted for the
continuous row of bushes, provided that it is not a chain-linkstyle
fence.
(b) The side yard buffer shall be provided by the developer or
property owner for all new land developments, changes of uses
and/or replacement with same use, and for buildings
reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the assessed tax
value or for buildings expanded by 10% of the square footage
or more.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided for all parcels within the Route 248
Overlay District. Sidewalks shall be provided by the developer or
property owner for all new land developments, changes of uses
and/or replacement with the same use, and for buildings
reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the assessed tax value
or for buildings expanded by 10% of the square footage or more.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Township
specifications (see Chapter 160, Street and Sidewalks, of the
Township Code) and installed to connect to the lot line of adjacent
parcels. Sidewalks constructed along Route 248 shall begin at the
§ 190-253 PALMER CODE § 190-254
186:928
§ 190-255. Signs.
§ 190-256. Parking standards and interconnection.
right-of-way and be constructed a minimum of five feet as
measured toward the building setback line.
A. Height. Within the Route 248 Overlay District, signs shall be limited to
a maximum height of five feet. Freestanding pole signs are prohibited.
B. Area. Maximum sign area in the Route 248 Overlay District shall be
limited to 15 square feet in residential districts and 20 square feet in
nonresidential districts.
C. Illumination.
(1) Illumination of signs beyond what is customary in a residential area
shall be prohibited within the LDR, MDR, HDR, HDR-2 and C-R
Districts. No sign shall be excessively illuminated beyond which is
necessary for the sign to be readable. Internally illuminated signs
shall be prohibited in all residential districts in the Township.
Where permitted in nonresidential districts, internally illuminated
signs shall have a dark background with illuminated text that
accounts for a maximum of 20% total sign area.
(2) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white, steady,
stationary light. External light shall be of reasonable intensity
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties. Signs
may be backlighted with a diffused or shielded light source if
deemed necessary by the Township to controlling glare.
Backlighting shall illuminate the letters, characters or graphics on
the sign, but not its background, in order to shine only on the face
of the sign and not spill over into the property.
(3) Hours of illumination. Signs shall be lit during office hours or
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., whichever is less.
All existing internally illuminated signs in a residential zoning
district shall be lit during office hours only.
A. Interconnection of off-street parking areas.
(1) To reduce traffic congestion and the number of curb cuts along
public streets, parking areas shall be connected to adjacent parcels
through rear or side yard access road. The intent is to provide a
secondary point of access in a grid pattern to uses within the Route
248 Overlay District. Where a parking area is constructed and is
adjacent to an undeveloped nonresidential parcel, the access drive
shall be extended to the lot line for future connection.
(2) The use of shared access points is strongly recommended. Where
possible, two adjacent uses may share ingress and egress points to
§ 190-254 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-256
186:929
§ 190-257. Building standards and orientation.
§ 190-258. Land development plan review. [Amended 10-29-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-325]
serve both uses. This model will decrease the number of curb
cuts along Route 248 and create a safer and more efficient road.
The number of access points onto minor arterial roads shall be
minimized through the use of shared ingress and egress between
adjacent uses.
(3) Access onto arterial and collector streets shall conform to the
standards in the Township Zoning Ordinance § 190-198.
B. Parking area lighting.
(1) All lights used for parking or in parking areas must be designed to
shine back toward the principal building and shall not spill any
light or glare onto the adjacent property.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall have hoods or shields to manage the light
from spilling over unnecessarily.
(3) Lighting shall be coordinated with landscaping in parking areas.
C. Parking.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to the rear or side of
structures to create a unified streetscape and minimize congestion.
Parking and loading shall conform to the standards in § 190-198 of
the Township Zoning Ordinance. A limit of three parking spaces
may be provided on the side of the building that faces a public
street in order to decrease the stacking of vehicles and "back up"
on to a public street. For corner lots, the front yard shall be
determined by side fronting onto the primary street, and the
secondary street frontage shall be considered a side yard.
A. All buildings in the Route 248 corridor overlay shall provide a
prominent and highly visible street-level doorway or entrance along the
front or side of the building that faces a public street.
B. In order to maintain the character of the area, blank walls shall not be
permitted to face a public street. The street level facade of any building
facing a public street or access drive shall be at least 15% transparent.
These requirements shall apply to all new land developments and
existing buildings reconstructed over 50% of tax value.
C. Exterior wall materials that are not permitted in the Route 248 corridor
overlay include: large split face blocks, tilt-up concrete panels,
prefabricated steel panels, and standard concrete masonry units.
A. For all home conversions to a nonresidential use (permitted only as a
conditional use), a land development plan shall be required.
§ 190-256 PALMER CODE § 190-258
186:930
B. If a conditional use review will also need approval of the physical layout
under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, then the
Zoning Officer may permit an applicant to satisfy the conditional use
plan requirement with a plan meeting the sketch plan requirements of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, provided that such
plan provided sufficient information to determine compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance (see § 190-201C).
§ 190-258 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-258
186:931

ARTICLE XXVI
William Penn Highway Overlay District
[Added 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 288; amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-311]
§ 190-259. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "William Penn Highway Overlay
District Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are shown in
the exhibit265.
§ 190-260. Purpose.
The purpose of the William Penn Highway Overlay District is to manage
growth and development along William Penn Highway and create a safe and
visually unified streetscape. The overlay district is intended to improve the
design standards of the corridor, while maintaining the base district use
standards and respecting the landowners in and around the William Penn
Highway corridor. It aims to facilitate the development of a safe and viable
corridor that links a variety of uses through streetscape amenities, design
standards, and coordinated signage.
§ 190-261. Community development objectives.
A. To ensure safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular travel along the
William Penn Highway corridor by managing land uses and traffic
conflicts, decreasing the number of curb cuts, and establishing more
effective building and parking lot orientations.
B. To encourage greater interest in design unification.
C. To proactively manage the streetscape and character of the corridor
through the application of coordinated amenities including sidewalks,
landscaping, and signage.
D. To build upon and improve the William Penn Highway corridor by
establishing guidelines and standards for future development, reuse,
and expansions.
E. To design new developments that contribute to and have a relationship
to the community as a whole and avoid uses which negatively impose
upon neighboring residential pockets.
F. To set standards for home conversions to enable flexibility while also
maintaining basic standards and minimizing land use conflicts.
G. To keep traffic and the number of curb cuts to a minimum.
265. Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-259 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-261
186:933
§ 190-262. Permitted by right uses.
§ 190-263. Conditional uses.
H. To establish backyard buffers which protect adjoining residential uses
from light, noise, and other conflicts that may be caused by
nonresidential uses.
A. Uses shall be permitted in the William Penn Highway Overlay District
as defined within the respective base zoning districts.
B. Additional uses permitted by right within the boundaries of the William
Penn Highway Overlay District shall include:
(1) Buildings containing commercial and/or office uses on the ground
floor and residential and/or office uses on the upper floors. Ground
floor commercial uses shall be limited to 1,500 square feet.
A. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the William Penn Highway
Overlay District as defined within the respective base zoning districts.
B. Regulations in this article must be followed upon change of use and/or
replacement with same use. All conversions under this article shall be
considered land developments, thereby conforming to the Palmer
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.266
C. Within the boundaries of the William Penn Highway Overlay District,
the following shall be permitted as conditional uses:
(1) In residential districts, home conversions from residential to
commercial uses with low traffic volumes, no drive-through
features, and total floor space not to exceed 3,000 square feet. All
"adult uses" are prohibited. Retail uses shall include but are not
limited to the following:
(a) Florists.
(b) Financial institutions (no drive-through).
(c) Restaurants (no drive-through).
(d) Animal clinics.
(e) Retail businesses.
(f) Cafes.
(g) Bookstores.
(h) Clothing stores.
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-261 PALMER CODE § 190-263
186:934
§ 190-264. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 190-265. Landscaping, screening, and buffer yards.
(2) In residential districts, home conversions from residential to
professional office space with low traffic volumes, not to exceed
3,000 square feet. Professional offices shall be representative of
but not limited to the following:
(a) Doctors offices.
(b) Dentists offices.
(c) Public accountants offices.
(d) Architectural offices.
(e) Engineering and planning offices.
(f) Law offices.
(g) Therapists and counselors offices.
(h) Insurance offices.
(i) Real estate offices.
(3) In residential districts, home conversions from single-family
residential to multifamily residential with a limit of two units per
dwelling.
A. Lot area: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
B. Lot width: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
C. Building and impervious coverage: shall follow respective base zoning
district regulations.
D. Front yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
E. Side yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
F. Rear yard setback: shall follow respective base zoning district
regulations.
G. Height: shall follow respective base zoning district regulations.
H. Trash dumpsters. Dumpsters and storage bins shall be screened (to
90% opaqueness) on three sides by evergreen planting, fencing, and/or
walls. Screening shall block view of dumpster from streets and
dwellings.
§ 190-263 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-265
186:935
A. Screening and buffer yard requirements. (Also see §§ 190-194 and
190-195.)
(1) Rear yard buffer. All buffer yard vegetation must be detailed on site
plans.
(a) Rear yard buffer strips shall be provided for all nonresidential
and multifamily residential uses abutting a residential use or
zoning district.
(b) Rear yard buffers shall include a minimum twenty-foot-wide
landscaping strip to act as a visual screen. The buffer shall be
provided by the developer or property owner along the William
Penn Highway corridor for all new land developments,
replacement of the same use and or changes of uses, and for
buildings reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the
assessed tax value or for buildings expanded by 10% of the
square footage or more.
(c) Per every 40 lineal feet of perimeter, the landscaping strip shall
contain a combination of one deciduous tree having a caliper of
not less than three inches and a height of 10 feet at the time of
planting and two evergreen trees having a height of not less
than six feet at time of planting, plus five shrubs, per 40 lineal
feet of perimeter. The deciduous trees, evergreen trees, and
shrubs shall be chosen from the list of plant types for Palmer
Township provided in SALDO § 165-73. Trees and shrubs shall
be creatively planted within the ten-foot landscaping strip to
include staggered placement and/or clustering.
(d) In addition to the required landscaped buffer, rear yards shall
include a permanent continuous fence with a minimum height
of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet, maintained in
good repair, and set back from the property line to include
trees placed between the fence and the property line. At least
80% of the total surface shall be opaque, with exception of the
first four inches between the ground and the fence. For
purpose of the buffer yard, chain-link-type fences are not
permitted.
(e) All building mechanical systems such as air-conditioning units,
exhaust systems, satellite dishes, elevator housing, and
dumpsters shall be integrated into the overall design and
character of the building. Landscaping and other screening
devices, including decorative fencing, shall be used to soften
the view of these features from adjoining properties.
(f) The rear buffer shall be installed and permanently maintained
by the applicant or his/her successor. Plants that are needed to
form the visual screen, which die or are removed, shall be
replaced by the landowner within five months of notification by
the Township.
§ 190-265 PALMER CODE § 190-265
186:936
§ 190-266. Streetscape performance regulations.
§ 190-267. Signs.
(2) Parking areas.
(a) Where paved vehicular areas occur in a side yard that abuts a
residential district or use, such paved areas shall have a
permanent continuous row of bushes, four feet high at the time
of planting, with sufficient density to block car lights from
shining into the adjoining property. Upon written approval
from the adjoining (i.e., affected) property owner, a four-foot
fence with 90% opaqueness may be substituted for the
continuous row of bushes, provided that it is not a chain-linkstyle
fence.
(b) The side yard buffer shall be provided by the developer or
property owner for all new land developments, changes of uses
and/or replacement with same use, and for buildings
reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the assessed tax
value or for buildings expanded by 10% of the square footage
or more.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided for all parcels within the William Penn
Highway Overlay District. Sidewalks shall be provided by the
developer or property owner for all new land developments,
replacement of the same use and/or changes of uses, and for
buildings reconstructed or rehabilitated over 25% of the assessed
tax value or for buildings expanded 10% of the square footage or
more.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Township
specifications (see Chapter 160, Street and Sidewalks, of the
Township Code) and installed to connect to the lot line of adjacent
parcels. Sidewalks constructed along William Penn Highway shall
begin at the right-of-way and be constructed a minimum of five feet
as measured toward the building setback line.
A. Height. Within the William Penn Highway Overlay District, ground
signs shall be limited to a maximum height of five feet. Freestanding
pole signs are prohibited.
B. Area. Maximum sign area in the William Penn Highway Overlay District
shall be limited to 15 square feet in residential districts and 20 square
feet in nonresidential districts.
C. Illumination.
(1) Illumination of signs beyond what is customary in a residential area
shall be prohibited within the LDR, MDR, HDR, HDR-2, and C-R
§ 190-265 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-267
186:937
§ 190-268. Parking standards and interconnection.
Districts. No sign shall be excessively illuminated beyond which
is necessary for the sign to be readable. Internally illuminated
signs shall be prohibited in all residential districts in the Township.
Where permitted in nonresidential districts, internally illuminated
signs shall have a dark background with illuminated text that
accounts for a maximum of 20% total sign area.
(2) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white, steady,
stationary light. External light shall be of reasonable intensity
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties. Signs
may be backlighted with a diffused or shielded light source if
deemed necessary by the Township to controlling glare.
Backlighting shall illuminate the letters, characters or graphics on
the sign, but not its background, in order to shine only on the face
of the sign and not spill over into the property.
(3) Hours of illumination. Signs shall be lit during office hours or
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., whichever is less.
All existing internally illuminated signs in a residential zoning
district shall be lit during office hours only.
A. Interconnection of off-street parking areas.
(1) To reduce traffic congestion and the number of curb cuts along
public streets, parking areas shall be connected to adjacent parcels
through rear or side yard access road. The intent is to provide a
secondary point of access in a grid pattern to uses within the
William Penn Highway Overlay District. Where a parking area is
constructed and is adjacent to an undeveloped nonresidential
parcel, the access drive shall be extended to the lot line for future
connection.
(2) The use of shared access points is strongly recommended. Where
possible, two adjacent uses may share ingress and egress points to
serve both uses. This model will decrease the number of curb cuts
along William Penn Highway and create a safer and more efficient
road.
(3) Access onto arterial and collector streets shall conform to the
standards in the Township Zoning Ordinance § 190-198.
B. Parking area lighting.
(1) All lights used for parking or in parking areas must be designed to
shine back toward the principal building and shall not spill any
light or glare onto the adjacent property.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall have hoods or shields to manage the light
from spilling over unnecessarily.
§ 190-267 PALMER CODE § 190-268
186:938
§ 190-269. Building standards and orientation.
§ 190-270. Land development plan review. [Amended 10-29-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-325]
(3) Lighting shall be coordinated with landscaping in parking areas.
C. Parking.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to the rear or side of
structures to create a unified streetscape and minimize congestion.
Parking and loading shall conform to the standards in § 190-198 of
the Township Zoning Ordinance. A limit of three parking spaces
may be provided on the side of the building that faces a public
street in order to decrease the stacking of vehicles and "back up"
on to a public street. For corner lots, the front yard shall be
determined by side fronting onto the primary street, and the
secondary street frontage shall be considered a side yard.
A. All buildings in the William Penn Highway corridor overlay shall provide
a prominent and highly visible street-level doorway or entrance along
the front or side of the building that faces a public street.
B. In order to maintain the character of the area, blank walls shall not be
permitted to face a public street. The street level facade of any building
facing a public street or access drive shall be at least 15% transparent.
These requirements shall apply to all new land developments and
existing buildings reconstructed over 50% of tax value.
C. Exterior wall materials that are not permitted in the William Penn
Highway corridor overlay include: large split face blocks, tilt-up
concrete panels, prefabricated metal panels, and standard concrete
masonry units.
A. For all home conversions to a nonresidential use (permitted only as a
conditional use), a land development plan shall be required.
B. If a conditional use review will also need approval of the physical layout
under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, then the
Zoning Officer may permit an applicant to satisfy the conditional use
plan requirement with a plan meeting the sketch plan requirements of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, provided that such
plan provided sufficient information to determine compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance (see § 190-201C).
§ 190-268 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-270
186:939

ARTICLE XXVII
NEB North End Business Overlay District
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
§ 190-271. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "North End Business Overlay
District Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are shown in
the exhibit.267
§ 190-272. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROUTE 33/MAIN STREET INTERCHANGE PROJECT — A project to
construct a new full-diamond highway interchange at the existing crossing
of PA Route 33 and Main Street in the northern end of Palmer Township.
The project includes the replacement of the existing Main Street bridge
structure over Route 33, the installation of new on- and off-ramps between
Route 33 and Main Street, traffic signals at the intersection of the new
ramps with Main Street, widening of Main Street, and associated
improvements that include signage, stormwater management systems,
storm-conveyance systems, utility pole relocations, and highway lighting.
This new interchange will provide access to areas east and west of Route
33, including areas immediately adjacent to the interchange.
§ 190-273. Purpose.
A. To provide sufficient space to meet current and anticipated future
regional needs for light industrial, office and commercial development
that will benefit the Township and the region, both economically and
aesthetically.
B. To recognize that the northern end of the Township will not be a
reasonable location for light industrial, office and commercial
development unless the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is
constructed.
C. To provide a mechanism that will allow areas planned for light
industrial, office and commercial uses to be developed in conjunction
with the construction of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project.
D. To allow for prudent business decisionmaking by future property
owners and encourage investments in land and infrastructure to be
made with the knowledge that the Township will permit such light
industrial, office and commercial development to be occupied and
operate only in the event that the Route 33/Main Street Interchange
Project is constructed.
267. Editor's Note: The current zoning map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-271 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-274
186:941
§ 190-274. Community development objectives.
§ 190-275. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply within the North End Business Overlay
District, provided that all other requirements of Township ordinances are
met:
A. To promote light industrial, office and commercial development in
appropriate locations to provide wider employment choices and
improve overall economic development for the Township.
B. To ensure that sufficient road capacity and utilities are in place before
new development occurs.
C. To provide a safe and efficient transportation network that is closely
coordinated with land use.
D. To proactively manage the streetscape and character of the area
through the application of coordinated amenities, including sidewalks,
landscaping and signage.
A. Applicability of base zoning district provisions.
(1) The provisions of the base zoning district(s) shall continue to be
applicable to the property within the North End Business Overlay
District only until such time that the plans for construction of the
Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project have been approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT), any
financial security required by PennDOT for the completion of said
improvements has been posted by the entity responsible for
completing the construction of said improvements, and primary
construction contracts relative to the completion of said project
have been executed.
(2) After the Zoning Officer has evidence that the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project is open to public traffic, then the name
of this district shall be changed to the North End Business District,
subject to the requirements set forth herein.
B. Procedure for application process in the North End Business Overlay
District.
(1) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the North
End Business Overlay District shall be accepted for review by the
Zoning Officer only in the event that the applicant provides the
Zoning Officer with documentation from PennDOT verifying that
plans for the construction of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange
Project have been approved by PennDOT, any financial security
required by PennDOT for the completion of said improvements has
been posted by the entity responsible for completing the
construction of said improvements, and primary construction
§ 190-274 PALMER CODE § 190-275
186:942
§ 190-276. Permitted by right uses.
contracts relative to the completion of said project have been
executed.
(a) Applications for zoning permits related to the construction of
structures permitted in the North End Business Overlay
District shall include the following information:
[1] Size of building, in square feet.
[2] Architectural renderings of the building showing
compliance with the design provisions of § 190-279 below.
(b) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
North End Business Overlay District shall include the following
additional information:
[1] Description of business and/or services provided.
[2] Hours and days of operation.
[3] Maximum number of employees expected on any one shift.
[4] Expected number of outside customers or visitors.
[5] Number of trucks and expected hours of truck traffic.
(2) Applications for building permits related to the construction of
structures permitted within the North End Business Overlay
District shall be approved only in the event that all relevant
provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
(3) Applications for certificates of occupancy for structures within the
North End Business Overlay District shall be granted only in the
event that the interchange improvements have been approved by
PennDOT, any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements
in accordance with the development agreement with PennDOT and
any policies and procedures set forth by PennDOT, and all other
applicable provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
A. Within the boundaries of the North End Business Overlay District, all
developments shall be constructed in accordance with a wellcoordinated,
integrated overall plan. If a development is to be carried
out in progressive phases, each phase shall be planned so that the
requirements and intents of this article and this ordinance shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any phase.
B. Uses permitted by right shall be as follows:
§ 190-275 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-276
186:943
(1) Business, professional or government office, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
(b) No structure designed for office use shall include any dwelling
unit or units.
(2) Medical office, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
(b) This use does not include treatment centers or mental care
facilities.
(3) Business services, as follows:
(a) Photocopying service.
(b) Package delivery service.
(c) Sales, service, repair and/or maintenance of computers,
business machines and office equipment.
(4) Printing and publishing establishment.
(5) Information/data processing.
(6) Industrial activity involving processing, cleaning, assembling,
packaging, conversion, production, repair, manufacturing or
testing of materials, goods and/or products, provided that:
(a) All activity shall occur within completely enclosed structures.
(b) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(c) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(7) Research, development or testing laboratory, provided that:
(a) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
§ 190-276 PALMER CODE § 190-276
186:944
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(b) All storage of explosive or hazardous substances or gases shall
comply fully with the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall require the applicant to provide
evidence of compliance with all current regulatory
requirements.
(8) Distribution center, either as a stand-alone use or in combination
with other uses, provided that:
(a) The distribution and warehousing component of any building
does not exceed 200,000 square feet; and
(b) Docking bays shall not be constructed or maintained on
opposite sides of the building.
(c) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(d) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 60
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(e) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queueing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
(9) Warehouse, provided that:
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum standards
of this ordinance and in unique situations shall be provided
according to maximum standards of the industry for the
specific type of warehouse.
(b) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(c) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or flammable
materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or
skins or similar items shall be permitted.
(d) Warehouse uses that would involve more than 40 tractortrailer
trips in any twenty-four-hour period shall be required to
meet the additional standards for a distribution center as listed
under Subsection B(8) above. A "trip" shall be defined as one
arrival at or one departure from the facility.
§ 190-276 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-276
186:945
§ 190-277. Prohibited uses.
(10) Wholesale sales, provided that no retail sales or sales to the
general public are permitted.
(11) Trade school.
(12) Child day-care center, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The use shall comply with applicable State Department of
Public Welfare regulations.
(b) Parking spaces shall be designed for safe and convenient dropoff
and pick-up of children.
(c) An outdoor recreation area shall be enclosed with a forty-eightinch
high fence and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any
rear lot line. The recreation area shall be screened so as to
protect adjoining properties and shall provide adequate shade
for the children.
(d) A child day-care center shall be permitted as an accessory use
for any principal use permitted in this ordinance, provided that
the use is limited to employees and their children only.
(13) Appropriate government services and facilities.
(14) Appropriate public utilities.
(15) Essential services.
C. Multiple occupancy.
(1) A principal building may be occupied by more than one use,
provided that all uses are permitted within this ordinance, and
provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are complied
with.
(2) The applicant for each use within a multiple-occupancy building
shall be required to apply for a separate building and zoning permit
through the required processes.
A. All uses are prohibited that would have a serious threat of future
inability to meet the environmental preservation standards of the
Zoning Ordinance, as stated in Article XVI, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Asphalt manufacturing or refining.
(2) Coke oven.
(3) Creosote treatment or manufacturing.
(4) Distillation of bones, coal or refuse (except in the manufacture of
gas).
§ 190-276 PALMER CODE § 190-277
186:946
§ 190-278. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 190-279. Building standards and orientation.
(5) Explosives, fireworks, ammunition and gunpowder manufacture or
storage (except within a United States military facility).
(6) Fat rendering.
(7) Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse
refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animals or animal waste.
(8) Bulk manufacturing of acids or chemicals.
(9) Oilcloth or linoleum manufacturing.
(10) Paper mill.
(11) Petroleum or kerosene refining or distillation or bulk storage.
(12) Potash work.
(13) Stockyard or slaughterhouse.
(14) Tar distillation or manufacturing.
A. Minimum lot area: three acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 180 feet.
C. Lot coverage:
(1) Maximum total building coverage: 40%.
(2) Maximum total impervious coverage: 70%.
D. Building setback from exterior lot lines:
(1) A minimum of 15 feet from the future right-of-way of any public
street.
(2) A minimum of 25 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot not within
the North End Business Overlay District.
(3) A minimum of 15 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot that is
within the North End Business Overlay District.
E. Maximum building height: 60 feet.
A. The main entrance of all buildings shall be located along the front or
side of the building that faces the street.
(1) The main entrance of a building shall be identified by being
recessed in from the surrounding wall or projecting out from the
surrounding wall, and/or by windows, changes in building height,
roof overhangs, awnings, lighting or combinations thereof.
§ 190-277 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-279
186:947
§ 190-280. Signs.
B. Blank walls shall not be permitted along any wall that faces Main
Street.
C. All exterior building walls that face a street shall be finished with brick,
cut stone, smooth precast concrete, poured concrete panels, split-face
masonry blocks, stucco, plaster, clear or lightly tinted glass, or
combinations thereof.
(1) Standard concrete block or metal shall not be permitted on walls
that face a street.
D. Exterior building walls shall use neutral colors. Contrasting trim, color
bands and/or textures may be used to help break up the vertical
monotony of flat walls.
E. For any property with frontage on Main Street, loading docks, service
bays and roll-up doors shall be screened against view from Main Street.
F. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall use the same color as the wall on
which they are located.
G. Building mechanical systems, including but not limited to airconditioning
units, exhaust systems, satellite dishes, and elevator
housing, shall be located on the roof whenever possible. Any
mechanical systems not located on the roof of the building shall be
enclosed with fencing and/or covering that is the same color as the
building.
H. Public utility equipment shall be placed underground whenever
feasible.
I. Trash receptacles and above-ground utility equipment shall be placed
to the side or rear of the nearest building.
(1) All trash receptacles shall be enclosed by landscaping, fencing,
walls or other enclosures.
(2) All fencing, walls, and/or enclosures used for trash receptacles
shall be the same color as the building with which they are
associated.
A. Permitted signs. The following types of signs are permitted within the
North End Business Overlay District:
(1) Freestanding ground-supported (monument) signs, not to exceed
one sign per street frontage. The total sign area of each
freestanding sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(a) A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or electronically
changing message sign, provided that it meets the size
requirements of this section and the provisions of § 190-189.
§ 190-279 PALMER CODE § 190-280
186:948
§ 190-281. Off-street parking and loading.
(b) Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot under the
provisions above, only one sign shall be a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it meets
the size requirements of this section and the provisions of
§ 190-189.
(2) Wall signs.
(a) Up to two wall signs shall be permitted for each principal
building. Each sign shall have a maximum total sign area of 50
square feet.
(b) Each principal use within a multiple-occupancy building may
also have a wall sign with a maximum sign area of four square
feet, which shall be located near or on the main entrance to the
use.
(3) Signs identifying major developments per § 190-181.
(4) Signs not requiring permits per § 190-179.
(5) Temporary signs per § 190-178.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) Freestanding pole signs are prohibited.
(2) Signs on mobile or movable stands are prohibited.
C. Height.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet.
(2) The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to the total height
of the wall on which they are located.
D. Illumination.
(1) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white light
that does not move or change intensity. External light shall be
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties.
(2) Externally illuminated signs may be backlit with a diffused or
shielded light source to control glare. Backlighting shall illuminate
the letters, characters or graphics on the sign but not its
background.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall have a dark background with
illuminated text that accounts for a maximum of 20% of the total
sign area.
§ 190-280 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-281
186:949
§ 190-282. Streetscape performance regulations.
A. Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements in Article
XVII and Table 17.1, the following requirements shall apply to uses
within the North End Business Overlay District:
(1) The design of parking and circulation areas on the site shall
address the needs of different users to the site, such as visitors,
employees and truck loading and unloading.
(a) Parking areas for visitors or customers shall be located
adjacent to the main entrance of the building.
(b) All parking areas on a lot shall be accessible from within the
lot.
(c) Clear access shall be provided to all sides of the building for
emergency vehicles.
(2) Where parking areas are located between the building and the
street, the parking areas shall be screened from view of the street
using low fencing, a low wall that matches the architectural style of
the principal building, earthen berms, variations in elevation,
landscaping, or combinations thereof.
(3) Internal walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided for visitors, customers
and employees to travel between buildings and parking areas.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed with a different
pavement material than that used for streets and parking areas
so as to differentiate the walkway from the driving areas.
Pedestrian walkways may be constructed with concrete,
decorative brick, blocks or stone, not including crushed stone.
B. Loading. In addition to the loading requirements in Article XVII, the
following requirements shall apply to uses within the North End
Business Overlay District:
(1) Loading and unloading areas, including areas for truck parking
and/or service, shall be located at the rear of a building, whenever
possible. If loading, unloading, truck parking and/or service bays
are not possible at the rear of a building, then they may be located
at the side of a building, provided that they are not visible from the
street.
(a) If loading, unloading, truck parking and/or service areas are
located at the side of a building, they shall be shielded from
view of the street using fencing, a wall that matches the
architectural style of the principal building, or dense
landscaping.
§ 190-281 PALMER CODE § 190-282
186:950
§ 190-283. Traffic management.
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided for all uses within the North
End Business Overlay District. Sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with Township specifications (see Chapter 160, Street and
Sidewalk Construction, of the Township Code) and installed to connect
to the lot line of adjacent parcels.
B. Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided along all street
frontages in the North End Business Overlay District.
(1) Streetlight poles shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall
be placed a maximum of 100 feet apart.
(2) All streetlight poles and fixtures shall be constructed in accordance
with design standards set forth by the electric utility company.
(3) The design of streetlight poles and fixtures shall be consistent
throughout the North End Business Overlay District.
(4) Cobra-head-style streetlights shall be prohibited.
A. Road capacity. To ensure that the road network is able to handle
additional traffic from intensive types of development, the following
conditions shall be met:
(1) A traffic impact report shall be submitted as required by § 190-203.
(2) The Township Engineer shall review, at the expense of the
applicant, any professional traffic studies that are presented and
make recommendations to the Township.
(3) The provisions of § 165-59M of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, entitled "Required traffic improvements,"
shall also apply to any use that involves construction of one or more
new principal buildings.
B. Access management. The Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project
will make Main Street a critical corridor for traffic movement. The
number of access points onto Main Street needs to be minimized, and
traffic shall be steered towards a minimum number of strategically
planned intersections and traffic signals. In order to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards, the following access management provisions
shall apply:
(1) Access to lots shall be provided only onto and off of an abutting
collector or local street and shall not be provided directly onto or
off of Main Street.
(2) Access to two or more adjoining lots may be combined, shared and/
or coordinated to minimize the number of access points onto a
public street. Shared parking lots and access drives or access
points connecting adjacent lots are strongly encouraged.
§ 190-282 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-283
186:951
§ 190-284. through § 190-290. (Reserved)
(a) The provision of joint access shall be subject to the creation of
an easement with the deed allowing cross-access between the
properties within the access road area. The joint access
arrangements shall include a recorded joint agreement with
the deed defining the maintenance responsibilities of each of
the property owners served by the access road.
(3) Developments consisting of three or more principal structures shall
make use of a carefully coordinated interior street system.
(a) Each principal building shall have its main vehicle access onto
a common parking lot, access drive, service road, marginal
access street, or other alternative method approved by the
Township, which shall then provide access to an abutting
collector or local street.
(b) Vehicle access shall be provided to each use without causing
congestion to, hazards upon or interference with traffic
movement on public streets.
(4) The minimum distance between an access point or driveway and a
street intersection on the same or opposite side of a street shall be
as follows, measured from center line to center line:
(a) From Main Street: 300 feet.
(b) From a collector street: 200 feet.
(c) From a local street: 100 feet.
(5) An access point or driveway shall be separated a minimum distance
of 100 feet from any other access point or driveway onto the same
street, measured from center line to center line.
(6) The access control provisions of § 190-198 and the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance § 165-59E and
§ 165-67 shall also apply, except that where the requirements of
this ordinance are more restrictive, this ordinance shall supersede.
§ 190-283 PALMER CODE § 190-284
186:952
ARTICLE XXVIII
MSC Main Street Commercial Overlay District
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
§ 190-291. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Main Street Commercial
Overlay District Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are
shown in the exhibit.268
§ 190-292. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROUTE 33/MAIN STREET INTERCHANGE PROJECT — A project to
construct a new full-diamond highway interchange at the existing crossing
of PA Route 33 and Main Street in the northern end of Palmer Township.
The project includes the replacement of the existing Main Street bridge
structure over Route 33, the installation of new on- and off-ramps between
Route 33 and Main Street, traffic signals at the intersection of the new
ramps with Main Street, widening of Main Street, and associated
improvements that include signage, stormwater management systems,
storm-conveyance systems, utility pole relocations, and highway lighting.
This new interchange will provide access to areas east and west of Route
33, including areas immediately adjacent to the interchange.
§ 190-293. Purpose.
§ 190-294. Community development objectives.
A. To allow for the creation of a planned commercial center featuring
qualities of a traditional Main Street neighborhood that will benefit the
Township and the region, both economically and aesthetically.
B. To recognize that the northern end of the Township will not be a
reasonable location for commercial development unless the Route 33/
Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
C. To provide a mechanism that will allow areas planned for commercial
uses to be developed in conjunction with the construction of the Route
33/Main Street Interchange Project.
D. To allow for prudent business decisionmaking by future property
owners and encourage investments in land and infrastructure to be
made with the knowledge that the Township will permit such
commercial development to be occupied and operate only in the event
that the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
268. Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-291 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-294
186:953
§ 190-295. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply within the Main Street Commercial
Overlay District, provided that all other requirements of Township
ordinances are met:
A. To expand the variety and competitiveness of goods and services that
can be conveniently accessed by Township residents and employees.
B. To ensure safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular connections along
the Main Street corridor by managing land uses and traffic conflicts and
minimizing the number of curb cuts.
C. To minimize the adverse visual impact of expansive parking lots by
establishing effective building and parking lot orientations and through
the use of shade trees, screening, and grade changes.
D. To proactively manage the streetscape and character of the area
through the application of coordinated amenities, including sidewalks,
landscaping, streetlighting and signage.
A. Applicability of base zoning district provisions.
(1) The provisions of the underlying zoning district(s) shall continue to
be applicable to the property within the Main Street Commercial
Overlay District only until such time that the plans for construction
of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project have been
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements,
and primary construction contracts relative to the completion of
said project have been executed.
(2) After the Zoning Officer has evidence that the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project is open to public traffic, then the name
of this district shall be changed to the Main Street Commercial
District, subject to the requirements set forth herein.
B. Procedure for application process in the Main Street Commercial
Overlay District.
(1) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the Main
Street Commercial Overlay District shall be accepted for review by
the Zoning Officer only in the event that the applicant provides the
Zoning Officer with documentation from PennDOT verifying that
plans for the construction of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange
Project have been approved by PennDOT, any financial security
required by PennDOT for the completion of said improvements has
been posted by the entity responsible for completing the
construction of said improvements, and primary construction
§ 190-294 PALMER CODE § 190-295
186:954
§ 190-296. Permitted by right uses.
contracts relative to the completion of said project have been
executed.
(a) Applications for zoning permits related to the construction of
structures permitted in the Main Street Commercial Overlay
District shall include the following information:
[1] Size of building, in square feet.
[2] Architectural renderings of the building showing
compliance with the design provisions of § 190-298 below.
(b) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
Main Street Commercial Overlay District shall include the
following additional information:
[1] Description of business and/or services provided.
[2] Hours and days of operation.
[3] Maximum number of employees expected on any one shift.
[4] Expected number of outside customers or visitors.
[5] Number of trucks and expected hours of truck traffic.
(2) Applications for building permits related to the construction of
structures permitted within the Main Street Commercial Overlay
District shall be approved only in the event that all relevant
provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
(3) Applications for certificates of occupancy for structures within the
Main Street Commercial Overlay District shall be granted only in
the event that the interchange improvements have been approved
by PennDOT, any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements
in accordance with the development agreement with PennDOT and
any policies and procedures set forth by PennDOT, and all other
applicable provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
A. Within the boundaries of the Main Street Commercial Overlay District,
all tracts shall be developed as part of a planned commercial
development, subject to the following provisions:
(1) All developments shall be constructed in accordance with a wellcoordinated,
integrated overall plan. If a development is to be
carried out in progressive phases, each phase shall be planned so
§ 190-295 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-296
186:955
that the requirements and intents of this article and this ordinance
shall be fully complied with at the completion of any phase.
(2) The site shall utilize a carefully designed interior and exterior
system of vehicular access to minimize the number of driveways
entering onto public streets. The applicant shall prove that all
proposed driveways or access points are placed in the most logical
and reasonable locations, considering impacts upon abutting
streets. No new traffic access that would involve left-hand turns
onto and off Main Street shall be permitted, except at an
intersection where a traffic signal exists or will be provided at the
same time as the shopping center use.
(3) Where a drive-through window is proposed for any use within the
development, a stacking lane shall be provided to serve a minimum
of 10 cars. The stacking lane shall connect only to internal access
drives and parking lots, shall not have direct access drives and
parking lots, and shall not have direct access from the street. The
stacking lane shall not be used as a parking lot circulation aisle nor
shall it in any way conflict with the circulation of traffic through the
parking lot.
B. Uses permitted by right shall be as follows:
(1) Shopping center.
(2) Retail store, as follows:
(a) Arts and crafts store.
(b) Beer, wine or liquor store.
(c) Bookstore, not to include an adult bookstore.
(d) Consumer electronics or appliance store.
(e) Florist.
(f) Gift shop.
(g) Grocery store or supermarket.
(h) Specialty food store, to include the following:
[1] Bakery or delicatessen, when goods are not sold for
immediate consumption on the premises.
[2] Fresh food market.
(i) Furniture or home furnishings store.
(j) Jewelry store.
(k) Pharmacy or drugstore.
§ 190-296 PALMER CODE § 190-296
186:956
(l) Health supplement store.
(m) Office supply store.
(3) Convenience store, including automotive fuel sales, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from any future street
right-of-way or 50 feet from the street center line, whichever is
greater.
(b) Adequate stacking capacity shall be provided to prevent traffic
from backing onto public streets.
(4) Auto service station, subject to the following provisions:
(a) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from any future street
right-of-way or 50 feet from the street center line, whichever is
greater.
(c) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be located
within a building.
(d) Full-body paint spraying or body or fender work shall not be
permitted.
(e) Automobiles that are taken to a service station for outside
storage because of an accident may remain no longer than 60
days from the day vehicle arrives at the station.
(f) Adequate stacking capacity shall be provided to prevent traffic
from backing onto public streets.
(5) Car wash, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Traffic flow and ingress/egress shall not cause traffic backups
on adjacent streets.
(b) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be
clearly marked.
(c) Signs and outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with this
ordinance.
(d) Adequate provisions shall be made for proper and convenient
disposal of refuse.
(e) On-site recycling of water shall be required.
(6) Restaurant, standard, including those with outdoor seating.
§ 190-296 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-296
186:957
(7) Restaurant, fast-food, including those with outdoor seating, subject
to the following provisions:
(a) A bakery or delicatessen shall be included in this use where
goods are prepared and sold for immediate consumption on the
premises.
(b) Where a drive-through window is proposed, a stacking lane
shall be provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars. A stacking
lane shall not be used for parking lot circulation aisles, nor
shall it in any way conflict with through circulation of parking.
(c) The use may provide an outdoor menu board with a maximum
sign area of 50 square feet (beyond the sign restrictions
established by this ordinance) if drive-through service is
provided from within the building to customers in their
vehicles.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside the restaurant for
patron use.
(8) Tavern, bar, or nightclub, not to include an after-hours club or adult
use, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The use shall not be open after 2:00 a.m.
(9) Financial institution or bank, not to include a check-cashing
business, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Any drive-through windows and approach lanes shall be
located to avoid traffic conflicts and hazards within the site and
along abutting streets.
(b) Where a drive-through window is proposed, a stacking lane(s)
shall be provided to serve a minimum of 10 cars. Total stacking
lane(s) shall not be used for parking lot circulation aisles, nor
shall it in any way conflict with through circulation of parking.
(10) Personal services uses, as follows (not to include adult uses):
(a) Barber or beauty salon.
(b) Dry cleaner.
(c) Photo studio.
(d) Shoe repair or tailor.
(e) Household appliance repair.
(11) Hotel/motel, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Units in such facilities shall contain a minimum of 200 square
feet of floor space, with a minimum of two rooms: a bedroom,
and a separate bathroom equipped with a flush toilet, a sink,
§ 190-296 PALMER CODE § 190-296
186:958
and a bathtub or shower, all properly connected to a public
water and sewer system.
(b) Indoor recreation facilities primarily directed towards guests
of the use and a restaurant may be permitted as accessory uses
to a hotel or motel.
(c) A hotel or motel shall serve only temporary guests. A use that
is routinely inhabited by any persons for periods longer than 60
days shall be considered a boardinghouse and regulated as
such.
(d) Complete coverage with an automatic fire alarm system and an
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
(12) Banquet hall, convention center or conference center, subject to
the following provisions:
(a) Food and/or alcoholic beverages may only be sold or served for
on-premises consumption and only during scheduled events.
(b) The use shall comply with the noise level standards of
§ 190-158.
(13) Auditorium, commercial, including a stadium or arena, subject to
the following provisions:
(a) Lighting which is perceptible beyond the property line shall be
minimized in accordance with § 190-161 of this ordinance.
(b) The use shall comply with the noise level standards of
§ 190-158.
(c) The minimum land area required shall be one acre per each
100 seats.
(d) The above-mentioned provisions need not be complied with if
the proposed facility is owned by the Township of Palmer or
any agency of the Township.
(14) Cultural center, including museum, library or art gallery.
(15) Recreation, indoor commercial, including a theater or movie
theater (not including drive-in theater), amusement arcade,
bowling alley, skating rink or laser tag facility, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
will project audible sound in excess of the sound levels of
§ 190-158 of this ordinance.
(b) Lighting shall be allowed in accordance with § 190-161.
(16) Exercise club, indoor, subject to the following provisions:
§ 190-296 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-296
186:959
(a) All activities shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(b) No loudspeaker or amplifying device shall be permitted which
will project audible sound beyond the property line.
(c) Lighting shall be allowed in accordance with § 190-161.
(17) Business, professional or government office, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within a
principal building.
(b) No structure designed for office use shall include any dwelling
unit or units.
(18) Medical office, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within a
principal building.
(b) This use does not include treatment centers or mental care
facilities.
(19) Business services, as follows:
(a) Photocopying service.
(b) Package delivery service.
(c) Sales, service, repair and/or maintenance of computers,
business machine and office equipment.
(20) Essential services.
C. Multiple buildings on a lot.
(1) An approved commercial lot may include more than one principal
building.
(a) The minimum building setback requirements shall only apply
at the lot lines of the property.
(b) A twenty-five-foot-wide minimum separation distance shall
apply between principal buildings, unless stated otherwise.
(2) The applicant for each use on a lot shall be required to apply for a
separate building and zoning permit.
D. Multiple occupancy.
(1) A principal commercial building may be occupied by more than one
use, provided that all uses are permitted within this ordinance, and
provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are complied
with.
§ 190-296 PALMER CODE § 190-296
186:960
§ 190-297. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 190-298. Building standards and orientation.
(2) The applicant for each use within a multiple-occupancy building
shall be required to apply for a separate building and zoning permit
through the required processes.
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Two acres, provided that:
(a) Each parcel shall be part of an overall commercial
development.
(b) Vehicular access shall be provided as part of the coordinated
internal driveway system throughout the entire commercial
development.
(c) No additional exterior access points shall be provided onto
Main Street.
B. Minimum lot width: individual outparcels shall have a minimum lot
width of 150 feet.
C. Lot coverage:
(1) Maximum total building coverage: 35%.
(2) Maximum total impervious coverage: 80%.
(3) Minimum landscaped area: 20%.
D. Building setback from exterior lot lines:
(1) A minimum of five feet up to a maximum of 15 feet from the future
right-of-way of any public street.
(2) A minimum of 25 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot not within
the Main Street Commercial Overlay District.
(3) A minimum of 15 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot that is
within the Main Street Commercial Overlay District.
E. Parking setback. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from Main Street.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is more
restrictive.
A. The main entrance of a building or use shall be identified by being
recessed in from the surrounding wall or projecting out from the
surrounding wall, and/or by windows, roof overhangs, awnings, lighting
or combinations thereof.
§ 190-296 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-298
186:961
§ 190-299. Signs.
B. Blank walls shall not be permitted along any wall that faces a street.
(1) The first-story facade of any wall that is visible from a street shall
be at least 25% transparent and may contain an entrance.
C. All exterior building walls shall be finished with brick, cut stone, smooth
precast concrete, poured concrete panels, split-face masonry blocks,
stucco, plaster, clear or lightly tinted glass, or combinations thereof.
(1) Standard concrete block or metal shall not be permitted as a visible
wall material.
D. For buildings that contain more than one use, the building shall be
designed to give the appearance of a separate facade for each use. Uses
shall be differentiated by columns, alternate materials, recesses,
projections, roof overhangs, awnings or combinations thereof within an
overall design scheme.
E. Exterior building walls shall use neutral colors. Contrasting trim, color
bands and/or textures may be used to create contrast.
F. Loading doors or service entrances shall use the same color as the wall
on which they are located.
G. Building mechanical systems, including but not limited to airconditioning
units, exhaust systems, satellite dishes, and elevator
housing, shall be located on the roof whenever possible. Any
mechanical systems not mounted on the roof shall be enclosed with
fencing and/or covering that is the same color as the building.
H. Public utility equipment shall be placed underground whenever
feasible.
I. Trash receptacles and above-ground utility equipment shall be placed
to the side or rear of the nearest building.
(1) All trash receptacles shall be enclosed by landscaping, fencing,
walls or other enclosures.
(2) All fencing, walls, and/or enclosures used for trash receptacles
shall be the same color as the building with which they are
associated.
A. Permitted signs. The following types of signs are permitted within the
Main Street Commercial Overlay District:
(1) Signs relating to a single use occupying an individual structure on a
single lot:
(a) Freestanding signs.
§ 190-298 PALMER CODE § 190-299
186:962
[1] One freestanding ground-supported (monument) sign shall
be permitted with a total sign area not to exceed 30 square
feet.
[2] If a lot has a total linear street frontage of more than 300
feet or if the lot has frontage on more than one street, a
second freestanding ground-supported sign is permitted
with a total maximum sign area of 60 square feet for the
two signs together.
(b) Wall signs. One wall sign shall be permitted for each building
wall facing a public street, each with a total sign area not to
exceed 15% of the total area of the building wall on which the
sign is located. The maximum total wall sign area shall be 60
square feet.
(c) Window signs. The total sign area of window signs, as defined
in Article XVIII, shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the
window on which the sign is located.
(d) Signs not requiring permits per § 190-179.
(e) Temporary signs per § 190-178.
(2) Signs relating to more than one commercial use or building on a
lot:
(a) Freestanding signs.
[1] One freestanding ground-supported (monument) sign shall
be permitted with a maximum sign area not to exceed 100
square feet, except where such sign is located within 100
feet of the right-of-way of, and intended or designed to be
viewed from, PA Route 33, in which case the maximum
sign area may be increased to 200 square feet. This sign
may consist of a structure to which are attached several
signs, within the total sign area.
[a] A freestanding sign may include a digital sign or
electronically changing message sign, provided that it
meets the size requirements of this section and the
provisions of § 190-189.
[2] If a lot has a total linear road frontage of more than 300
feet on Main Street or if the lot has frontage on more than
one street or if the lot includes more than 10 principal
uses, a second freestanding sign shall be allowed with a
total maximum sign area of 150 square feet for the two
signs together, except where one such sign is located
within 100 feet of the right-of-way of, and intended or
designed to be viewed from, PA Route 33, in which case
§ 190-299 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-299
186:963
the maximum total sign area shall be increased to 250
square feet.
[a] Where more than one sign may be permitted on a lot
under the provisions above, only one sign shall be a
digital sign or electronically changing message sign,
provided that it meets the size requirements of this
section and the provisions of § 190-189.
[3] It is the specific intent of this section that, for buildings
including more than one use, each use be identified as part
of one coordinated freestanding sign structure and not by
individual freestanding signs.
(b) Wall signs. Up to two wall signs shall be permitted for each
use. One wall sign shall be allowed on the wall of the building
containing the main entrance to the building. If the primary
entrance is not on the wall of the building which faces the
street, a second wall sign shall be permitted on the wall of the
building which faces the street. For each use, the sign area of a
wall sign shall not exceed 15% of the area of the wall on which
the sign is located, up to a maximum sign area of 50 square
feet.
(c) Window signs. The total sign area of window signs, as defined
in Article XVIII, shall not exceed 20% of the total area of the
window on which the sign is located.
(d) Signs identifying major developments per § 190-181.
(e) Signs not requiring permits per § 190-179.
(f) Temporary signs per § 190-178.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) Freestanding pole signs are prohibited.
(2) Signs on mobile or movable stands are prohibited.
C. Height.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet,
except where such sign is located within 100 feet of the right-ofway
of, and intended or designed to be viewed from, PA Route 33,
in which case the maximum height may be increased to 40 feet.
(2) The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to the total height
of the wall on which they are located.
D. Illumination.
(1) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white light
that does not move or change intensity. External light shall be
§ 190-299 PALMER CODE § 190-299
186:964
§ 190-300. Off-street parking and loading.
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties.
(2) Externally illuminated signs may be backlit with a diffused or
shielded light source to control glare. Backlighting shall illuminate
the letters, characters or graphics on the sign but not its
background.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall have a dark background with
illuminated text that accounts for a maximum of 20% of the total
sign area.
A. Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements in Article
XVII and Table 17.1, the following requirements shall apply to uses
within the Main Street Commercial Overlay District:
(1) The design of parking and circulation areas on the site shall
address the needs of different users to the site, such as customers,
employees and truck loading and unloading.
(a) Parking areas for customers shall be located closest to the
main entrance of the building.
(b) All parking areas on a lot shall be accessible from within the
lot.
(2) Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to the rear or side of
structures. Parking areas shall not be permitted between the street
and the building. For corner lots, the side of the building fronting
onto Main Street shall be considered the front, and the side of the
building fronting on the secondary street frontage shall be
considered the side.
(3) Interconnection of off-street parking areas.
(a) To reduce traffic congestion and minimize the number of curb
cuts along Main Street, parking areas shall be connected to
adjacent parcels through a rear or side yard access road.
Where a parking area is constructed and is adjacent to an
undeveloped parcel, the access drive shall be extended to the
lot line for future connection.
(b) The use of shared access points is required. Adjacent uses shall
share ingress and egress points to serve both uses.
(c) Access onto arterial and collector streets shall conform to the
standards in the Township Zoning Ordinance § 190-198.
(4) Internal walkways.
§ 190-299 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-300
186:965
§ 190-301. Streetscape performance regulations.
§ 190-302. Traffic management.
(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided for customers and
employees to travel between buildings and parking areas.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between the sidewalk
and the main entrance of all principal buildings.
(c) Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed with a different
pavement material than that used for streets and parking areas
so as to differentiate the walkway from the driving areas.
Pedestrian walkways may be constructed with concrete,
decorative bricks, blocks or stone, not including crushed stone.
(5) Fire zones. At the direction of the Township Fire Commissioner, fire
zones shall be set aside and marked around each building to ensure
access by fire vehicles. Such marking shall consist of metallic signs
or painted lines, or both, bearing the legend "No Parking - Fire
Zone" or "No Parking - Fire Lane."
B. Loading. In addition to the loading requirements in Article XVII, the
following requirements shall apply to uses within the Main Street
Commercial Overlay District:
(1) Loading and unloading areas shall be located at the rear of a
building. If loading and unloading areas are not possible at the rear
of a building, then they may be located at the side of a building,
provided that they are screened from view of the street using
fencing, a wall that matches the architectural style of the principal
building, dense landscaping, or combinations thereof.
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets for all parcels
within the Main Street Commercial Overlay District. Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications (see Chapter
160, Street and Sidewalk Construction, of the Township Code) and
installed to connect to the lot line of adjacent parcels.
B. Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided along all street
frontages in the Main Street Commercial Overlay District.
(1) Streetlight poles shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall
be placed a maximum of 100 feet apart.
(2) All streetlight poles and fixtures shall be constructed in accordance
with design standards set forth by the electric utility company.
(3) The design of streetlight poles and fixtures shall be consistent
throughout the Main Street Commercial Overlay District.
(4) Cobra-head-style streetlights shall be prohibited.
§ 190-300 PALMER CODE § 190-302
186:966
A. Road capacity. To ensure that the road network is able to handle
additional traffic from intensive types of development, the following
conditions shall be met.
(1) A traffic impact report shall be submitted as required by § 190-203.
(2) The Township Engineer shall review, at the expense of the
applicant, any professional traffic studies that are presented and
make recommendations to the Township.
(3) The provisions of § 165-59M of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, entitled "Required traffic improvements,"
shall also apply to any use that involves construction of one or more
new principal buildings.
B. Access management. The Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project
will make Main Street a critical corridor for traffic movement. The
number of access points onto Main Street needs to be minimized, and
traffic shall be steered towards a minimum number of strategically
planned intersections and traffic signals. In order to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards, the following access management provisions
shall apply:
(1) Access to lots shall be provided only onto and off of an abutting
collector or local street and shall not be provided directly onto or
off of Main Street.
(2) Access to two or more adjoining lots shall be combined, shared and/
or coordinated to minimize the number of access points onto a
public street. Shared parking lots and access drives or access
points connecting adjacent lots are strongly encouraged.
(a) The provision of joint access shall be subject to the creation of
an easement with the deed allowing cross-access between the
properties within the access road area. The joint access
arrangements shall include a recorded joint agreement with
the deed defining the maintenance responsibilities of each of
the property owners served by the access road.
(3) Developments consisting of three or more principal structures shall
make use of a carefully coordinated interior street system.
(a) Each principal building shall have its main vehicle access onto
a common parking lot, access drive, service road, marginal
access street, or other alternative method approved by the
Township, which shall then provide access to an abutting
collector or local street.
(b) Vehicle access shall be provided to each use without causing
congestion to, hazards upon or interference with traffic
movement on public streets.
§ 190-302 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-302
186:967
§ 190-303. through § 190-310. (Reserved)
(c) All access to outparcels of a development shall be provided
using internal access drives. Separate access to outparcels
from collector or local streets shall be prohibited.
(4) The minimum distance between an access point or driveway and a
street intersection on the same or opposite side of a street shall be
as follows, measured from center line to center line:
(a) From Main Street: 300 feet.
(b) From a collector street: 200 feet.
(c) From a local street: 100 feet.
(5) An access point or driveway shall be separated a minimum distance
of 100 feet from any other access point or driveway onto the same
street, measured from center line to center line.
(6) The access control provisions of § 190-198 and the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance § 165-59E and
§ 165-67 shall also apply, except that where the requirements of
this ordinance are more restrictive, this ordinance shall supersede.
§ 190-302 PALMER CODE § 190-303
186:968
ARTICLE XXIX
TI-1 Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
§ 190-311. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 1 Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are
shown in the exhibit.269
§ 190-312. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROUTE 33/MAIN STREET INTERCHANGE PROJECT — A project to
construct a new full-diamond highway interchange at the existing crossing
of PA Route 33 and Main Street in the northern end of Palmer Township.
The project includes the replacement of the existing Main Street bridge
structure over Route 33, the installation of new on- and off-ramps between
Route 33 and Main Street, traffic signals at the intersection of the new
ramps with Main Street, widening of Main Street, and associated
improvements that include signage, stormwater management systems,
storm-conveyance systems, utility pole relocations, and highway lighting.
This new interchange will provide access to areas east and west of Route
33, including areas immediately adjacent to the interchange.
§ 190-313. Purpose.
§ 190-314. Community development objectives.
A. To provide sufficient space to meet current and anticipated future
regional needs for large-site industrial and distribution uses that will
benefit the Township and the region.
B. To recognize that the northern end of the Township will not be a
reasonable location for large-site industrial and distribution uses unless
the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
C. To provide a mechanism that will allow areas planned for industrial and
distribution uses to be developed in conjunction with the construction
of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project.
D. To allow for prudent business decisionmaking by future property
owners and encourage investments in land and infrastructure to be
made with the knowledge that the Township will permit such industrial
and distribution development to be occupied and operate only in the
event that the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
269. Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-311 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-314
186:969
§ 190-315. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply within the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 1, provided that all other requirements of Township
ordinances are met:
A. To promote industrial, research and distribution uses in appropriate
locations to provide wider employment choices for Township residents
and improve overall economic development for the Township.
B. To ensure that sufficient road capacity and utilities are in place before
new development occurs.
C. To provide a safe and efficient transportation network that is closely
coordinated with land use.
D. To limit large warehouse/distribution centers to locations north of Main
Street.
E. To encourage the extension of rail spurs from existing rail lines to
industrial areas to help attract employers and decrease truck traffic.
F. To proactively manage the streetscape and character of the area
through the application of coordinated amenities, including sidewalks,
landscaping and signage.
A. Applicability of base zoning district provisions.
(1) The provisions of the underlying zoning district(s) shall continue to
be applicable to the property within the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District I only until such time that the plans for
construction of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project have
been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements,
and primary construction contracts relative to the completion of
said project have been executed.
(2) After the Zoning Officer has evidence that the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project is open to public traffic, then the name
of this district shall be changed to the Transportation Industrial
District I, subject to the requirements set forth herein.
B. Procedure for application process in the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 1.
(1) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 shall be accepted for
review by the Zoning Officer only in the event that the applicant
provides the Zoning Officer with documentation from PennDOT
verifying that plans for the construction of the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project have been approved by PennDOT, any
§ 190-314 PALMER CODE § 190-315
186:970
§ 190-316. Permitted by right uses.
financial security required by PennDOT for the completion of said
improvements has been posted by the entity responsible for
completing the construction of said improvements, and primary
construction contracts relative to the completion of said project
have been executed.
(a) Applications for zoning permits related to the construction of
structures permitted in the Transportation Industrial Overlay
District 1 shall include the following information:
[1] Size of building, in square feet.
[2] Architectural renderings of the building showing
compliance with the design provisions of § 190-318 below.
(b) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 shall include the
following additional information:
[1] Description of business and/or services provided.
[2] Hours and days of operation.
[3] Maximum number of employees expected on any one shift.
[4] Expected number of outside customers or visitors.
[5] Number of trucks and expected hours of truck traffic.
(2) Applications for building permits related to the construction of
structures permitted within the Transportation Industrial Overlay
District 1 shall be approved only in the event that all relevant
provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
(3) Applications for certificates of occupancy for structures within the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 shall be granted only in
the event that the interchange improvements have been approved
by PennDOT, any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements
in accordance with the development agreement with PennDOT and
any policies and procedures set forth by PennDOT, and all other
applicable provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
A. Within the boundaries of the Transportation Industrial Overlay District
1, all developments shall be constructed in accordance with a wellcoordinated,
integrated overall plan. If a development is to be carried
out in progressive phases, each phase shall be planned so that the
§ 190-315 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-316
186:971
requirements and intents of this article and this ordinance shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any phase.
B. Uses permitted by right shall be as follows:
(1) Industrial activity involving processing, cleaning, assembling,
packaging, conversion, production, repair, manufacturing or
testing of materials, goods and/or products, provided that:
(a) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(2) Research, development or testing laboratory, provided that:
(a) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(b) All storage of explosive or hazardous substances or gases shall
comply fully with the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall require the applicant to provide
evidence of compliance with all current regulatory
requirements.
(3) Distribution center, either as a stand-alone use or in combination
with other uses, provided that:
(a) The distribution and warehousing component of any building
does not exceed 1,000,000 square feet; and
(b) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 60
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(c) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queueing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
§ 190-316 PALMER CODE § 190-316
186:972
(4) Trucking company terminal, provided that:
(a) The use shall include a system to contain, separate and
properly dispose of any fuel, oils, or similar pollutants that may
spill or leak where such substances are stored or where
vehicles are fueled, repaired, or maintained. This system shall
be in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations,
including but not limited to International Plumbing Code-2000,
NPDES, PADEP, NFPA, etc.
(b) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 60
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(c) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queueing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
(5) Warehouse, provided that:
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum standards
of this ordinance.
(b) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or flammable
materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or
skins or similar items shall be permitted.
(c) Warehouse uses that would involve more than 40 tractortrailer
trips in any twenty-four-hour period shall be required to
meet the additional standards for a distribution center as listed
under Subsection B(3) above. A "trip" shall be defined as one
arrival at or one departure from the facility.
(6) Wholesale sales, provided that no retail sales or sales to the
general public are permitted.
(7) Information/data processing.
(8) Heliport, private, provided that:
(a) The outside limits of the helipad shall be located a minimum of
300 feet from any property line and from any public road, and a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any existing residential use.
(b) All buildings associated with the heliport, including hangars,
landing pads, warmup pads, refueling facilities, lights, etc.,
shall be placed at least 100 feet from the property line of the
lot.
(c) The helipad shall be oriented to minimize the hazards and
disturbances posed by aircraft during takeoff and landing.
§ 190-316 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-316
186:973
§ 190-317. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the Transportation Industrial Overlay District
1 shall be as follows:
(d) The applicant shall show compliance with all regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, and/or Federal Aviation Administration, and shall
have the approval of those agencies and of any other required
licensing agencies of the federal or state government.
(e) The flight paths proposed must be such that a noise hazard will
not be created to existing residential areas. The determination
of what constitutes a noise hazard shall be according to
accepted standards in the industry.
(f) The applicant must show that the proposed facility will not
threaten the character of an existing residential neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be permitted which will violate the regulations
of this ordinance or any other Township ordinance controlling
noise, dust, dirt, electrical disturbance, hazards or other
nuisances.
(9) Appropriate public utilities.
(10) Essential services.
(11) Business office, as an accessory use to any other use permitted by
right.
C. Multiple occupancy.
(1) A principal industrial or distribution building may be occupied by
more than one use, provided that all uses are permitted within this
ordinance, and provided that all requirements of this ordinance are
complied with.
(2) Each applicant for a use within a multiple-occupancy building shall
be required to apply for a separate building and zoning permit
through the required processes.
A. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
C. Lot coverage:
(1) Maximum total building coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum total impervious coverage: 75%.
D. Building setback from exterior lot lines:
§ 190-316 PALMER CODE § 190-317
186:974
§ 190-318. Building standards and orientation.
(1) A minimum of 15 feet from the future right-of-way of any public
street.
(2) A minimum of 25 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot not within
the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 or Transportation
Industrial Overlay District 2.
(3) A minimum of 15 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot that is
within the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1 or
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2.
E. Maximum building height: 60 feet.
A. The main entrance of all principal buildings shall be located along the
front or side of the building that faces the street.
(1) The main entrance of a building shall be identified by being
recessed in from the surrounding wall or projecting out from the
surrounding wall, and/or by windows, changes in building height,
roof overhangs, awnings, lighting or combinations thereof.
B. Blank walls shall not be permitted along any wall that faces Main
Street.
C. All exterior building walls that face a street shall be finished with brick,
cut stone, smooth precast concrete, poured concrete panels, split-face
masonry blocks, stucco, plaster, clear or lightly tinted glass, or
combinations thereof.
(1) Standard concrete block or metal shall not be permitted on walls
that are visible from the street.
D. Exterior building walls shall use neutral colors. Contrasting trim, color
bands and/or textures may be used to help break up the vertical
monotony of flat walls.
E. For any property with frontage on Main Street, loading docks, service
bays and roll-up doors shall be screened against view from Main Street.
F. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall use the same color as the wall on
which they are located.
G. Building mechanical systems, including but not limited to airconditioning
units, exhaust systems, satellite dishes, and elevator
housing, shall be located on the roof whenever possible. Any
mechanical systems not located on the roof of the building shall be
enclosed with fencing and/or covering that is the same color as the
building.
H. Public utility equipment shall be placed underground whenever
feasible.
§ 190-317 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-318
186:975
§ 190-319. Signs.
I. Trash receptacles and above-ground utility equipment shall be placed
to the side or rear of the nearest building.
(1) All trash receptacles shall be enclosed by landscaping, fencing,
walls, or other enclosures.
(2) All fencing, walls, and/or enclosures used for trash receptacles
shall be the same color as the building with which they are
associated.
A. Permitted signs. The following types of signs are permitted within the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1:
(1) Freestanding ground-supported (monument) signs, not to exceed
one sign per street frontage. The total sign area of each
freestanding sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) Wall signs. One wall sign shall be permitted for each building wall
of a principal building. Each sign shall have a sign area not to
exceed 10% of the total area of the building wall on which the sign
is located, up to a maximum sign area of 200 square feet per sign.
(3) Each principal use within a multiple-occupancy building may also
have a wall sign with a maximum sign area of four square feet,
which shall be located near or on the main entrance of the use.
(4) Signs identifying major developments per § 190-181.
(5) Signs not requiring permits per § 190-179.
(6) Temporary signs per § 190-178. Signs on mobile or movable stands
are specifically prohibited.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) Freestanding pole signs are prohibited.
(2) Signs on mobile or movable stands are prohibited.
C. Height.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet.
(2) The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to the total height
of the wall on which they are located.
D. Illumination.
(1) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white light
that does not move or change intensity. External light shall be
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties.
§ 190-318 PALMER CODE § 190-319
186:976
§ 190-320. Off-street parking and loading.
(2) Externally illuminated signs may be backlit with a diffused or
shielded light source to control glare. Backlighting shall illuminate
the letters, characters or graphics on the sign but not its
background.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall have a dark background with
illuminated text that accounts for a maximum of 20% of the total
sign area.
A. Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements in Article
XVII and Table 17.1, the following requirements shall apply to uses
within the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1:
(1) The design of parking and circulation areas on the site shall
address the needs of different users to the site, such as visitors,
employees and truck loading and unloading.
(a) Parking areas for visitors or customers shall be located
adjacent to the main entrance of the building.
(b) All parking areas on a lot shall be accessible from within the
lot.
(c) Clear access shall be provided to all sides of the building for
emergency vehicles.
(2) Where parking areas are located between the front of the building
and the street, the parking areas shall be screened from view of the
street using low fencing, a low wall that matches the architectural
style of the principal building, earthen berms, variations in
elevation, landscaping, or combinations thereof.
(3) Internal walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided for visitors, customers
and employees to travel between buildings and parking areas.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed with a different
pavement material than that used for streets and parking areas
so as to differentiate the walkway from the driving areas.
Pedestrian walkways may be constructed with concrete,
decorative brick, blocks or stone, not including crushed stone.
B. Loading. In addition to the loading requirements in Article XVII, the
following requirements shall apply to uses within the Transportation
Industrial Overlay District 1:
(1) Loading and unloading areas, including areas for truck parking
and/or service, shall be located at the rear of a building, whenever
possible. If loading, unloading, truck parking and/or service bays
are not possible at the rear of a building, then they may be located
§ 190-319 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-320
186:977
§ 190-321. Streetscape performance regulations.
§ 190-322. Traffic management.
at the side of a building, provided that they are screened from view
of the street using fencing, a wall that matches the architectural
style of the principal building, dense landscaping, or combinations
thereof.
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided for all uses within the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1. Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications (see Chapter
160, Street and Sidewalk Construction, of the Township Code) and
installed to connect to the lot line of adjacent parcels.
B. Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided along all street
frontages in the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1.
(1) Streetlight poles shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall
be placed a maximum of 100 feet apart.
(2) All streetlight poles and fixtures shall be constructed in accordance
with design standards set forth by the electric utility company.
(3) The design of streetlight poles and fixtures shall be consistent
throughout the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1.
(4) Cobra-head-style streetlights shall be prohibited.
A. Road capacity. To ensure that the road network is able to handle
additional traffic from intensive types of development, the following
conditions shall be met:
(1) A traffic impact report shall be submitted as required by § 190-203.
(2) The Township Engineer shall review, at the expense of the
applicant, any professional traffic studies that are presented and
make recommendations to the Township.
(3) The provisions of § 165-59M of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, entitled "Required traffic improvements,"
shall also apply to any use that involves construction of one or more
new principal buildings.
B. Access management. The Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project
will make Main Street a critical corridor for traffic movement. The
number of access points onto Main Street needs to be minimized, and
traffic shall be steered towards a minimum number of strategically
planned intersections and traffic signals. In order to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards, the following access management provisions
shall apply:
§ 190-320 PALMER CODE § 190-322
186:978
§ 190-323. through § 190-330. (Reserved)
(1) Access to lots shall be provided only onto and off of an abutting
collector or local street and shall not be provided directly onto or
off of Main Street.
(2) Access to two or more adjoining lots may be combined, shared and/
or coordinated to minimize the number of access points onto a
public street. Shared parking lots and access drives or access
points connecting adjacent lots are strongly encouraged.
(a) The provision of joint access shall be subject to the creation of
an easement with the deed allowing cross-access between the
properties within the access road area. The joint access
arrangements shall include a recorded joint agreement with
the deed defining the maintenance responsibilities of each of
the property owners served by the access road.
(3) Developments consisting of three or more principal structures shall
make use of a carefully coordinated interior street system.
(a) Each principal building shall have its main vehicle access onto
a common parking lot, access drive, service road, marginal
access street, or other alternative method approved by the
Township, which shall then provide access to an abutting
collector or local street.
(b) Vehicle access shall be provided to each use without causing
congestion to, hazards upon or interference with traffic
movement on public streets.
(4) The minimum distance between an access point or driveway and a
street intersection on the same or opposite side of a street shall be
as follows, measured from center line to center line:
(a) From Main Street: 300 feet.
(b) From a collector street: 200 feet.
(c) From a local street: 100 feet.
(5) An access point or driveway shall be separated a minimum distance
of 100 feet from any other access point or driveway onto the same
street, measured from center line to center line.
(6) The access control provisions of § 190-198 and the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance § 165-59E and
§ 165-67 shall also apply, except that where the requirements of
this ordinance are more restrictive, this ordinance shall supersede.
§ 190-322 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-323
186:979

ARTICLE XXX
TI-2 Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-410]
§ 190-331. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 2 Regulations." The boundaries of the overlay district are
shown in the exhibit.270
§ 190-332. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROUTE 33/MAIN STREET INTERCHANGE PROJECT — A project to
construct a new full-diamond highway interchange at the existing crossing
of PA Route 33 and Main Street in the northern end of Palmer Township.
The project includes the replacement of the existing Main Street bridge
structure over Route 33, the installation of new on- and off-ramps between
Route 33 and Main Street, traffic signals at the intersection of the new
ramps with Main Street, widening of Main Street, and associated
improvements that include signage, stormwater management systems,
storm-conveyance systems, utility pole relocations, and highway lighting.
This new interchange will provide access to areas east and west of Route
33, including areas immediately adjacent to the interchange.
§ 190-333. Purpose.
§ 190-334. Community development objectives.
A. To provide sufficient space to meet current and anticipated future
regional needs for large-site industrial and distribution uses that will
benefit the Township and the region.
B. To recognize that the northern end of the Township will not be a
reasonable location for large-site industrial and distribution uses unless
the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
C. To provide a mechanism that will allow areas planned for industrial and
distribution uses to be developed in conjunction with the construction
of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project.
D. To allow for prudent business decisionmaking by future property
owners and encourage investments in land and infrastructure to be
made with the knowledge that the Township will permit such industrial
and distribution development to be occupied and operate only in the
event that the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project is constructed.
270. Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-331 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-334
186:981
§ 190-335. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply within the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 2, provided that all other requirements of Township
ordinances are met:
A. To promote industrial, research and distribution uses in appropriate
locations to provide wider employment choices for Township residents
and improve overall economic development for the Township.
B. To ensure that sufficient road capacity and utilities are in place before
new development occurs.
C. To provide a safe and efficient transportation network that is closely
coordinated with land use.
D. To proactively manage the streetscape and character of the area
through the application of coordinated amenities, including sidewalks,
landscaping and signage.
A. Applicability of base zoning district provisions.
(1) The provisions of the underlying zoning district(s) shall continue to
be applicable to the property within the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 2 only until such time that the plans for
construction of the Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project have
been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements,
and primary construction contracts relative to the completion of
said project have been executed.
(2) After the Zoning Officer has evidence that the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project is open to public traffic, then the name
of this district shall be changed to the Transportation Industrial
District 2, subject to the requirements set forth herein.
B. Procedure for application process in the Transportation Industrial
Overlay District 2.
(1) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 shall be accepted for
review by the Zoning Officer only in the event that the applicant
provides the Zoning Officer with documentation from PennDOT
verifying that plans for the construction of the Route 33/Main
Street Interchange Project have been approved by PennDOT, any
financial security required by PennDOT for the completion of said
improvements has been posted by the entity responsible for
completing the construction of said improvements, and primary
construction contracts relative to the completion of said project
have been executed.
§ 190-334 PALMER CODE § 190-335
186:982
§ 190-336. Permitted by right uses.
(a) Applications for zoning permits related to the construction of
structures permitted in the Transportation Industrial Overlay
District 2 shall include the following information:
[1] Size of building, in square feet.
[2] Architectural renderings of the building showing
compliance with the design provisions of § 190-338 below.
(b) Applications for zoning permits for uses provided for in the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 shall include the
following additional information:
[1] Description of business and/or services provided.
[2] Hours and days of operation.
[3] Maximum number of employees expected on any one shift.
[4] Expected number of outside customers or visitors.
[5] Number of trucks and expected hours of truck traffic.
(2) Applications for building permits related to the construction of
structures permitted within the Transportation Industrial Overlay
District 2 shall be approved only in the event that all relevant
provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
(3) Applications for certificates of occupancy for structures within the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 shall be granted only in
the event that the interchange improvements have been approved
by PennDOT, any financial security required by PennDOT for the
completion of said improvements has been posted by the entity
responsible for completing the construction of said improvements
in accordance with the development agreement with PennDOT and
any policies and procedures set forth by PennDOT, and all other
applicable provisions of this ordinance and the Palmer Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance have been met.
A. Within the boundaries of the Transportation Industrial Overlay District
2, all developments shall be constructed in accordance with a wellcoordinated,
integrated overall plan. If a development is to be carried
out in progressive phases, each phase shall be planned so that the
requirements and intents of this article and this ordinance shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any phase.
B. Uses permitted by right shall be as follows:
§ 190-335 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-336
186:983
(1) Industrial activity involving processing, cleaning, assembling,
packaging, conversion, production, repair, manufacturing or
testing of materials, goods and/or products, provided that:
(a) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(2) Research, development or testing laboratory, provided that:
(a) No use shall be permitted that:
[1] Creates dangerous, injurious or noxious conditions or fire,
explosive or toxic hazards.
[2] Does not comply with federal or state regulations
regarding storage or disposal of hazardous materials or
wastes, as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(b) All storage of explosive or hazardous substances or gases shall
comply fully with the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall require the applicant to provide
evidence of compliance with all current regulatory
requirements.
(3) Distribution center, either as a stand-alone use or in combination
with other uses, provided that:
(a) The distribution and warehousing component of any building
does not exceed 400,000 square feet; and
(b) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 60
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(c) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queueing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
(4) Trucking company terminal, provided that:
(a) The use shall include a system to contain, separate and
properly dispose of any fuel, oils, or similar pollutants that may
§ 190-336 PALMER CODE § 190-336
186:984
spill or leak where such substances are stored or where
vehicles are fueled, repaired, or maintained. This system shall
be in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations,
including but not limited to International Plumbing Code-2000,
NPDES, PADEP, NFPA, etc.
(b) In addition to any loading areas for trucks, there shall be at
least one tractor-trailer parking space provided for every 10
loading dock positions. Each such space shall be 12 feet by 60
feet and shall be clearly delineated with appropriate pavement
markings.
(c) All facilities with gated entrances shall provide for an on-site
queueing area for the stacking of a minimum of two tractortrailers.
(5) Warehouse, provided that:
(a) Truck parking and loading shall meet the minimum standards
of this ordinance.
(b) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, explosive or flammable
materials, hazardous substances, animals, animal carcasses or
skins or similar items shall be permitted.
(c) Warehouse uses that would involve more than 40 tractortrailer
trips in any twenty-four-hour period shall be required to
meet the additional standards for a distribution center as listed
under Subsection B(3) above. A "trip" shall be defined as one
arrival at or one departure from the facility.
(6) Wholesale sales, provided that no retail sales or sales to the
general public are permitted.
(7) Information/data processing.
(8) Heliport, private, provided that:
(a) The outside limits of the helipad shall be located a minimum of
300 feet from any property line and from any public road and a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any existing residential use.
(b) All buildings associated with the heliport, including hangars,
landing pads, warmup pads, refueling facilities, lights, etc.,
shall be placed at least 100 feet from the property line of the
lot.
(c) The helipad shall be oriented to minimize the hazards and
disturbances posed by aircraft during takeoff and landing.
(d) The applicant shall show compliance with all regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, and/or Federal Aviation Administration and shall have
§ 190-336 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-336
186:985
§ 190-337. Area and bulk regulations.
Area and bulk regulations in the Transportation Industrial Overlay District
2 shall be as follows:
the approval of those agencies and of any other required
licensing agencies of the federal or state government.
(e) The flight paths proposed must be such that a noise hazard will
not be created to existing residential areas. The determination
of what constitutes a noise hazard shall be according to
accepted standards in the industry.
(f) The applicant must show that the proposed facility will not
threaten the character of an existing residential neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be permitted which will violate the regulations
of this ordinance or any other Township ordinance controlling
noise, dust, dirt, electrical disturbance, hazards or other
nuisances.
(9) Appropriate public utilities.
(10) Essential services.
(11) Business office, as an accessory use to any other use permitted by
right.
C. Multiple occupancy.
(1) A principal industrial or distribution building may be occupied by
more than one use, provided that all uses are permitted within this
ordinance, and provided that all requirements of this ordinance are
complied with.
(2) Each applicant for a use within a multiple-occupancy building shall
be required to apply for a separate building and zoning permit
through the required processes.
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
C. Lot coverage:
(1) Maximum total building coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum total impervious coverage: 75%.
D. Building setback from exterior lot lines:
(1) A minimum of 15 feet from the future right-of-way of any public
street.
§ 190-336 PALMER CODE § 190-337
186:986
§ 190-338. Building standards and orientation.
(2) A minimum of 25 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot not within
the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 or Transportation
Industrial Overlay District 1.
(3) A minimum of 15 feet from all abutting lot lines of a lot that is
within the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2 or
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 1.
E. Maximum building height: 60 feet.
A. The main entrance of all principal buildings shall be located along the
front or side of the building that faces the street.
(1) The main entrance of a building shall be identified by being
recessed in from the surrounding wall or projecting out from the
surrounding wall, and/or by windows, changes in building height,
roof overhangs, awnings, lighting or combinations thereof.
B. Blank walls shall not be permitted along any wall that faces Main
Street.
C. All exterior building walls that face a street shall be finished with brick,
cut stone, smooth precast concrete, poured concrete panels, split-face
masonry blocks, stucco, plaster, clear or lightly tinted glass, or
combinations thereof.
(1) Standard concrete block or metal shall not be permitted on walls
that are visible from the street.
D. Exterior building walls shall use neutral colors. Contrasting trim, color
bands and/or textures may be used to help break up the vertical
monotony of flat walls.
E. For any property with frontage on Main Street, loading docks, service
bays and roll-up doors shall be screened against view from Main Street.
F. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall use the same color as the wall on
which they are located.
G. Building mechanical systems, including but not limited to airconditioning
units, exhaust systems, satellite dishes, and elevator
housing, shall be located on the roof whenever possible. Any
mechanical systems not located on the roof of the building shall be
enclosed with fencing and/or covering that is the same color as the
building.
H. Public utility equipment shall be placed underground whenever
feasible.
I. Trash receptacles and above-ground utility equipment shall be placed
to the side or rear of the nearest building.
§ 190-337 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-338
186:987
§ 190-339. Signs.
(1) All trash receptacles shall be enclosed by landscaping, fencing,
walls, or other enclosures.
(2) All fencing, walls, and/or enclosures used for trash receptacles
shall be the same color as the building with which they are
associated.
A. The following types of signs are permitted within the Transportation
Industrial Overlay District 2:
(1) Freestanding ground-supported (monument) signs, not to exceed
one sign per street frontage. The total sign area of each
freestanding sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) Wall signs. One wall sign shall be permitted for each building wall
of a principal building. Each sign shall have a sign area not to
exceed 10% of the total area of the building wall on which the sign
is located, up to a maximum sign area of 200 square feet per sign.
(3) Each principal use within a multiple-occupancy building may also
have a wall sign with a maximum sign area of four square feet,
which shall be located near or on the main entrance of the use.
(4) Signs identifying major developments per § 190-181.
(5) Signs not requiring permits per § 190-179.
(6) Temporary signs per § 190-178. Signs on mobile or movable stands
are specifically prohibited.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) Freestanding pole signs are prohibited.
(2) Signs on mobile or movable stands are prohibited.
C. Height.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet.
(2) The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to the total height
of the wall on which they are located.
D. Illumination.
(1) Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white light
that does not move or change intensity. External light shall be
directed at the sign without light spillover and without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring properties.
(2) Externally illuminated signs may be backlit with a diffused or
shielded light source to control glare. Backlighting shall illuminate
§ 190-338 PALMER CODE § 190-339
186:988
§ 190-340. Off-street parking and loading.
the letters, characters or graphics on the sign but not its
background.
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall have a dark background with
illuminated text that accounts for a maximum of 20% of the total
sign area.
A. Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements in Article
XVII and Table 17.1, the following requirements shall apply to uses
within the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2:
(1) The design of parking and circulation areas on the site shall
address the needs of different users to the site, such as visitors,
employees and truck loading and unloading.
(a) Parking areas for visitors or customers shall be located
adjacent to the main entrance of the building.
(b) All parking areas on a lot shall be accessible from within the
lot.
(c) Clear access shall be provided to all sides of the building for
emergency vehicles.
(2) Where parking areas are located between the front of the building
and the street, the parking areas shall be screened from view of the
street using low fencing, a low wall that matches the architectural
style of the principal building, earthen berms, variations in
elevation, landscaping, or combinations thereof.
(3) Internal walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided for visitors, customers
and employees to travel between buildings and parking areas.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed with a different
pavement material than that used for streets and parking areas
so as to differentiate the walkway from the driving areas.
Pedestrian walkways may be constructed with concrete,
decorative brick, blocks or stone, not including crushed stone.
B. Loading. In addition to the loading requirements in Article XVII, the
following requirements shall apply to uses within the Transportation
Industrial Overlay District 2:
(1) Loading and unloading areas, including areas for truck parking
and/or service, shall be located at the rear of a building, whenever
possible. If loading, unloading, truck parking and/or service bays
are not possible at the rear of a building, then they may be located
at the side of a building, provided that they are screened from view
of the street using fencing, a wall that matches the architectural
§ 190-339 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-340
186:989
§ 190-341. Streetscape performance regulations.
§ 190-342. Traffic management.
style of the principal building, dense landscaping, or combinations
thereof.
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided for all uses within the
Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2. Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications (see Chapter
160, Street and Sidewalk Construction, of the Township Code) and
installed to connect to the lot line of adjacent parcels.
B. Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided along all street
frontages in the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2.
(1) Streetlight poles shall have a maximum height of 20 feet and shall
be placed a maximum of 100 feet apart.
(2) All streetlight poles and fixtures shall be constructed in accordance
with design standards set forth by the electric utility company.
(3) The design of streetlight poles and fixtures shall be consistent
throughout the Transportation Industrial Overlay District 2.
(4) Cobra-head-style streetlights shall be prohibited.
A. Road capacity. To ensure that the road network is able to handle
additional traffic from intensive types of development, the following
conditions shall be met:
(1) A traffic impact report shall be submitted as required by § 190-203.
(2) The Township Engineer shall review, at the expense of the
applicant, any professional traffic studies that are presented and
make recommendations to the Township.
(3) The provisions of § 165-59M of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, entitled "Required traffic improvements,"
shall also apply to any use that involves construction of one or more
new principal buildings.
B. Access management. The Route 33/Main Street Interchange Project
will make Main Street a critical corridor for traffic movement. The
number of access points onto Main Street needs to be minimized, and
traffic shall be steered towards a minimum number of strategically
planned intersections and traffic signals. In order to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards, the following access management provisions
shall apply:
(1) Access to lots shall be provided only onto and off of an abutting
collector or local street and shall not be provided directly onto or
off of Main Street.
§ 190-340 PALMER CODE § 190-342
186:990
(2) Access to two or more adjoining lots shall be combined, shared and/
or coordinated to minimize the number of access points onto a
public street. Shared parking lots and access drives or access
points connecting adjacent lots are strongly encouraged.
(a) The provision of joint access may be subject to the creation of
an easement with the deed allowing cross-access between the
properties within the access road area. The joint access
arrangements shall include a recorded joint agreement with
the deed defining the maintenance responsibilities of each of
the property owners served by the access road.
(3) Developments consisting of three or more principal structures shall
make use of a carefully coordinated interior street system.
(a) Each principal building shall have its main vehicle access onto
a common parking lot, access drive, service road, marginal
access street, or other alternative method approved by the
Township, which shall then provide access to an abutting
collector or local street.
(b) Vehicle access shall be provided to each use without causing
congestion to, hazards upon or interference with traffic
movement on public streets.
(4) The minimum distance between an access point or driveway and a
street intersection on the same or opposite side of a street shall be
as follows, measured from center line to center line:
(a) From Main Street: 300 feet.
(b) From a collector street: 200 feet.
(c) From a local street: 100 feet.
(5) An access point or driveway shall be separated a minimum distance
of 100 feet from any other access point or driveway onto the same
street, measured from center line to center line.
(6) The access control provisions of § 190-198 and the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance § 165-59E and
§ 165-67 shall also apply, except that where the requirements of
this ordinance are more restrictive, this ordinance shall supersede.
§ 190-342 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § 190-342
186:991
Appendix
Chapter A195
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A195-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance."
§ A195-2. Cable franchise agreement with Service Electric Cable TV.
The Palmer Township Board of Supervisors hereby approves the cable
franchise agreement between Palmer Township and Service Electric Cable
TV in the same form as that attached hereto as Exhibit A, which shall be
executed on behalf of Palmer Township.271
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
257 12-30-1994 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
258 1-16-1995 Snow emergency routes Ch. 180, Art. V
259 2-13-1995 Post-Retirement Benefit
Plan and Fund
See Ch. 24
260 10-2-1995 General obligation note NCM
261 11-13-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
262 12-18-1995 Supervisors compensation Ch. 30, Art. I
263 4-8-1996 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 165; Ch. 190
264 7-15-1996 Approval of road
construction plan
NCM
271. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township Offices.
§ 190-342 PALMER CODE § DL-1
186:992
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
265 8-27-1996 Smoking: school buildings
and school buses
amendment
Ch. 153, Art. I
266 9-24-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
267 4-21-1997 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority Articles of
Incorporation amendment
NCM; see Ch. 17
268 4-21-1997 Recycling regulations Ch. 156, Art. III
269 7-7-1997 General obligation note NCM
270 2-16-1998 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
271 9-29-1998 Approval of sewer project NCM
272 2-15-1999 Moratorium NCM
273 4-5-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
273A 7-6-1999 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority pretreatment
program
Ch. 147, Art. V
274 8-16-1999 Moratorium NCM
275 7-12-1999 Manager Ch. 13
276 11-15-1999 Moratorium NCM
277 11-15-1999 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
278 11-23-1999 Manager amendment Ch. 13
279 12-6-1999 Stormwater management Ch. 159
280 2-7-2000 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
281 2-29-2000 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
282 2-15-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
283 2-15-2000 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
284 2-15-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
285 7-17-2000 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
286 8-7-2000 General obligation note NCM
287 8-7-2000 General obligation note NCM
288 8-21-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § DL-1
186:993
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
289 Void
290 Void
291 10-24-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
292 10-24-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2000-293 12-18-2000 Building codes updated Chs. 55, 72, 81, 99,
112, 124 and 128
2000-294 12-18-2000 Peddlers amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2013-426
295 12-29-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
296 1-15-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2001-297 2-19-2001 Insurance cooperative
agreement
NCM
2001-298 2-19-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2001-299 2-19-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2001-300 2-19-2001 Key lock box system Ch. 81, Art. III
2001-301 2-19-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2001-302 3-19-2001 Nuisances amendment Ch. 109
2001-303 4-16-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2001-304 4-16-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2001-305 4-16-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2001-306 5-7-2001 General obligation note NCM
2001-307 5-7-2001 Speed limits Ch. 180, Art. IV
2001-308 9-4-2001 Health Code Ch. 87
2001-309 12-17-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2001-310 12-17-2001 Speed limits Ch. 180, Art. IV
2002-311 12-17-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2002-312 1-7-2002 Collector of Delinquent
Taxes
Ch. 37, Art. I
2002-313 1-29-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2002-314 1-29-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2002-315 3-26-2002 Zoning amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2002-327
2002-316 5-20-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 PALMER CODE § DL-1
186:994
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-317 5-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2002-318 6-17-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2002-319 7-1-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2002-320 7-1-2002 Zoning and property
maintenance amendments
Chs. 128; 190
2002-321 7-1-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2002-322 7-1-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2002-323 7-15-2002 General obligation note NCM
2002-324 7-23-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2002-325 10-29-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2002-326 11-26-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2002-327 11-26-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2002-328 11-26-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2003-329 1-6-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2003-330 1-6-2003 Intermunicipal agreement
for special response team
NCM
2003-331 1-6-2003 Intermunicipal agreement
for tobacco compliance
checks
NCM
2003-332 1-6-2003 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
2003-333 1-28-2003 Adoption of Easton Area
Joint Sewer Authority
rules and program
Ch. 147, Art. IV
2003-334 3-3-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-335 3-3-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-336 4-3-2003 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
2003-337 4-29-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-338 7-7-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2003-339 7-21-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § DL-1
186:995
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-340 9-2-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-341 10-28-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2003-342 11-17-2003 Curbs and sidewalks
amendment
Chs. 55, 160
2003-343 11-17-2003 Installation of curbs and
sidewalks
NCM
2003-344 12-15-2003 Supervisors'
compensation
Ch. 30, Art. I
2004-345 2-16-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2004-346 2-24-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2004-347 3-23-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2004-348 3-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
2004-349 4-27-2004 Sewage collection system
agreement
Ch. 17, Art. V
2004-350 5-25-2004 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
2004-351 6-21-2004 General obligation note NCM
2004-352 6-29-2004 Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 60
2004-353 8-16-2004 General obligation note NCM
2004-354 9-7-2004 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority program
standards amendment
NCM
2004-355 9-28-2004 Insurance cooperative
agreement
NCM
2004-356 12-6-2004 Street vacation: Birch
Street and Cedar Street
NCM
2005-357 3-7-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 158
2005-358 6-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2005-359 7-18-2005 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 55
2005-360 8-15-2005 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2005-361 10-3-2005 Earned income tax
amendment
Not included
2005-362 12-19-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 PALMER CODE § DL-1
186:996
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-363 1-16-2006 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2006-364 2-28-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2006-365 8-21-2006 Fire Commissioner Chs. 6; 79; 81, Arts. I,
II and III; 153, Art. I;
165; 190
2006-366 10-16-2006 Street vacation: portion of
27th Street
NCM
2007-367 1-2-2007 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-375
2007-368 1-23-2007 Special study infiltration/
inflow agreement
NCM
2007-369 2-29-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2007-370 2-27-2007 Real estate transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. IV
2007-371 5-7-2007 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 158
2007-372 11-5-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2007-373 11-19-2007 Nuisances amendment Ch. 109
2007-374 12-26-2007 Business privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
2007-375 12-26-2007 Local services tax Ch. 173, Art. III
2008-376 2-4-2008 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
2008-377 5-27-2008 Building Code
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-413
2008-378 5-27-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2008-379 5-27-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 165
2008-380 8-26-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2008-381 8-26-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2008-382 10-6-2008 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 24
2008-383 10-28-2008 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority Pretreatment
Program Policy and
Enforcement Response
Plan amendment
See Ch. 147, Art. V
§ DL-1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § DL-1
186:997
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-384 12-15-2008 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority agreement
amendment
See Ch. 17, Art. IV
2009-385 1-19-2009 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2009-386 7-8-2009 General obligation note NCM
2009-387 9-29-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2009-388 11-16-2009 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. III
2009-389 12-29-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-390 12-29-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2010-391 3-23-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2010-392 4-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2010-393 6-14-2010 General obligation note NCM
2010-394 6-29-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2010-395 6-29-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2010-396 7-27-2010 Bond NCM
2011-397 6-13-2011 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
2011-398 8-23-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
vehicle regulations
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. IV
2011-399 8-23-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
vehicle regulations
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. IV
2011-400 8-23-2011 Easton Area Joint Sewer
Authority Pretreatment
Program Policy and
Enforcement Response
Plan amendment
See Ch. 147, Art. V
2011-401 10-25-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2011-402 10-25-2011 General penalty
amendment
Chs. 1, Art. II; 147,
Art. I; 173, Art. V; 184
2011-403 11-29-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2011-404 11-29-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2011-405 12-27-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 PALMER CODE § DL-1
186:998
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-406 3-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2012-407 4-24-2012 Palmer Township
Municipal Sewer
Authority amendment
Ch. 17, Art. I
(repealer only)
2012-408 6-11-2012 Route 33 Neighborhood
Improvement District
Ch. 106, Art. I
2012-409 6-26-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2012-410 6-26–2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2012-411 8-28-2012 Nonuniformed Employee
Retirement Plan
See Ch. 25
2012-412 8-28-2012 Nonuniformed Employee
Retirement Plan
See Ch. 25
2012-413 9-25-2012 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 55
2012-414 10-8-2012 Solid waste: recycling
regulations amendment
Ch. 156, Art. III
2012-415 10-8-2012 Refuse disposal: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 138, Art. I
2012-416 12-3-2012 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 128
2012-417 12-10-2012 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A195
2013-418 1-7-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2013-419 1-7-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2013-420 1-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2013-421 3-26-2013 Bond NCM
2013-422 5-28-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2013-423 7-23-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-424 7-23-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2013-425 7-23-2013 Bond NCM
2013-426 11-12-2013 Peddlers Ch. 118, Art. I
2013-427 12-9-2013 Agreement with Nazareth
Borough Municipal
Authority amendment
Ch. 17, Art. V
§ DL-1 WEEDS; VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS § DL-1
186:999
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-428 12-9-2013 Peddlers amendment Ch. 118, Art. I
2014-429 2-25-2014 Foreclosed and
abandoned real property
Ch. 85
2014-430 6-24-2014 Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board
Ch. 27
2014-431 6-24-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2014-432 6-24-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2014-433 6-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2014-434 8-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic: snow
emergency and severe
weather declarations
amendment
Ch. 180, Arts. I and V
2014-435 8-26-2014 Nuisances amendment Ch. 109
2015-436 4-28-2015 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2015-437 4-28-2015 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2015-438 4-28-2015 Nonuniformed Employee
Retirement Plan
amendment
See Ch. 25
2015-439 4-28-2015 Nonuniformed Employee
Retirement Plan
amendment
See Ch. 25
2015-440 7-6-2015 Local government
investment trust
NCM
2015-441 10-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2015-442 8-25-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-443 2-1-2016 Bond NCM
2016-444 3-29-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-445 4-11-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 24
2016-446 9-6-2016 Taxation: business
privilege tax amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
2016-447 11-29-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 PALMER CODE § DL-1
186:1000