

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
1.1 Short Title 1
1.2 Statement of Purpose 1
1.3 Fees 2
1.4 Remedies 2
1.5 Enforcement Penalties 2
1.6 Repealer 2
1.7 Severability 2
1.8 Public Inspection of Ordinance 2
1.9 Effective Date 3
1.10 Municipally-Owned Property 3
1.11 Authority 3
SECTION 2 ZONING MAP 4
2.1 General Provisions 4
2.2 Zoning District Boundaries 4
2.3 Rules of Construction And Interpretation 4
SECTION 3 RULES AND REGULATIONS 5
3.1 Rules 5
3.2 Definitions 5-33
SECTION 4 USE (ZONING) DISTRICTS 34
4.1 Establishment Of Districts 34
SECTION 5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 35
5.1 R-1 District Permitted Uses 35
5.2 R-1A District Permitted Uses 35
5.3 R-2 District Permitted Uses 35
5.4 R-3 District Permitted Uses 35-36
5.5 R-4 District Permitted Uses 36
5.6 R-5 District Permitted Uses 36
5.7 R-6 District Permitted Uses 37
Page
5.8 R-7 District Permitted Uses 37-38
5.9 C District Permitted Uses 38
5.10 Non-Residential Uses Permitted In An R-7 District 38-39
5.11 Other Provisions Applying To All Uses In Residential Districts 39
5.12 R-1 District, Conditional Uses 39-41
5.13 R-1A District, Conditional Uses 41
5.14 R-2 District, Conditional Uses 41
5.15 R-3 District, Conditional Uses 41
5.16 R-4 District, Conditional Uses 41
5.17 R-5 District, Conditional Uses 41
5.18 R-6 District, Conditional Uses 41
5.19 R-7 District, Conditional Uses 41-42
5.20 C District, Conditional Uses 42
5.21 R-1 District, Special Exceptions 42
5.22 R-1A District, Special Exceptions 42
5.23 R-2 District, Special Exceptions 42-43
5.24 R-3 District, Special Exceptions 43
5.25 R-4 District, Special Exceptions 43
5.26 R-5 District, Special Exceptions 43
5.27 R-6 District, Special Exceptions 44
5.28 R-7 District, Special Exceptions 44
5.29 C District, Special Exceptions 44
5.30 Bulk and Area Regulations for Residential Districts 44-45
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATION 47-48
SECTION 6 BUSINESS DISTRICTS 49
6.1 B-1 District (Neighborhood Business) Permitted Uses 49
6.2 B-2 District (Community Business) Permitted Uses 49-51
6.3 B-3 District (Office and Professional) Permitted Uses 51-52
6.4 B-1 District, Conditional Uses 52
6.5 B-2 District, Conditional Uses 52-53
6.6 B-3 District, Conditional Uses 53
6.7 B-1 District, Special Exceptions 53
6.8 B-2 District, Special Exceptions 53-54
6.9 B-3 District, Special Exceptions 54
6.10 Bulk and Area Requirements 54-55
6.11 Other Provisions Applying To All B Uses 55
Page
SECTION 7 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 56-61
7.1 I-1 District (Light Industrial) Permitted Uses 56
7.2 I-2 District (General Industrial) Permitted Uses 57
7.3 I District Uses Specifically Prohibited 58-59
7.4 I Districts - Conditional Uses 59
7.5 I Districts - Special Exceptions 59
7.6 I Districts - Bulk and Area Requirements 59-61
7.7 I districts-General Regulations 61
SECTION 8 MIXED USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 62
8.1 M District - Permitted Uses 62-63
8.2 M District - Conditional Uses 63
8.3 M District - Special Exceptions 63
8.4 M District - Bulk and Area Regulations 63
8.5 M District - General Regulations 64
SECTION 9 SIGN REGULATIONS 64
9.1 Residential Districts 64-65
9.2 Commercial, Industrial, and M Districts 65-69
9.3 Performance Standards - All Signs 69-70
SECTION 10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 71
10.1 Off-Street Parking Regulations 71-75
10.2 Off-Street Loading Regulations 75-76
10.3 Number of Buildings on a Zoning Lot 76
10.4 Accessory Buildings 76
10.5 Space and Yards - General Regulations 76-78
10.6 Sidewalks 79
10.7 Drives and Roads - Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family Residential 79-80
10.8 Driveways - Single-Family Residential 80-81
10.9 Excavating, Grading, Site Preparation 81-83
10.10 Storm Drainage 83-84
10.11 Vegetation Preservation Regulations 84-88
10.12 Lighting 88
10.13 Noise Regulations 88
10.14 Vibration Regulations 88
10.15 Air Pollution 88
Page
10.16 Heat, Glare, Radiation, and Fumes Regulations 88
10.17 Odor 88-89
10.18 Performance Standards 89
10.19 Performance Standards for Temporary Uses 89-90
10.20 Recreation and Open Space Requirements 90
10.21 Recreation and Open Space Development Schedule 90-91
10.22 Other Items to be Considered During Review 91
SECTION 11 CONDITIONAL USES 92
11.1 Purpose 92
11.2 Conditional Uses - Conditions 92
11.3 Conditional Uses - Procedure 92-94
11.4 Conditional Uses - General Provisions 95
11.5 Conditional Uses - Specific Conditions 96-121
SECTION 12 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 122
12.1 Purpose 122
12.2 Special Exceptions - Conditions 122
12.3 Special Exceptions - Procedure 122-124
12.4 Special Exceptions - General Provisions 124
12.5 Special Exceptions-Specific Provisions 125-126
SECTION 13 NON-CONFORMING USES 127
13.1 Regulations of Non-Conforming Lots, Structures, Signs, and Uses 127
13.2 Non-Conforming Lot of Record 127
13.3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land 127-128
13.4 Non-Conforming Structures and Signs 128
13.5 Determination of Replacement Cost 128-129
SECTION 14 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 130
14.1 General Rules of Construction 130
14.2 Department of Code Enforcement 131-132
14.3 The Planning Commission 132-133
14.4 Building Permits 133-134
14.5 Certificates of Use, Occupancy and Compliance 135-137
14.6 Amendments 137-145
Page
SECTION 15 ZONING HEARING BOARD 146
15.1 Creation 146
15.2 Continuity of Office 146
15.3 Membership, Term of Office 146
15.4 Vacancies 146
15.5 Removal of Members 146
15.6 Organization of the Board 146
15.7 Rules and Regulations 146-147
15.8 Expenditures 147
15.9 Meetings and Public Hearings 147
15.10 Notices 147
15.11 Powers and Duties 147-149
15.12 Appeal to Court 149
15.13 Time Limitations 149
SECTION 16 SITE PLAN APPROVAL AND REVIEW 150
16.1 General Purposes 150
16.2 Site Plan Review 150-153
16.3 Environmental Reports 153-154
16.4 Waiver of Environmental Report Requirement 154
16.5 Waiver of Requirements 154
16.6 Request for Additional Information 154
16.7 Additional Requirements 155
16.8 Submissions 155-156
16.9 Fees, Stages of Inquiry, Time Limitations 156-158
16.10 Rights of Public to Attend Proceedings, Public Notice,
Conflicts of Interest, Minor Changes After Approval,
Appeals, and Site Plan Conformance 158-160
SECTION 17 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 161
17.1 Interpretation 161
17.2 Introduction 161
17.3 Decision Making Power 161
17.4 Permitted Uses 161-162
17.5 Approval Procedures 162-174
17.6 Use Requirements 174-177
17.7 Common Open Space 177-179
Page
SECTION 18 EASTGATE DISTRICT 180
18.1 Purpose 180
18.2 Community Development Objectives 180
18.3 Conflicts with Other Provisions 180
18.4 Severability 180
18.5 Definitions 180-184
18.6 Permitted Uses 184-187
18.7 Procedures 187-188
18.8 Design Standards 188-195
SECTION 19 FORESTRY-REGULATIONS 196
19.1 Scope: Application 196
19.2 Notification: Preparation of a Logging Plan 196
19.3 Contents of the Logging Plan 197
19-4 Forest Practice 198
19-5 Responsibility for Road Maintenance and Repair: Road Bonding 198-199
APPENDIX
Adopting Ordinance 2121
Amending Ordinance 2420
Universal Application Form
Conditional Use Approval Instructions
Site Plan and Development Information
Application for Zoning Amendments
PENN HILLS ZONING ORDINANCE #2420
MAY 2004
MAYOR & COUNCIL
Anthony L. DeLuca, Mayor
Yvonne R. Lamanna, Deputy Mayor
Mary Rose Davis
John DePietro
R. J-LaVon Kincaid, Sr.
PENN HILLS PLANNING COMMISSION
Al Papa, Jr., Chairman
Sara J. Kuhn, Vice Chairwoman
Trent Griffith
David Moore
Charles Pagano
PENN HILLS ZONING HEARING BOARD
Daniel Fitzhenry, Chairman
Joseph Capozoli, Vice Chairman
Vince Ombres, Secretary
William Carlisle
William Steele
Prepared by:
PENN HILLS PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Howard Davidson, Director
Christopher Blackwell, Principal Planner
Meg Balsamico, Planner
John McCafferty, Housing Coordinator
Corinne Puszko, Secretary

1
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Short Title - This ordinance shall be known as, and may be referred to as, the Municipality
of Penn Hills Zoning Ordinance of 1980.
1.2 Statement of Purpose - The Mayor and the Council of the Municipality of Penn Hills hereby
declare that the provisions of this ordinance have been designed to promote, protect, and
facilitate the public health, safety, and general welfare. To accomplish this, additional
provisions, regulations, and minimum standards have been established regarding population
density, the provision of adequate light and air, police protection, off-street parking and
loading spaces, adequate transportation facilities, public water and sewage facilities,
educational facilities, open space and other public facilities.
This ordinance is further designed to prevent the overcrowding of land, physical blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire,
flood, panic, landslides, subsidence, and other dangers.
In 1976, the Municipality began a process of updating the 1957 Comprehensive Plan.
Included in this effort was the completion and adoption of the following publications and
documents:
1. Critical Environmental Factors and Land Use Planning
2. Housing/Analysis of Existing Conditions, 1976
3. Housing Policy Plan
4. Land Use Policy Plan
These studies include the adoption of policies and objectives for the rational physical
development of the community and are hereby incorporated as an integral part of this
ordinance and a statement of community development objectives.
The Municipality has also adopted several other ordinances designed to control the physical
development of the community, which also establish minimum standards and procedures for
proper review, including:
The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
The Municipal Standards of Construction
This zoning ordinance is to be enforced and applied in conjunction with the above
ordinances.
Whenever conflicts appear in regard to minimum standards or other requirements of this
ordinance and the requirements of other ordinances, the regulations which are more
restrictive shall govern.
2
1.3 Fees - Any application for amendment, variance, special exception, conditional use, permit,
or any other application or certificate within the scope of this ordinance, shall be
accompanied by a fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by the Council upon the
recommendation of the Director of Planning, and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
costs involved.
1.4 Remedies - The Council, or the Mayor with the approval of the Council, may institute in the
name of the Municipality of Penn Hills, any appropriate legal action or proceeding to prevent
or restrain any actions constituting a violation of this ordinance. This remedy is not
exclusive; any other remedies available to the Council or to the Mayor are specifically
preserved.
1.5 Enforcement Penalties - Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning ordinance enacted under this act or
prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Municipality as a result thereof. No
judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs, and reasonable
attorney fees collection for the violation of zoning ordinance shall be paid to the Municipality
whose ordinance has been violated.
1.6 Repealer - Any ordinance, resolution, or policy of the Municipality of Penn Hills inconsistent
with the provisions of this ordinance, are hereby repealed and are null and void.
1.7 Severability - The provisions of this ordinance are severable and any section, sentence,
phrase, paragraph or other part hereof, which is found unconstitutional, illegal, or
unenforceable, shall not invalidate any other provisions of this ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect.
1.8 Public Inspection of Ordinance - This ordinance, its amendments and regulations, and the
Municipal Zoning Map, shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Planning
Department. Copies of the above will be available for purchase by the general public at the
cost of printing.
3
1.9 Effective Date - After adoption by the Mayor and the Council, this ordinance shall be
effective ten (10) days after notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
1.10 Municipally-Owned Property - This ordinance shall not apply to property owned by the
Municipality of Penn Hills. The Municipality will develop and control property in
accordance with the Charter of the Municipality of Penn Hills and will have no obligation to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance upon itself.
1.11 Authority- Authority is hereby granted to the Penn Hills Department of Planning and
Economic Development and the Penn Hills Department of Code Enforcement, to administer
and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. In the absence of specific language to the
contrary, the Director of Planning and Economic Development will be the chief interpreter of
this ordinance and the Penn Hills Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Ordinance
2136 as amended. The Director of Code Enforcement shall be the chief interpreter of the
Penn Hills Building code and Property Maintenance Code. The Principal Planner, Planner,
Housing Coordinator, Code Enforcement Officers, and all personnel in both the Department
of Planning and the Department of Code Enforcement are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance under the supervision and direction of the Director of the
Department of Planning and Economic Development.
The Planning Commission is hereby granted authority to review and approve site plans in
conformance with Section 16 of this ordinance, and Planned Residential Developments in
accordance with Section 17 of this Ordinance. The authority of the Zoning Hearing Board is
established by Section 15 of this ordinance and the activities of the Penn Hills Council are
described in Section 11 and 14 of this ordinance. In all cases administration and authority
must be consistent with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
In the process of administering this ordinance the Planning Director and the Planning
Commission are hereby authorized to request and obtain the advice and opinions of the
various municipal department directors. For example the Public Works Director may be
consulted on the construction of new streets, sidewalks, and storm sewers. The Water
Pollution control Department may be consulted for the proposed construction of sanitary
sewers and sewage facilities, and the Police Department may be consulted on traffic issues.
The Solicitor for the Municipality, or an attorney appointed by the Governing Body, shall
serve the planning agencies as legal advisor. The engineer for the municipality, or an
engineer appointed by the Governing Body, shall serve the planning agencies as legal
advisor. The engineer for the municipality, or an engineer appointed by the Governing
Body, shall serve the planning agencies as engineering advisor.
4
SECTION 2 ZONING MAP
2.1 General Provisions - The location and boundaries of the districts established in this ordinance
are shown upon the Official Zoning Map which is incorporated into this ordinance. The
Zoning Map and all subsequent amendments shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if
fully set forth and described herein.
2.2 Zoning District Boundaries - The district boundary lines on the Zoning Map are intended to
follow lot lines or center lines of streets or alleys. In the case of tracts not laid out in lots, the
district boundary lines shall be determined by the Zoning Map.
2.3 Rules of Construction and Interpretation - Regarding the boundaries of any use districts
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
2.3.A Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center lines.
2.3.B Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be construed
as following such lot lines.
2.3.C Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall be construed
as following municipal limits.
2.3.D Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the
midpoint of the railroad right-of-way.
2.3.E Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore
lines and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with
the actual shore line. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water, shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
2.3.F Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined
by the scale of the map.
2.3.G Where existing physical features conflict with features shown on the Official Zoning
Map, or in circumstances not covered by Subsections A through F above, the
Director of Code Enforcement shall interpret the district boundaries.
2.3.H At the adoption of this ordinance, the Official Zoning Map was on file for public
viewing in the Department of Code Enforcement, where all parties have an
opportunity to examine the same
5
SECTION 3 RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.1 RULES - The following rules shall apply in construing this ordinance unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
3.1.A Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, and
words used in the present tense shall include the future.
3.1.B The word, shall, is mandatory and not discretionary.
3.1.C The word, may, is discretionary and not mandatory.
3.1.D The word, lot, shall include the words, piece, and parcel.
3.1.E The word, building, shall include all other structures of every kind.
3.1.F The phrase, used for, shall include the phrases, arranged for, designed for, intended
for, maintained for, and occupied for.
3.1.G The word, Council, includes the Mayor and the Council.
3.2 DEFINITIONS
Accessory Use or Structure (Commercial, Mixed Use) - A use or structure on the same lot with, and
of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure on the lot.
Accessory uses include, but are not limited to the following:
a. Parking garages, automobile parking
b. Storage buildings
c. Commercial canopies
d. Parking of commercial and recreation vehicles but not commercial equipment or
construction equipment unless in an approved outdoor storage yard.
e. Vehicles not in running condition, located on lot no longer than thirty (30) days.
f. Recreation equipment
g. Outdoor storage yard as described by Section 10.5.E (3)
h. Incidental sales, sidewalk sales, outdoor cafes and similar outdoor activities
subject to Section 10.5.E (3)
i. Outdoor employee picnic pavilions
Accessory Use or Structure (Residential)—A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure on the lot. Accessory uses
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Garages, automobile parking
6
b. Storage sheds
c. Greenhouses
d. Recreational equipment and facilities
e. A boat, camper, or recreation vehicles, or utility trailer, located in a rear yard side
yard or garage.
f. Vehicles, not in running condition, located on a lot for no longer than thirty (30)
days.
g. Commercial vehicles whose GVWR is not over 11,000 pounds, is located in the
rear yard, side yard or garaged and limited to one per lot.
Adult Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated
or slug-oriented or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images or five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store - A commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT
VIDEO STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental
for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical area.
Adult Cabaret - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which
regularly features:
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas
7
or by specified sexual activities; or
C. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Entertainment - Either or both of the following:
A. An exhibition of any adult oriented motion pictures, meaning those distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. A live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or
substantial portion of the performance of any actual or simulated performance of
specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas,
removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothes, pantomiming, modeling or any
other personal services offered patrons.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater - An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty
(50) persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
Adult Motel - A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons
with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers any single sleeping room for rent, four (4) or more times in one (1) calendar day
during five (5) or more calendar days in any continuous thirty (30) day period.
Adult Motion Picture Theater - An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more
persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
Adult Theater - A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which
8
are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
Advertising Sign - See Sign, Advertising
Agriculture - Farming, the cultivation of soil for the purpose of producing crops and/or
raising livestock for either personal use or resale. Such activity shall be permitted only on
tracts of land at least five (5) acres in size and under single ownership or control.
Alley - A public right-of-way, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property
Alteration - See Structural Alteration
Applicant - A person whose name appears on the application to operate sexually oriented
establishment.
Arcade, Amusement - A facility designed and operated as an amusement center, equipped
with any combination of five (5) or more mechanical and/or electronic amusement devices,
either as the sole use or in combination with other business activity, shall be considered to be
an amusement arcade.
Arterial Highways - Major state, county or municipal roads, or highways, having regional as
well as local significance, and designated by the Planning Commission as such.
Auto Laundry - A building, or portion thereof, wherein more than one automobile may be
washed simultaneously, using mechanized laundry equipment.
Automobile Pounds - Repair garages designated by the Council where vehicles wrecked,
abandoned, or not in running condition, may be temporarily stored.
Automobile Service Station - Any land and structures which are used for the sale of gasoline
or other motor vehicle fuel, and oil and other lubricants, including any sale of motor vehicle
accessories and other items. This term includes uses which have facilities for lubricating,
washing, or performing repairs on vehicles, provided these activities are carried on within an
enclosed building. This term does not include auto laundries, which are special exceptions in
B-2 Community Business Districts (see Section 6.8). This term does include auto body
garages, detailing, and auto painting.
Average Gross Density - See Gross Dwelling Density
Awning - A structure which may overhang a public or private pedestrian walkway to provide
9
protection from the elements.
Basement - The space enclosed by the foundation or ground floor walls of a building with a
minimum depth of six (6) feet. A basement shall not be counted as a story for purposes of
height measurement unless one-half or more of its volume is above the average elevation of
the finished grade at the front of the building.
Beer Distribution - The legal sale of beer entirely for off-premises consumption.
Billboard - See Sign, Advertising
Boarder - An individual(s) other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit, or
part thereof, who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be
furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration.
Boarding Home - A dwelling unit, or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner
or operator for more than two boarders. A boarding home shall not be considered a family
care or group care facility. A boarding home will be permitted only in an R-5 district.
Buffer - A buffer, buffer area, buffer yard, or buffer setback, is a portion of a developed
property which must be reserved for landscaping purposes. A buffer cannot be used for
parking, outdoor storage, structures, or any purpose other than fencing and landscaping.
Building - Any structure intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person,
animal, or personal property of any kind.
Building, Detached - A building surrounded by open space on the same lot with another
building.
Building Height - Unless otherwise specified, the vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed or actual finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and to the highest point of
any other roof. Chimneys, shall not be included in building height.
Building, Non-Residential - A building used exclusively for non-residential purposes.
Building, Principal - A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot on which
it is located, is conducted.
Building, Residential - A building which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used,
for residential occupancy by one or more families, and which includes the following types:
10
A. One-family detached dwellings
B. Multiple-family dwellings
C. Two-family dwellings
D. Townhouses
E. Mobile homes
F. Senior Citizens housing
G. Boarding homes
H. Penthouses
Bulk - The term used to indicate the size, setback, and location of buildings with respect to
each other on a single zoning lot, including the following specifications:
A. Size of buildings
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot line, streets, or to other buildings
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio)
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit
Bus - See Vehicle, Bus
Business Sign - See Sign, Business
Canopy - A roofed structure supported by columns and with no walls, used for sheltering
patrons or gasoline pumps of self-service gasoline stations. A canopy is not considered a
building.
Carport - A structure arranged, used, or intended to be used, for the shelter of a car, which
includes a roof and is open from the roof to the ground on two or more sides.
Child Oriented Business - A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
business purposes, serves and/or sells to children and their families, food, apparels, goods,
services, play and/or entertainment.
Club or Lodge, Private - A non-profit association of persons, which owns, or leases, a
building, or portion thereof, for use by members and their guests only. It shall be permissible
to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining space and food
preparation space and equipment are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members
and their guests shall be allowed unless otherwise specified, providing such sale is secondary
to the operation of the dining facility for the purpose of serving food or meals, and further
providing that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with applicable federal,
state, and county regulations.
11
Code Enforcement Officer - The staff members of the Department of Code Enforcement
responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance. This term also applies to a “zoning
officer”, “building inspector”, or “inspector.” Under certain circumstances the
Principal Planner, the Planner, and the Housing Coordinator also have status as code
enforcement officers and enforcement authority. The Director of Planning and
Economic Development and the Director of the Code Enforcement Department have
both enforcement and supervisory authority. See Section 1.11-Authority.
Commercial Vehicle - See Vehicle, Commercial
Community Facility - A non-profit building/structure, open to the general public and
designed for educational, recreational, leisure-time and similar activities. Such facility
includes, but it not limited to, libraries, senior citizen centers, YMCAs and YWCAs.
Common Open Space - A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of
land and water within a Planned Residential Development site and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents of the Planned Residential Development, not including
streets, off-street parking area, and areas set aside for public facilities.
Conditional Use - A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the provisions in
Article VI of the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170 of 1988 and Section 11 of the Penn
Hills Zoning Ordinance #2121, as amended.
Conference Centers - A conference center is a permitted use in a B-2, Community Business
District, a B-3, Professional Office District, and an M, Mixed Use District. Conference
centers may also be approved as conditional uses in Residential and Conservation Districts,
in accordance with the provisions and standards of Section 11 of this ordinance.
Construction Equipment - Equipment commonly used commercially in one or more of the
following uses: construction, demolition, maintenance, and excavation of buildings, roads,
and lands. Equipment includes, but is not limited to, bulldozers, hi-lifts, backhoes, road
graders, concrete mixers, portable air compressors and generators powered by an internal
combustion engine, concrete forms, scaffolding, commercial landscaping machinery, etc.
Coverage - That percentage of a lot covered by structures.
Curb Level - The level of the curb in front of a building as established on a municipallyapproved
plan, or a level to be determined by the Municipal Engineer if the curb levels are
not established on a municipally-approved plan.
Deck - An open area usually attached to, or part of, and with direct access to a building,
where said open area is elevated above ground level and is not covered by a permanent roof.
12
Development - The provisions for development, including a planned residential
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location, and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and
parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase provisions of the
development plan when used in this act shall mean the written and graphic materials referred
to in this definition. The following types of development plans are required by various
provisions of this ordinance:
A. Plan (As Built) - Updated set of drawings showing all details in the as-built condition,
illustrating field adjustments and true conditions of the improved installations.
B. Plan (Construction) - A plan prepared by a registered engineer showing the horizontal
details, profile, and typical cross-section of a street and its appurtenances to be constructed
or installed.
C. Plan (Final) - A complete and exact subdivision plan prepared for recording by a registered
engineer or registered surveyor, showing right-of-way lines, easements, lot lines and
areas and any other relevant information pertaining to the streets or lot layout of a subdivision,
or of a land development.
D. Plan (Preliminary) - A plan prepared by a registered engineer or registered surveyor
showing existing features and topography of the land and proposed street and lot layout
within and adjacent to a subdivision or to a land development.
E. Plan (Sketch) - An informal drawing, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed
subdivision.
F. Plat - The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or
final.
G. Site Plan - A land development plan for one or more lots, whether preliminary or final,
prepared by a registered surveyor, architect, landscape architect, or engineer; more particularly
required by Section 16 of Ordinance 2121 and Section 6.11 of Ordinance 2136
as amended.
Development Ownership Organization - A single development ownership organization
formed by all the landowners in a Planned Residential Development, which organization
shall then be known as the landowner.
Dwelling - A building or structure, or portion thereof, or house trailer or mobile home,
designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings and
13
multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, or lodging and boarding houses.
Dwelling, Attached - A dwelling, which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by
a party wall or walls.
Dwelling, Detached - A dwelling, which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same
lot.
Dwelling Unit - A dwelling consisting of one or more rooms in a residential building, which
are arranged, designed, used, or intended for use, as living quarters by a family.
Dwelling, Single-Family - A dwelling designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one
family. This term does not include mobile homes, or house trailers.
Dwelling, Multi-Family - A building, or portion thereof, containing two or more dwelling
units.
Employee - Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or
render any service directly related to the operation of a sexually oriented establishment.
Entertainer - A person who provides entertainment within a sexually oriented establishment,
whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not
entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
Escort - A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or
date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person.
Escort Agency - A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other
consideration.
Establishment, Business or Commercial - A place of business carrying out operations, the
ownership and management of which are separate and distinct from those of any other place
of business located on the same zoning lot, or on adjacent zoning lots.
Family - A family shall be considered one of the following:
a. A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household.
b. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a household caring for
foster children occupying a dwelling unit, sharing common cooking and bathing facilities
and maintaining a common household.
14
c. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, and not more than two
(2) boarders occupying a dwelling unit, who share common cooking and bathing facilities
but do not necessarily maintain a common household.
d. Not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, sharing common
cooking and bathing facilities and maintaining a common household. This subsection
shall not apply in those situations that are covered under the Federal Fair Housing Act,
which permits certain groups of persons, such as, but not limited to, mentally
handicapped, to be considered as a Family, and to live together in a home with
supervision.
Family Day Care Home - A residence offering baby-sitting services and child care services to
a maximum of six (6) children unrelated to the resident household. A family day care home
is a permitted accessory use in residential district. For facilities offering service to a larger
number of children, see Group Day Care Home and Nursery. A family day care home must,
however, register with the Penn Hills Department of Planning and Economic Development.
Farm - Any residentially or conservation zoned parcel of land containing five (5) acres or
more, with principal and accessory buildings thereon. Truck gardens and nurseries shall be
considered farms.
Farm Animal - Any animal normally raised for its meat, milk, skins, or other products, or for
its ability to perform work. Horses, cows, pigs, sheep, goats, chickens, ducks, rabbits,
pigeons, doves and other similar animals are examples of farm animals and not household
pets. Farm animals shall be restricted to farms and parcels of land in excess of five (5) acres.
Any resident may be permitted one rabbit and/or one duck, and one pot-belly pig, ferret and
other animals that from time to time become popular which will be considered to be a
household pet and not a farm animal. Bees are not considered to be farm animals, but are
regulated by PA Act 58 of April 6, 1921, P.L. 95. For other regulations regarding animals,
see Chapter 612, Codified Ordinances.
Felling-The act of cutting a standing tree so that it fall to the ground.
Floor Area - When prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street parking spaces and
loading berths for any use, floor area shall mean the sum of gross areas of the floors of the
buildings, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located
within selling or working space, such as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor
area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices. All other building areas shall not be considered in the computation of
floor area, except areas in excess of 30 per cent of the area of each floor.
Floor Space Index - The floor space index or floor area ratio of the building, or buildings, on
15
any zoning lot is the floor space of the building, or buildings, on that zoning lot divided by
the area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of a planned development, by the net site area.
Forestry – The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with
accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting
and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
Frontage, Building - The distance between lines which project perpendicularly from the front
lot line to the side limits of the building.
Frontage, Lot - The distance between the points of intersection of the side and front lot lines.
On a corner lot, frontage is the distance between the corner of the property abutting the
intersection of right-of-ways and the intersection of the side lot line and the front property
line. On lots arranged around a cul-de-sac, where the radius of curvature of the street is less
than one hundred fifty feet (150'), frontage shall be deemed to be the same as mean lot width.
Funeral Home - An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or
cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. A funeral home is a conditional use
in an R-1 district or as a permitted service establishment in a B-2 district.
Gardening - The cultivation of land on which flowers, plants or domestic vegetables are
grown for personal use and not for sale.
Gasoline Station - See Automobile Service Station.
Gross Dwelling Density - The ratio of the number of dwellings in a given area to the sum of
the square feet of the lot areas of those dwellings.
Gross Site Area - The entire area within a site.
Ground Floor - A floor that does not vary in elevation more than four (4) feet from the level
of the adjacent ground to which it has direct access. A building on a sloping lot can have a
ground floor on two (2) different levels.
Group Care Facility - A facility which provides services to seven (7) or more individuals who
are mentally or physically handicapped, homeless, disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation,
and are provided a program to meet their needs. When required, or available, Group Care
Facilities must be licensed by appropriate Federal, State or County health/welfare agencies.
Group Care Facility is not a “family” as defined by this Ordinance, but is a conditional use in
R-5, R-6, R-7 and B-2 Districts. Neither is a Group Care Facility a nursing home or senior
citizen housing, which are regulated separately.
16
Group Day Care Home - A residence offering baby-sitting services and child care service to
a maximum of twelve (12) children unrelated to the resident household. A Group Day Care
Home is permitted as a home occupation only after obtaining the approval of a special
exception application from the Zoning Hearing Board. (See Section 3.2 Definition: “Home
Occupation”, Section 5 Schedule of District Regulations, and Section 12 Special Exceptions)
For residences offering services for four (4) to six (6) children, see Section 3.2 Definitions:
“Family Day Care Home.”
Half-Way House - A Half-Way House is a conditional use in a B-2 District. A Half-Way
House is a facility designed to provide residential and rehabilitative treatment services to
persons being treated for drug and/or alcohol abuse, or persons under the supervision of the
Courts or County, State, or Federal Parole Boards, either after being charged with a criminal
offense, or in lieu of criminal charges.
Health Care Facility - An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical, or
other services to individuals, including offices of physicians, dentists and other health care
practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks, oxygen
and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services. Services offered at such facilities
shall not include those which necessitate overnight care or recuperation of patients. (Inpatient
care)
Height - See Building Height.
Home Occupations - An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit. Home occupations shall
be special exceptions, subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board. Exception –“ No
Impact Home Occupation” as described below in Section 3.2. In reviewing applications for
home occupation, the Board may impose appropriate and reasonable conditions necessary to
protect the surrounding properties.
Home Occupation – No–Impact Home Occupation- No Impact Home Occupation, as defined
by PA Act 43 of 2002, which amended the PA Act 43 of 2002, which amended the PA MPC,
is a business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is
clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to
or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. No impact
home based businesses shall be a use permitted by right in all residential zones of the
Municipality, except that such permission shall not supersede any deed restriction, covenant
or agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or other document
applicable to a common interest ownership community. No Impact Home Occupations shall
be subject to administrative review and approval by the Chief Zoning Officer provided that
the business or commercial activity meets the following conditions:
1. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and
17
surrounding residential uses.
2. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the
dwelling.
3. There shall be no display or sale of retail or wholesale goods and no stockpiling or
or inventory of a substantial nature.
4. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to,
Parking, signs or lights.
5. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise,
Vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including
interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
6. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume
or type, which is normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
7. The business activity shall be conducted only within the swelling and may not occupy
More than 25% of the habitable floor area. The business may not involve any illegal
activity.
Hospital - An institution engaged in providing medical or surgical care to persons, primarily
inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or
mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
House Trailer - See Mobile Home.
Impervious Surface - Impervious surfaces are those that do not absorb rain. All buildings,
parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas in concrete and asphalt shall be
considered impervious surfaces within this definition.
Inspector - An employee of Allegheny County Health Department authorized and designated
by the director of the department and/Municipality of Penn Hills Building Inspector, and/or
an employee of the Municipality of Penn Hills’ police department, authorized by the
commanding officer of the police department, or other persons designated by the
Municipality of Penn Hills to inspect premises regulated under this Ordinance and to
cooperate in taking the required actions authorized by this Ordinance where violations are
found on a premises and to request correction of unsatisfactory conditions found on a
premise.
Junk Yard - An area where scrap metal, paper, rags, tires and other waste and/or used
materials, are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled or handled, or
where machinery or motor vehicles not in running condition are collected, dismantled,
stored, or sold for parts. Any use conducted entirely within an enclosed building is not a
junk yard.
18
Kennel and Kennel/Breeder - An establishment in which more than six (6) dogs, are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold. A kennel is a commercial business and not a
permitted use in a residential district. Breeding of pets is a commercial business and not
permitted in a residential district. Exception-owners whose pets have a litter are permitted
ninety (90) days to find appropriate new owners for the dogs. Breeding dogs for financial
gain is specifically prohibited in residential districts.
Land Development -
a. The improvement of one lot, or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land
for any purpose involving:
1. A group of two or more residential or non-residential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot or lots regardless
of the number of occupants or tenure, or
2. The division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing
or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.
b. A subdivision of land.
c. Development in accordance with the conditions described below which for provisions
for the execution of certain land development from the definition of land development
contained above only when such land development involves:
1. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling into not more than three (3) residential units, unless such units are
intended to be a condominium; or
2. The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building; or
3. The addition or conversation of buildings or rides within confines of an enterprise
which would be considered an amusement park. For purposes of this sub clause, an
amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly
acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded areas
have been approved by proper authorities.
19
Landing- A place where logs, pulpwood, or firewood are assembled for transportation to
processing facilities.
Landowner- An individual, partnership, company, firm, association or corporation that is in
actual control of forest land, whether such control is based on legal or equitable title, or any
other interest entitling the holder to sell or otherwise dispose of any or all of the timber on
such land in any manner, and any agents thereof acting on their behalf, such as forestry
consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting.
Licensee - A person, corporation or partnership in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license.
Litter-To discard items not naturally occurring on the site such as tires, oil and, equipment
parts, and other rubbish.
Lop-To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow material to settle close to the ground.
Lot Area - The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines.
Lot, Corner - A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such
intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot, Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of
the lot measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot Line, Front - That boundary of a lot, which is along an existing or dedicated public street,
or where no public street exists, is along a public way.
Lot Line, Rear - That boundary of a lot, which is most distant from, and is most nearly
parallel to, the front lot line, except for through or corner lots, which have no rear lot line.
Lot Line, Side - Any boundary of a lot, which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot of Record - An area of land designated as a lot on a recorded plat or subdivision, or
described on a deed duly recorded or registered pursuant to statute with the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County.
Lot, Through - A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel
public streets, and which is not a corner lot.
20
Lot Width - The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within
the lot boundaries.
Lot, Zoning - A single tract of land located within a single block, which at the time of filing
for a building permit is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed,
or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control, and therefore, may not coincide
with a lot of record. A lot is a zoning lot, except, as the context shall indicate a lot of record,
in which case a lot is a lot of record.
Major Excavation and Grading - Any excavation or grading involving the extraction of coal
or other minerals and/or the removal of 10,000 square feet of woodland, as defined by United
States Geological Survey (USGS) maps, where prior site plan approval by the Planning
Commission has not been obtained.
Marquee - A roof-like structure of a permanent nature, other than a carport, which projects
from a building or is supported on posts, and which provides protection to a public or private
right-of-way.
Mechanical and/or Electronic Amusement Device - Any machine which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as a
game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include, but
not be limited to, pinball machines, video games, marble machines, and skill ball.
Minor - A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
Mixed Residential and Commercial Structure - a building which contains both residential
and non-residential uses. Non-residential uses are permitted on the first and second floors of
the building, provided the total floor space of all residential uses does not exceed fifty per
cent (50%) of the floor space of the entire structure, exclusive of basement floor area.
Mobile Home - A transportable single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
office or place of assembly, contained in one unit, or in two (2) units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. Mobile
homes other than those within mobile home parks must be placed upon a permanent
foundation and in accordance with the Municipality’s current building code.
Mobile Home Lot - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection(s) thereon of a single
mobile home.
21
Mobile Home Park - A parcel of contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated
and improved that it contain two (2) or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of
mobile homes.
Motel - A building, or group of buildings, located on a single zoning lot, and containing
individual sleeping or living units, designed for, or used by, travelers or transients.
MPC - See Municipalities Planning Code.
Municipalities Planning Code - Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, act 170, 1988,
as amended. Also referred to as the MPC.
Municipality - The Municipality of Penn Hills.
Net Site Area - The area of land devoted to a particular use exclusive of any area devoted to
streets.
Nonconforming Lot - A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption
or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
Nonconforming Structure - A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to
comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming Use - A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the
applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation.
Non-Residential Building - See Building, Non-Residential
Noxious Matter - Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the psychological,
biological, social, or economic well-being of individuals.
Nude Model Studio - Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity,
or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or
22
any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietant school licensed
by the State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
1. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicated a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Nudity or a State of Nudity - The appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast.
Nursery (Day Care Center) - A facility, not in a private residence, which may or may not
operate for profit and is designed to provide daytime care and/or instruction for preschool
children. Such facility shall employ licensed personnel and shall be licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Nursery (Farm) - Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and/or plants for sale.
Such activity shall be permitted only on tracts of land at least five (5) acres in size and under
single ownership or control.
Nurseries are considered to be permitted uses (farms) in single-family residential districts.
Landscaping businesses, landscape contracting companies and similar activities are permitted
uses in commercial and industrial districts, but are not nurseries.
Nursing Home - A structure designed to provide permanent housing and nursing services for
the elderly.
Office, Professional - Office serving clients and/or patients.
Open Space - Land used for recreation, agriculture, resource protection, or buffers. Open
space is freely accessible to all residents of a development, except that access may be
restricted to agricultural lands. Open Space does not include land occupied by nonrecreational
buildings, roads, or road right-of-ways, nor does it include the yard or lots of
single or multi-family dwelling units or parking areas required by this Ordinance. Open
space should be left in a natural state, except for recreation areas which may be surfaced.
23
Open Space Ratio - The proportion of a site neither occupied by private lots nor dedicated to
a public right-of-way. This ratio is calculated by dividing the area of public Open Space by
the gross site area.
Operator –An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or corporation engaged in
timber harvesting including the agents, subcontractor, and employees thereof.
Outdoor Storage - The storage of equipment, supplies, products for sale and other materials
in conjunction with an approved Certificate of Use, Occupancy and Compliance, but not
within an enclosed building. See Section 10.5.E. (3) for performance standards. Outdoor
storage regulations shall not apply to single-family residences, sidewalk sales, or other
incidental sales.
Particular Matter - Matter which is suspended in, or discharged into, the atmosphere in
finely-divided form.
Patio - An improved area at ground level directly adjacent to a principal building and not
covered by a permanent roof.
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) - See Municipalities Planning Code
(MPC).
Penthouse - a structure permitted in the R-6 and R-7 districts, located above the uppermost
floor of a building, which structure is not in excess of fourteen feet (14') in height and which
contains an area not in excess of seventy per cent (70%) of the total area of the floor below.
This structure may or may not contain dwelling units. The height of the penthouse shall not
be included in computing the allowable height of the entire building.
Personal Care Boarding Home - Senior citizen housing.
Planned Residential Development - An area of land, controlled by landowner, to be
developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk,
type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one district created, from time to time, under the provisions of
a municipal zoning ordinance.
Planned Residential Development Plan - The provisions for development of a Planned
Residential Development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location, and bulk of buildings, and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways, and parking facilities, common open space, and public facilities.
The phrase provisions of the development plan when used in the Planned Residential
24
Development chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
Porch - A roofed open area usually attached to, or part of, with direct access to or from, a
building. A porch may or may not be elevated above ground level.
Pre-commercial timber stand improvement-A forest practice, such as thinning or pruning,
which results in better growth, structure, species composition or health for the residual stand
but which does not yield a net income to the land owner, usually because any trees cut are of
poor quality, too small or otherwise of limited marketability or value.
Public Hearing - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Council or the
Planning Commission intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170, 1988.
Public Notice - Notice published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be
less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.
Public Utility - A private business organization, which provides service to the general public,
such as water, gas, electricity, transportation, or communication. Included in this definition
is the equipment and/or infrastructures necessary for the distribution of the services. This
includes, but is not limited to, electric sub-stations, and telephone exchanges, water and
sewer filtration plants, and water pumping stations.
Recreational Facility - Private - A building, structure, or open space designed for recreational
purposes, and limited to members of an organization and to their guests, and not accessible to
the general public. Such facility includes, but is not limited to, country clubs, golf courses,
tennis courts, and swim clubs. These facilities do not include social clubs, lodges, meeting
halls, athletic clubs and similar facilities which are more appropriately located in commercial
districts.
Recreational Facility - Public - A building, structure, or open space designed for recreational
purposes and open to the general public. Such facility includes parks, nature trails, public
swimming pools, skating rinks, deck hockey rinks, golf courses, driving ranges, miniature
golf, marinas, and other similar facilities. Public recreational facilities do not include pool
halls, arcades, bowling alleys, karate schools, dance halls, dance studios, and other similar
facilities that are more appropriately located in commercial districts. Facilities such as gocart
racetracks, dirt bike racetracks, survival clubs, and model airplane flying clubs are
limited to heavy industrial districts.
25
Recreational Vehicle - See Vehicle, Recreational.
Research and Development Organization - Professional offices and related facilities for
organizations which do not involve the sale of products for services on site, and, therefore,
generate a low daily vehicular traffic volume. R & D organizations shall not be permitted to
emit fumes, generate noise or smoke, or create any other similar nuisances to adjacent
residential properties.
Restaurant, Conventional - All restaurants other than Fast Food Restaurants.
Restaurant, Fast Food - Any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing, or serving of a
limited menu of prepared food or beverages for consumption in cars, off premises, or on
premises, where patrons do not receive table service.
This definition also includes businesses more commonly known as drive-in restaurants,
refreshment stands, or self-service restaurants. Bakers, candy stores, and convenience stores
that sell food items as an accessory use are not considered to be Fast Food Restaurants.
Retail Use - A use involving the sale of relatively small quantities of goods and services
directly to consumers.
R-4 Double-House - A building of not more than two and one-half (2-1/2) stories (not
including basement) containing two (2) dwelling units separated from one another by a
continuous vertical party wall, without openings from basement floor to roof.
R-4 Duplex (Two Family House) - A building of not more than two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories (not including basement), containing two (20) dwelling units separated from one
another by a continuous horizontal party wall.
R-5 Garden Apartments - A building of not more than three (3) stories (not including
basement) with each dwelling unit contained on not more than one (1) floor. More than one
(1) building is permitted on a lot, provided said buildings are separated by a horizontal
distance of at least twenty-five feet (25').
R-6 High Rise Apartments - A building of not less than four (4) stories and not more than ten
(10) stories (not including basement or penthouse, if any) with an elevator required to service
all floors and basements. More than one (1) building is permitted on a lot provided said
buildings are separated by a horizontal distance of at least twenty-five feet (25').
R-7 Multi-Story, Multi-Family, Limited Commercial - A building of not less than five (5)
stories and not more than ten (10) stories (not including basement or penthouse, if any) and
an elevator required to service all floors and basements. More than one (1) building is
permitted on a lot, provided said buildings are separated by a horizontal distance of at least
26
twenty-five feet (25').
School - Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for educational
purposes. A school shall be licensed by the State, shall meet State requirements for
elementary or secondary education, or for institutions of higher learning. Business schools,
trade schools, studios, etc., are service establishments and shall be located in commercial
districts.
Select Cutting-The removal of timber in areas beyond the approved timber harvest area. This
timber removal would generally involve a limited number of high value trees in a situation
where the integrity of the ordinance would be preserved and adjacent properties would not be
negativity affected. Select cutting is administered by the Director of Code Enforcement only
in areas approved by this ordinance.
Semi-Nude - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic
region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps and devices.
Senior Citizen Housing - A facility designed for, operated as, and occupied by five (5) or
more unrelated persons sixty (60) years of age or older. Such dwelling may be a Personal
Care Boarding Home, Adult Day Care Home, an Elderly Hi-rise, Senior Citizen apartment
building, or similar facility and may be the conversion of an existing building or a new
facility. Senior citizen housing is a conditional use in all R, B-1 and B-2 Districts.
Sexual Activities - The term does not include any of the following:
1. Medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or films.
2. Any art photography publications which devote at least 25% of the lineage of each issue
to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography.
3. Any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which from time to
time publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the
dissemination of the news.
4. Any publications or films which describe and report different cultures and which from
time to time publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons
when describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the populations.
Sexual Encounter Center - A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
27
sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1)
or more of the persons is in the state of nudity or semi-nudity.
Sexually Oriented Establishment/Business - The term includes without limitation, the
following establishments when operated for profit, whether direct or indirect:
1. Adult Arcade
2. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store
3. Adult Cabaret
4. Adult Motion Picture Theaters
5. Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theaters
6. Adult Motel
7. Adult Theater
8. Escort Agency
9. Nude Model Studio
10. Sexual Encounter Center
11. Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and
which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose
of viewing sexually oriented motion pictures, or where an entertainer provides adult
entertainment of a sexual nature to a member of the public, a patron or a member.
12. An adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged and used as
such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, exotic dance
studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like
import. The term booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls for
purposes of defining sexually oriented establishments does not mean enclosures which
are private offices used by the owner, manager or persons employed on the premises for
attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public for
the purpose of viewing motion pictures or other entertainment for a fee, and which are
not open to any persons other than employees.
Sexually Related Facilities - A business or establishment which offers its patrons services or
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Sign - A name, identification, description, or display object which includes an illustration
which is affixed to, or painted on, or represented directly, or indicated upon, a building,
structure, or piece of land, which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, or organization, or business.
Sign, Advertising - A sign which directs attention to a business, goods, or services,
28
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such a sign is located, or
to which it is affixed. This definition includes billboards.
Sign, Business - A sign which directs attention to a business or professional activity
conducted, or to goods or services sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located, or to which it is affixed.
Sign, Flashing or Animated - Any sign which is not maintained stationary and/or, if
illuminated, does not remain constant in intensity and color, except for internally-illuminated
computer-controlled displays which are permitted provided advertising messages are
programmed at such intervals as not to have a flashing effect and, to the satisfaction of traffic
control and zoning officers, do not create a distraction to motorists. Under no circumstances
shall a sign be designed to approximate or resemble standard traffic signalization.
Sign, Flush-Mounted - A sign mounted on the wall of a building and not extending beyond or
above the wall. All portions of the sign are within one foot (1') of the edge of the wall.
Sign, Gross Surface Area of - The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of a sign. Such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying
outside the limits of the sign and not forming an integral part of the display. Where a sign is
permitted by any provision of this ordinance, it shall be construed to permit a double-face
sign. Each face of a double-face sign may equal the maximum size for the particular type of
sign permitted in this ordinance.
Sign, Identification - A sign indicating only the name of an occupant and/or address of a
building, and/or the management thereof.
Sign, Marquee - A sign suspended from either side, or from the underside of a marquee, and
not projecting beyond the marquee.
Sign, Moving - A sign, any portion or all of which moves.
Sign, Nameplate - A sign indicating only the name and/or address of the occupant of a
dwelling or structure, and/or a permitted home occupation.
Sign, Temporary - Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light material with or without
frame, advertising grand openings, distress sales and changes in ownership.
Site - A parcel, or parcels, of land intended to contain one or more buildings, or intended to
be subdivided into one or more lots.
Site Plan - The development plan for one or more lots on which the existing and proposed
conditions of the lot are shown, including topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains,
29
marshes and waterways, open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices, as well as other information
that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the
Planning Commission. See Development Plan.
Skidding - Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing by any means.
Slash -The woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs, chunks, bark,
branches, uprooted stumps, and broken or uprooted trees or shrubs
Special Exception - A use not permitted by right in a use district, which, if controlled, would
promote public health, safety, welfare, or morals. Special Exceptions are enumerated in this
ordinance. Applications for Special Exceptions shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board for approval.
Specified Anatomical Areas -
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
a. Human genitals or pubic region;
b. Buttocks; or
c. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities - The term includes any of the following:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation
or sodomy;
3. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
4. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth herein.
Stand-Any area of forest vegetation whose site conditions, past history, and current
species composition are sufficiently uniform to be managed as a unit.
Story - That part of a building, not including the penthouse, included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story for
30
purposes of height measurement unless one-half or more of its volume is above the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building.
Stream-Any natural or artificial channel of conveyance for surface water with an annual or
intermittent flow within a defined bed and bank.
Street - A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
Structural Alteration - any change, other than incidental repair, which would prolong the life
of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance - Penn Hills Ordinance 2136, as amended.
Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Establishment - The increase in floor areas
occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on
date of enactment of this ordinance or an addition or expansion of more than 2,000 square
feet.
Telecommunications Antenna - A device attached to a building, structure or
telecommunications tower principally intended for receipt or transmission of signals for such
uses as commercial or public television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers,
cellular telephone, fixed point microwave, lower power television or AM radio, including
accessory equipment related to telecommunications. Not included are antennae for private,
noncommercial and amateur purposes, including but not limited to ham radios and citizens
band radios. Antenna are a permitted use in any zoning district provided they do not extend
more than twenty (20) feet higher than the maximum height for the respective district in
which it is to be located.
Telecommunications Facility Building - The building in which electromagnetic receiving
and relay equipment for a telecommunications tower is housed.
Telecommunications Tower - A freestanding structure, including any guy wires, principally
intended to support facilities for receipt of transmission of signals for uses such as
commercial or public television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers, cellular
telephone, fixed microwave, low power television, or AM radio, including accessory
equipment related to telecommunications. Not included are towers and supportive structures
for private, non-commercial and amateur purposes including but not limited to ham radios
and citizen band radios.
Telecommunications Tower Site - Any lot or parcel, or any structure located on any lot or
building lot, on which telecommunications towers are located or proposed to be located.
Temporary Use - A temporary use of commercial or industrial property not to exceed thirty
31
(30) days, including and limited to flea markets, Christmas tree sale, seasonal produce and
roadside fruit stands. A temporary use must be approved by permit and must be consistent
with the performance standards for temporary uses set forth in Section 10 of this ordinance.
Penn Hills community based non-profit corporations and organizations may apply to the
Director of Planning for exemption from any of the restrictions regarding temporary uses.
Timber Harvesting “Tree Harvesting” or “Logging”-That part of forestry involving cutting
down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale or commercial
processing into wood products.
Top-The upper portion of a felled tree that is not merchantable because of small size, taper,
or defect.
Townhouses - Single-family dwelling units constructed in a series or group; including more
than three (3) units with common walls.
Toxic Materials - Those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical or biological means when present in relatively small amounts.
Trailer, Commercial (Including Semi-Trailers) - Vehicles not equipped with automotive
power, constructed for attachment to commercial automobiles, or to tractors, to supplement
the carrying capacity of such automobiles or tractors.
Trailer, House - See Mobile Homes.
Trailer, Utility - Trailers not used for commercial purposes and designed for use with private
passenger automobiles, but excluding “mobile homes” or house trailers. Utility trailers in
residential districts must be less than 9000 pounds combined gross vehicle weight.
Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Establishment - Includes any of the
following:
1. The sale or sublease of the business;
2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether
by sale, exchange or similar means; or
3. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership
or control of the business, except for transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
Use - The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged,
32
or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory - See Accessory Use.
Use, Conditional - See Conditional Use.
Use, Principal - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use.
Variance - A relaxation of the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance, where literal
enforcement would create an unnecessary and undue hardship, but where such relaxation will
not be contrary to public health, safety, welfare or morals.
Vehicle, Bus - A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers,
exclusive of the driver, and used for the transportation of persons, and a motor vehicle other
than a taxi cab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
Vehicle, Commercial - A vehicle registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
eligible for registration, as a commercial vehicle and primarily used for business or service
purposes. Any dump truck, cube or box van, step van, or tow truck is considered to be a
commercial vehicle regardless of class. Pickup trucks and vans with a Gross Vehicle Weight
Registration of less than 9000 pounds (class I, II, III) shall not be deemed commercial
vehicles regardless of the presence of exterior advertising, or the fact that they may be used
for commercial purposes.
Vehicle Not in Running Condition - Any vehicle without a current inspection sticker and/or
without a current license plate, or any vehicle which, by visual inspection, can be determined
to be seriously or permanently disabled, abandoned, or in the process of being dismantled. A
vehicle not in running condition and located on a lot for more than thirty (30) days shall not
be an accessory use.
Vehicle, Recreational - A vehicular unit not exceeding thirty feet (30') in body length, eight
feet (8') in width, or eleven feet (11') in overall height, primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. It has either its own motive power, or is
designed to be mounted on, or drawn by, an automotive vehicle. Recreational vehicles
include motor homes, truck campers, travel trailers, and camping trailers.
Wetland-Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions including swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
Wholesale - the sale of commodities and services to retailers or jobbers rather than directly to
33
the consumer.
Yard - The required open space on a zoning lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from
its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise
along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the use district in which the lot is located.
Yard, Front - A yard extending along the full length of a front lot line between the side lot
lines. On a corner lot or through lot the front yards are the yards abutting the streets or righta-
ways.
Yard, Rear - A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot
lines. A corner lot and a through lot have no rear yards.
Yard, Side - A yard extending along a side lot from the front yard to the rear yard, except on
a corner lot where all yards, other than the front yards, are side yards.
Yard, Transitional - A yard usually required in addition to the normal front, side, and rear
yard setback when non-residential uses abut residential districts. A transitional yard may
include landscaping features only. Parking areas, driveways, storage, and other accessory
uses are not permitted in transitional yards.
34
SECTION 4 USE (ZONING) DISTRICTS
Establishment of Districts
4.1 In order to implement the purposes and provisions of this ordinance, the Municipality of
Penn Hills is hereby divided into the following use districts:
4.1.A. Residence Districts:
(1) R-1 Single-Family Residence District
(2) R-1A Single-Family Residence District
(3) R-2 Single-Family Residence District
(4) R-3 Single-Family Residence District
(5) R-4 Double-House Residence District, Townhouses
(6) R-5 Garden Apartment Residence District
(7) R-6 High-Rise Apartment Residence District
(8) R-7 Multi-Story, Multi-Family, Limited Commercial District
(9) C Conservation District
4.1.B. Business Districts -
(1) B-1 Neighborhood Business District
(2) B-2 Community Business District
(3) B-3 Office and Professional District
4.1.C. Industrial Districts -
(1) I-1 Light Industrial District
(2) I-2 General Industrial District
35
4.1.D. Mixed Use District –
(1) M Mixed Use District
SECTION 5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3, Single-Family Residential Districts are composed of certain quiet, lowdensity
residential areas of the Municipality, and vacant lands where single-family residential
development is encouraged. The regulations for these districts are designed to stabilize and protect
the essential characteristics of these districts; to protect the amenities of certain areas where a singlefamily
residential pattern has already been established; to promote a suitable environment conducive
to family life; and to prohibit those commercial activities not explicitly approved. To these ends,
development is limited to those uses expressly permitted and certain bulk and area regulations are
established.
5.1 R-1 District Permitted Uses - The following uses are permitted in an R-1 District. No uses
are permitted to be conducted in the public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly
permitted in an R-1 District are prohibited.
5.1.A. The permitted uses in an R-1 District are:
(1) Single-family residences
(2) Agriculture/gardening
(3) Accessory uses
(4) Signs as permitted in Section 9
(5) Farms and farm animals on parcels of five acres or more
(6) No-Impact Home Occupation
5.2 R-1A District Permitted Uses - The following uses are permitted in an R-1A District. No
uses are permitted to be conducted in a public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly
permitted in an R-1A District are prohibited.
5.2.A. The permitted uses in an R-1A District are the same uses permitted in an R-1 District.
5.3 R-2 District Permitted Uses - The following uses are permitted in an R-2 District. No uses
are permitted to be conducted in a public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly
permitted in an R-2 District are prohibited.
5.3.A. The permitted uses in an R-2 District are the same uses permitted in an R-1 District.
5.4 R-3 District Permitted Uses - The following uses are permitted in an R-3 District. No uses
are permitted to be conducted in a public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly
permitted in an R-3 District are prohibited.
36
5.4.A. The permitted uses in an R-3 District are the same uses permitted in an R-1 District,
plus house trailers and mobile homes.
5.5 R-4 District Permitted Uses - The R-4 Multi-Family Residential District is composed of
certain areas within the Municipality where multi-family dwelling units have been
constructed, or are likely to be constructed. These multi-family districts are generally
restricted as to type and density, namely townhouses, duplexes, and other types of two-family
dwelling units at a lower density than those in R-5, R-6, and R-7 Districts.
R-4 Districts are established in an effort to provide an alternative to the single-family
detached dwelling unit, which is suitable for families with living styles not requiring large
lots and the private open spaces that they include. To these ends, development is limited to
those uses expressly permitted and certain bulk and area regulations are established.
The following uses are permitted in an R-4 District. No uses are permitted to be conducted
in a public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly permitted in an R-4 District are
prohibited.
5.5.A. The permitted uses in an R-4 District are:
(1) Two-Family residences
(2) Townhouses
(3) Gardening
(4) Accessory uses
(5) Signs as permitted in Section 9
(6) No-Impact Home Occupations
5.6 R-5 District Permitted Uses - The R-5 Multi-Family Residential District is composed of
certain areas within the Municipality where multi-family residential dwelling units exist or
are most likely to occur. These multi-family residential districts are generally restricted as to
type and density, namely garden apartment buildings, townhouses, and other types of multifamily
units at a density greater than that of an R-4 District and less than that of an R-6
District.
R-5 Districts are established in an effort to provide a variety of dwelling unit types within the
Municipality, including rental apartments and condominiums where open space is provided
in the form of common open spaces and recreation areas. To these ends, development is
limited to those uses expressly permitted and certain bulk and area regulations are
established.
The following uses are permitted in an R-5 District. No uses are permitted to be conducted
in the public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly permitted in an R-5 District are
37
prohibited.
5.6.A. The permitted uses in an R-5 District are:
(1) Multi-family residences
(2) Signs as permitted in Section 9
(3) No-Impact Home Occupations
5.7 R-6 District Permitted Uses - The R-6 Multi-Family Residential District is composed of
certain areas within the Municipality where high-density multi-family dwelling units exist or
are likely to occur. These multi-family residential districts are generally restricted as to type
and density, namely garden apartments, hi-rise apartment structures and other types of multifamily
residential structures at a higher density than in R-4 and R-5 Districts.
R-6 Districts are established in an effort to provide for a variety of housing types within the
Municipality, but should be located in areas of the Municipality where the land can be
appropriately developed in a manner compatible with surrounding land uses, and where the
structures are adequately supported by community services. To these ends, development is
limited to uses expressly permitted and certain bulk and area regulations are established.
The following uses are permitted in an R-6 District. No uses are permitted to be conducted
in the public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly permitted in an R-6 District are
prohibited.
5.7.A The permitted uses in an R-6 District are:
(1) Multi-family residences
(2) Signs as permitted in Section 9
(3) No-Impact Home Occupations
5.8 R-7 District Permitted Uses - The R-7 Multi-Family Residential/Limited Commercial
District is composed of certain areas within the Municipality where high density, multifamily
residential dwelling units in conjunction with certain limited commercial uses exist or
are likely to occur. These multi-family residential districts are generally restricted as to type
and density, namely garden apartments, hi-rise apartment structures, and other types of multifamily
housing, including structures which combine commercial uses with apartments.
R-7 Districts are established in an effort to provide for a variety of housing types within the
Municipality, but should be located in areas of the Municipality where the land can be
appropriately developed in a manner compatible with surrounding land uses, and where the
structures are adequately supported by community services. The development is limited to
uses expressly permitted and certain bulk and area regulations are established. The following
uses are permitted in an R-7 District. No uses are permitted to be conducted in the public
38
right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly permitted in an R-7 District are prohibited.
5.8.A. The permitted uses in an R-7 District are:
(1) Multi-family residences
(2) Non-residential uses as defined and permitted in Section 5.10
(3) Signs as permitted in Section 9
(4) No Impact Home Occupations
5.9 C District Permitted Uses - The C Conservation District is intended to encourage the
conservation of certain lands within the Municipality where the economics of building and
supplying public services and facilities argue against the most usual type of building
development; where only high expenditures for grading, increased foundation costs and other
additional site preparations will make the land more buildable; where commercial and
industrial uses of the land are prohibited; and to discourage any use because its character or
location within the district would create requirements and costs for public services
substantially in excess of such requirements and costs in areas of the Municipality where land
is not of the same physical character.
The lands within this district are identified by studies within the Penn Hills Land Use Policy
Plan as lands possessing physical features presenting potential hazards to development.
These features include, but are not limited to:
Steep slopes (slopes in excess of 25%)
Slide-prone soils
Flood-prone areas
Undermined areas
As it may be demonstrated that lands in this district can be utilized for more intensive uses,
consideration may be given to a change of zoning classification as may be appropriate for the
area and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the Municipality.
The following uses are permitted in a C District. No uses are permitted to be conducted in
the public right-of-way. Structures and uses not clearly permitted in a C District are
prohibited.
5.9.A. The permitted uses in a C District are the same as permitted in an R-1 District.
5.10 Non-Residential Uses Permitted in an R-7 District - These uses are permitted on the first and
second floors of a structure, provided the total floor space of all non-residential uses does not
exceed twenty per cent (20%) of the floor space of the entire structure, exclusive of basement
floor area.
39
5.10.A. The following non-residential uses are permitted in an R-7 District only:
(1) Retail sale of wearing apparel, jewelry and notions
(2) Retail sale of stationery supplies
(3) Retail sale of unused books, literature and periodicals
(4) Retail florists
(5) Bank and savings and loan associations
(6) Barber shop
(7) Beauty shop
(8) Business of professional office
(9) Drug store
(10) General photography
(11) Retail laundry or cleaning agency (deposit and pickup only)
(12) Conventional restaurant (which may serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises)
(13) Signs as permitted in Section 9
5.11 Other Provisions Applying To All Uses In Residential Districts - All uses in a residentiallyzoned
district are subject to the applicable provisions of Section 10 of this ordinance
regarding parking, loading and other performance standards, and any other applicable
provisions in this ordinance.
5.12 R-1 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.12.A The following uses are conditional uses in an R-1 District -
(1) Churches, rectories, cemeteries, mausoleums, and similar religious structures
(2) Community facilities (non-profit)
(3) Public and private recreational facilities
(4) Schools
(5) Nurseries (Day Care Centers)
(6) Public utilities and public services
(7) Senior citizen housing
(8) Planned unit residential developments
40
(9) De-activated school re-use, subject to the following conditions:
a. Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Conditional uses listed above, excluding #4 and #9
2. Research and development organizations (However, organizations
proposing to undertake research involving the use of animals must
submit appropriate additional information, including licenses, reports
from regulatory agencies, descriptions of methods to be used and
proposed animal care.)
3. Parks and playgrounds
4. Libraries
5. Community health centers
6. Art galleries and museums
7. Professional Offices
b. Expansion or enlargement may not exceed the current building space.
c. All provisions of Sections 10 and 16 shall be applied
d. All zoning provisions associated with the intended use shall be adhered
to, such as parking requirements, landscaping, curb cuts, etc.
(10) Major Excavation and Grading
a. A grading permit shall be obtained from the Municipality.
b. Isolation Distance - No operation shall conduct activities within 300
feet of any residential structure and 100 feet of the right-of-way of any
public street.
c. Should a site plan requirement be waived by the Planning Commission,
a plan shall be presented which illustrates all wooded areas and fields.
Evergreen trees shall be planted at a rate of 300 trees per acre in addition
to reseeding in any area shown to be wooded. Seedlings of a minimum
of two (2) years are permitted.
d. A bond shall be posted with the Municipality to cover 1-1/2 times the
cost of restoration, as determined by the municipal engineer.
e. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M
. unless special permission is granted by the Council.
f. Trucks and other equipment shall not be operated on any municipal
street except between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. unless
special permission is granted by the Council.
g. A map of the truck route shall be supplied to, and approved by, the
Municipality. This route shall be consistent with size and weight limits,
41
and any use of municipal streets other than the designated streets is prohibited.
h. A bond supplied by the operator to the Municipality may be used by the
Municipality to repair any damage to streets caused by trucks or equipment
associated with the operation, or to cover the cost of cleaning mud
and /or controlling dust, or abating any other nuisance.
i. Only one operation is permitted to be active per watershed. No two
operations shall be permitted to use concurrently the same municipallyowned
streets.
(11) Funeral homes
(12) Conference centers
(13) Telecommunications Towers
(14) Telecommunications Facility Buildings
(15) Forestry
5.13 R-1A District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is
regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.13.A. Conditional uses in an R-1A District are the same as in an R-1 District.
5.14 R-2 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.14.A. Conditional Uses in an R-2 District are the same as in an R-1 District.
5.15 R-3 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.15.A. Conditional uses in an R-3 District are:
(1) Conditional uses in an R-1 District
(2) Mobile home parks, subject to the provisions of the Penn Hills
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
5.16 R-4 District, Conditional Uses - the approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.16.A. Conditional uses in an R-4 District are the same as in an R-1 District.
42
5.17 R-5 District, Conditional Uses - the approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.17.A. The following uses are conditional uses in R-5 Districts:
(1) Conditional uses in an R-1 District
(2) Group care facilities
(3) Nursing homes
5.18 R-6 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.18.A. Conditional uses in an R-6 District are the same as in an R-5 District.
5.19 R-7 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.19.A. The following uses are conditional uses in an R-7 District:
(1) Permitted uses in a B-1 District
(2) Conditional uses in an R-5 District
5.20 C District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is regulated
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
5.20.A. The following uses are conditional uses in a C District:
(1) Public and private recreational facilities
(2) Community facilities (non-profit)
(3) Public utilities and public services
(5) Conference centers
(6) Telecommunications Towers
(7) Telecommunications Facility Buildings
(8) Forestry
5.21. R-1 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.21.A. The following uses are special exceptions in an R-1 District:
(1) Home Occupations
43
5.22 R-1A District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning
Hearing Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.22.A. Special exceptions in an R-1A District are the same as in an R-1 District.
5.23 R-2 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.23.A. The following uses are special exceptions in an R-2 District:
(1) Conversion of a single-family residence to a two-family residence,
subject to the following conditions:
a. Minimum lot size - 7500 sq. ft.
b. Minimum gross floor area 1600 sq. ft.
c. Minimum floor area of each dwelling unit after conversion -
500 sq. ft.
d. A minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
These parking spaces shall not be provided in any required front yard.
e. The structure must otherwise be in conformance with zoning, building
code, and health regulations for two-family residences.
f. Appropriate occupancy, building, and sewage permits must be
obtained.
(2) Special exceptions in an R-1 District
5.24 R-3 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.24.A. Special exceptions in an R-3 District are the same as in an R-1 District.
5.25 R-4 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.25.A. Special exceptions in an R-4 District are:
(1) Single-family residences
(2) Home Occupations
5.26 R-5 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.26.A. The following uses are special exceptions in an R-5 District:
44
(1) Single-family residences
(2) Two (2) - family residences
(3) Home occupations
5.27 R-6 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.27.A. Special exceptions in an R-6 District are the same as in an R-5 District.
5.28 R-7 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.28.A. Special exceptions in an R-7 District are the same as in an R-5 District.
5.29 C District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
5.29.A. Special exceptions in a C District are the same as in an R-1 District.
5.30 Bulk and Area Regulations for Residential Districts
5.30.A. The following Table I contains bulk and area regulations for all residential districts:
45
BULK AND AREA REGULATIONS
C R-3 R-1A R-1 R-2 R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Minimum Lot Area 40,000 20,000 10,000 8,400 5,000 8,000 9,000 30,000 20,000
(Square Feet) and and and and
4000/DU* 3000/DU 1500/DU 1500/DU
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Minimum Frontage and
Average Lot Width (Ft.) 150 110 75 60 50 50 50 150 150
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Minimum Front Yard 35 30 30 25 20 20 20 20* 20*
Depth (Ft)
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Minimum Side Yard 25 15 10 5*** 5 10 15 20* 20*
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Minimum Rear Yard (Ft) 25 15 15 15 10 10 15 20* 20*
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Maximum Height (Ft.) 45 45 35 35 35 35 45 100 100
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Maximum Density 1.5 3 4 5 8 10 15 25 25
(Dwelling Units/Acre)
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
*Plus three feet for every story over three. **DU=dwelling units ***Provided the sum of both yards must be a minimum of 15 feet
NOTE: Bulk and area regulations for uses permitted as special exceptions shall be established by the Zoning Hearing Board and for uses
permitted as conditional uses, by the Council
46
47
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATION
District Permitted Uses Conditional Uses Special Exceptions
R-1 Single-family residences, Churches, Rectories, Cemeteries, Home Occupations
Agriculture/Gardening Mausoleums and similar religious
Accessory uses structures
Signs, as governed by Community Facilities (non profit)
Section 9 Public and Private Recreational Facilities
Farms and farm animals Forestry, Funeral Homes,
on parcels of five Telecommunication Towers and Facility Buildings
acres or more Schools, Conference Centers
No-Impact Nurseries (Day Care Centers)
Home Occupations Public Utilities and Public Services
Senior Citizens' Housing
Planned Unit Residential Developments
De-activated School Re-Use
Major Excavation & Grading
R-1A Same as R-1 Same as R-1 Same as R-1
R-2 Same as R-1 Same as R-1 Conversion of
Single-Family
Residence to Two-
Family Residence
Home Occupations
R-3 Same as R-1, plus Same as R-1 Same as R-1
Mobile Homes
R-4 Two-Family residences Same as R-1 Single-family
Residences
Home Occupations
R-5 Multi-Family residences Same as R-1 One and Two-family
Signs, as permitted in Group Care Facilities Residences
Home Occupations
Section 9 Nursing Homes
R-6 Multi-family residences Same as R-5 Same as R-5
R-7 Multi-family residences Same as R-5 Same as R-5
Non-residential uses as Same as B-1
Defined and permitted
In Section 5.10
Signs as permitted in Section 9 ____________________________________________
C Same as R-1 Public and Private Recreational Home Occupations
Facilities. Forestry, Conference Centers
Community Facilities (Non Profit),
Public Utilities and Public Services
Telecommunication Towers/Facility Buildings
48
5.30.B. Bulk and area regulations for special conditional uses are set forth in Sections 10 and 11 of
this ordinance, or otherwise established by the Zoning Hearing Board for special exceptions and by
the Council for conditional uses.
5.30.C. Subdivisions involving existing structures with common walls:
(1) Providing a lot or parcel is of sufficient size and otherwise in conformance
with zoning and subdivision regulations, a subdivision may be
approved that effectively creates a zero lot line or a zero side and/or
rear yard setback.
(2) Such subdivision shall apply to existing structures only with a common
party wall.
(3) Standard maintenance agreements regarding common or shared facilities
shall be prepared and properly recorded with newly-created deeds.
49
SECTION 6 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
The following uses are permitted in the applicable B Use District. No uses in these districts are
permitted to be conducted on a public right-of-way. Uses of land and structures not clearly permitted
in the applicable district are prohibited.
6.1 B-1 District (Neighborhood Business) Permitted Uses - In the B-1 District; the types of uses
permitted are uses of land for commercial purposes directed at the residents of the
neighborhood in which the use is located. This district excludes commercial and industrial
uses, which would alter the character of the district as a residential area containing only
neighborhood businesses.
Prohibited uses include fast food restaurants, service stations, auto laundries, auto repair
garages and planned developments.
6.1.A. Uses permitted in a B-1 district are those uses, which are retail sales or service
establishments:
(1) Sales of non-alcoholic beverages, books, confections, drugs, electrical
appliances, flowers, food, hardware, notions, novelties, periodicals, shoes,
sundries, household articles, tobacco and wearing apparel.
Manufacturing or process on the premises is not permitted unless incidental
and essential to an enterprise in which merchandise is sold at retail primarily
on the premises.
(2) Barber shop or beauty parlor
(3) Clothes pressing, cleaning, tailoring or repair and shoe repair
(4) Financial institutions
(5) Professional offices
(6) Conventional restaurants where there is no live entertainment, dancing, or
serving of intoxicating beverages
(7) Signs as permitted by Section 9
(8) Nursery (Day Care Center)
(9) Funeral Homes
6.1.B Permitted uses in a B-1 District are subject to the condition that all activity except for offstreet
parking and loading shall be completely conducted within enclosed buildings.
6.2 B-2 District (Community Business) Permitted Uses
6.2.A. In a B-2 District the following uses are permitted:
(1) Permitted uses in a B-1 District
50
(2) Retail goods and service establishments
(3) Combination retail and wholesale goods and service establishments where the
primary use is office or retail. Warehousing, wholesaling, self-storage
warehousing and similar operations are permitted operations in a M,11, or 12
Districts.
(4) Lodges, clubs and meeting halls, restaurants which may serve alcoholic
beverages for on-premise consumption
(5) Signs as permitted by Section 9
(6) Fast-food restaurants subject to the following conditions:
a. The operators of a fast-food restaurant are required to collect all litter
from the fast-food restaurant daily in an area within two-hundred fifty
feet (250') of the restaurant. This two-hundred-fifty feet (250') area
includes both sides of all roadways in the area.
b. There shall be a minimum of five (5) parking spaces plus one (1) space
for each one-hundred square feet (100 sq.ft.) of gross floor area.
c. Compliance with any and all additional conditions imposed by this ordinance
and any other applicable ordinance, is mandatory.
(7) Mixed residential and commercial structures subject to the following
conditions:
a. The structure must meet the provisions of Section 11.5J of this ordinance,
and
b. The structure may include a maximum of ten (10) dwelling units.
(8) Amusement arcades subject to the following conditions:
a. An amusement arcade shall operate only between the hours of 9:00 A.M.
and Midnight (12:00 A.M.) Monday through Saturday, and between
1:00 P.M. and Midnight (12:00 A.M.) on Sunday, except for arcades
which are an accessory to a business selling alcoholic beverages.
c. No loitering and no smoking signs must be posted and enforced.
d. There shall be no admission of school children during normal school
hours and the owners of the establishment shall be responsible for
refusing admission.
(9) Motor vehicles service stations, repair garages, bus garages, and auto body
51
repair garages subject to the following conditions:
a. Parking of more than four (4) vehicles not in running condition, and not
completely enclosed in a building, is prohibited.
b. Gasoline pumps, kerosene pumps, light standards, and similar fixtures
are permitted provided no portion of the same shall be placed closer to
the property line than fifteen feet (15').
c. With the exception of minor incidental maintenance and repair, all work
must be done indoors.
d. No access drive shall be wider than thirty-five feet (35').
e. Vehicular access drives shall be limited to intervals of not less than onehundred
feet (100') as measured from the nearest sidelines of each,
when on an arterial highway, and not less than forty feet (40') as
measured from the nearest sidelines of each, on all other streets.
f. Vehicular access drives on a corner lot shall be limited to not less than
forty feet (40') distant on each street measured from the intersection of
the curb lines of the two streets as extended to the nearest sidelines of
the access drives, except that on corner lots of arterial highways the
distance shall be one-hundred feet (100').
g. Any building shall be set back at least twenty-five feet (25') from any
public right-of-way lines. Any portion of a canopy shall be set back at
least fifteen feet (15') from any right-of-way line.
h. All debris, used tires, junk, etc., shall be stored in an enclosure in such a
manner that it cannot be seen from any adjacent property, or from the
roadway.
6.3 B-3 District (Office and Professional) Permitted Uses
6.3.A. In a B-3 District, the following uses are permitted
(1) Business and professional offices
(2) Retail sales of books, literature, periodicals, stationery supplies, floral items,
financial institutions, antiques and objects d’art, barber shops, beauty parlors,
conventional restaurants (which may serve alcoholic beverages for onpremise
consumption), drug stores.
52
These non-office business uses shall be located only on the first floor of a
building and the total of such non-office business uses shall not occupy more
than 20% of the floor area of the entire building, exclusive of basement floor
area.
(3) Mixed Residential/Commercial Structures
a. Non-residential uses shall be restricted to those uses otherwise permitted
within the respective use district.
b. All activity, except for off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted
completely within enclosed buildings.
c. The total floor space of all residential uses shall not exceed 50% of the
floor space for the entire structure.
d. Residential uses shall meet the bulk and area regulations applicable to R-2
Districts.
e. Parking spaces must be provided separately for residential and nonresidential
and non-residential uses.
(4) Signs as permitted by Section 9
(5) Nursery (Day Care Center)
6.4 B-1 District Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is governed
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
6.4.A. The following uses are conditional uses in a B-1 District:
(1) Public or privately-owned recreation facilities or community centers
(2) Senior citizen housing
(3) Schools and other educational institutions
(4) Mixed residential and commercial structures
6.5 B-2 District, Conditional Uses - The approval of conditional uses by the Council is governed
by the applicable provisions of Section 11 of this ordinance.
6.5.A. The following uses are conditional uses in a B-2 District
(1) Public or privately-owned recreation facilities or community centers
(2) Senior citizen housing
(3) Health centers, hospitals and sanitariums
(4) Libraries
(5) Theaters
53
(6) Mixed residential and commercial buildings with more than ten (10) dwelling
units
(7) Reserved
(8) Group care facilities
(9) Half-way houses
(10) Nursing homes
(11) Forestry
6.6 B-3 District, Conditional Uses - There are no conditional uses in a B-3 District.
6.7 B-1 District, Special Exceptions - There are no special exceptions in a B-1 District.
6.8 B-2 District, Special Exceptions - the approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
6.8.A. The following uses are special exceptions in a B-2 District
(1) Auto laundries, subject to the following conditions:
a. All operations shall take place in a completely enclosed building, including
operations such as vacuuming, brushing, steaming, wiping, and
polishing.
b. All driveway and waiting areas shall be paved.
c. All other areas shall be either paved or planted in such a way that no
dust can be created.
d. Waiting areas outside the building, exclusive of employee parking areas,
for thirty (30) autos, shall be provided. Such waiting areas shall not be
in the right-of-way or in the transitional yard.
e. Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal of
sewage and waste are required and must be submitted and approved by
the appropriate municipal officer.
f. No access drive shall be wider than thirty-five feet (35').
g. Vehicular access drives shall be limited to intervals of not less than onehundred
(100') as measured from the nearest sidelines of each when the
use is located on an arterial highway, and not less than forty feet (40')
as measured from the nearest sidelines of each, on all other streets.
h. Vehicular access drives on a corner lot shall be limited to not less than
54
forty feet (40') distant on each street measured from the intersection of
the curb lines of the two streets as extended to the nearest sidelines of
the access drives, except that on corner lots of arterial highways the
distance shall be one-hundred feet (100').
i. Any building shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from any public
right-of-way line.
j. There shall be a raised curb six inches (6") in height along all property
lines coinciding with public right-of-ways, except for driveway openings
k. Outdoor lighting shall be designed so as to eliminate any glare on adjoining
properties.
6.9 B-3 District, Special Exceptions - The approval of special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board is regulated by the applicable provisions of Section 12 of this ordinance.
6.9.A. There are no special exceptions in a B-3 District.
6.10 Bulk and Area Requirements
6.10.A. The maximum floor space index for uses in B Districts is as follows:
(1) B-1 District, 0.4
(2) B-2 District, 0.8
(3) B-3 District, 0.8
6.10.B. The minimum front yard depth for uses in B Districts is as follows:
(1) B-1 District, 25 feet
(2) B-2 District, 25 feet
(3) B-3 District, 25 feet
6.10.C. The minimum side yard and rear yard width for uses in B Districts which do not abut
residential zones or uses, are as follows:
(1) B-1 District, 10 feet
(2) B-2 District, 10 feet
(3) B-3 District, 10 feet
6.10.D. The following transitional yard regulations apply whenever a B District abuts a
residential district or use:
55
(1) Where a side yard in a B District abuts a side yard in a residential
district or use, a transitional side yard of at least ten feet (10’in width)
shall be maintained in addition to the required side yard.
(2) Where a side yard in a B district abuts a rear yard in a residential
district or use, a transitional side yard shall be maintained which is to
be at least equal to the required residential rear yard in addition to the
required side yard.
(3) Where a rear lot in a B District abuts a rear yard in a B District abuts a
rear or side yard in a residential district or use, a transitional rear yard
shall be maintained which is to be at least equal to the required
residential rear yard in addition to the required rear yard.
(4) Where a front yard or an extension of a side yard in a B District abuts
a front yard in a residential district or use, a transitional yard shall be
maintained which is to be at least equal in depth to the required
residential front yard for a distance of at least thirty feet (30’) from
the residential lot in addition to the required front yard.
6.10.E. Subdivisions involving existing structures with common walls
(1) Providing a lot or parcel is of sufficient size and otherwise in
conformance with zoning and subdivision regulations, a subdivision
may be approved which effectively creates a zero lot line or a zero
side and/or rear yard setback.
(2) Such subdivisions shall apply to existing structures only with a
common party wall.
(3) Standard maintenance agreements regarding common or shared
facilities shall be prepared and properly recorded with newly-created
deeds.
6.11 Other Provisions Applying to all B Uses - All uses in any B District are subject to the
applicable provisions of Section 10 regarding parking, loading, noise and other
performance standards, and any other applicable provision of this ordinance.
56
SECTION 7 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The following uses are permitted in the applicable I Use District. No uses in these districts are
permitted to be conducted on the public right-of-way. Uses of land and structures not clearly
permitted in the applicable district, are prohibited.
7.1 I-1 District (Light Industrial) Permitted Uses - A light industrial use in one which creates a
minimal amount of nuisance, is conducted entirely within enclosed buildings (except for offstreet
parking and loading), does not use open area around structures for storage of raw
materials or manufactured products and which is not noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gas, odors, noise or vibrations, beyond the confines of the
building.
7.1.A. Permitted uses in an I-1 District are as follows:
(1) Bakery
(2) Bottling works
(3) Clothing factory
(4) Dry cleaning plant
(5) Dyeing plant
(6) Engraving plant
(7) Research and development organizations
(8) Sheet metal shop
(9) Storage firm
(10) Wholesale business
(11) Animal hospitals
(12) Fabrication institutions
(13) Educational institutions
(14) Planned industrial developments
(15) Parks and playgrounds
(16) Any other similar and comparable light industrial use including, but not
limited to, combination wholesale and retail businesses, car and truck rentals,
auto body garages, light manufacturing, and other uses found to be
compatible with light industrial uses
(17) Accessory use or building customarily
(18) Signs as permitted by Section 9 of this ordinance including billboards and
advertising signs
(19) Professional offices
(20) New and/or used car sales (subject to the provisions of Section 8.1.A.(9)
(21) Landscaping businesses, lawn and garden centers
(22) Contracting company offices and storage yards (subject to the provisions of
Section 10.5.E. (3).
57
7.2 I-2 District (General Industrial) Permitted Uses
7.2.A. Permitted uses in an I-2 District are as follows -
(1) All uses permitted in an I-1 District
(2) Those industrial uses which, because they may create some nuisance, are
more properly conducted outside of residential and commercial use districts,
and which are conducted within the regulations and standards as set forth in
this ordinance, and any other applicable municipal, county, state or federal
regulations.
(3) Private and public recreation facilities otherwise not permitted in residential
districts such as go-cart race tracks, dirt bike race tracks, survival clubs,
model airplane flying clubs, and similar facilities subject to the following
conditions:
a. The Penn Hills Planning Commission and/or the Department of Planning
and Economic Development may impose appropriate conditions to protect
adjacent properties including fencing, landscaping, restrictions on
hours of operation, and other similar requirements.
b. If such facilities are located on property adjacent to a residential district,
a minimum landscaped buffer of five hundred (500) feet must be maintained
together with other features which eliminate noise from adjacent
property.
7.2.B. All uses in an I-2 District are subject to the following conditions:
(1) For any use within one hundred feet (100') of a residential district or use, all
storage of vehicles exceeding one (1) ton capacity shall be completely
enclosed within a structure.
(2) All uses shall be on a lot directly fronting on and having access to, a
permanently surfaced public street or highway, or fronting on a street
constructed to specifications approved by the Council, which directly
connects with a permanently surfaced public street or highway.
7.2.C Permitted Uses in an I-3 District:
(1) All uses permitted in an I-1 District
(2) All uses permitted in an I-2 District
58
7.3 I-District Uses Specifically Prohibited
7.3.A. The following uses are prohibited in an I District -
(1) Acetylene gas manufacture
(2) Acid manufacture
(3) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine
(4) Arsenal
(5) Asphalt manufacture or refining
(6) Candle manufacture
(7) Celluloid manufacture
(8) Coke ovens
(9) Creosote treatment or manufacture
(10) Disinfectants manufacture
(11) Distillation of bones, coal or wood
(12) Dyestuff manufacture
(13) Exterminator and insect poison manufacture
(14) Emery cloth and sand paper manufacture
(15) Fat rendering, soap, the manufacturing and refining of tallow, grease,
or lard
(16) Fertilizer manufacture
(17) Fish smoking and curing
(18) Garbage disposal or incineration except recycling facilities
(19) Glue, size, or gelatin manufacture
(20) Fireworks or explosives manufacture
(21) Junkyards
(22) Natural gas manufacture or storage in excess of 10,000 cubic feet
(23) Lamp black manufacture
(24) Match manufacture
(25) Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture
(26) Ore reduction and general smelting operations
(27) Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture
(28) Paper and pulp manufacture
(29) Petroleum and petroleum by-products refining or storage
(30) Plating works, potash works and pyroxline
(31) Rubber, caoutchouc or gutta percha manufacture
(32) Slaughter house
(33) Stock yards
(34) Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture
(35) Tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhide, or skins
(36) Tar distillation or manufacture
(37) Tar roofing or water proofing manufacture
(38) Vinegar manufacture
(39) Wool pulling
59
(40) Yeast plant
(41) Those industrial uses not listed above, but otherwise identified by
regulations promulgated under Section 3001 of the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, (PL 94-580), as
producing hazardous wastes, shall not be located closer than 2500
feet to any commercial or residential properties.
7.4 I Districts - Conditional Uses
7.4.A. (1) Auto pounds
(2) Forestry
7.4.B. I-3 Conditional Uses
(1) Sexually oriented establishments
7.5 I Districts - Special Exceptions - There are no special exceptions in an I District.
7.6 I Districts - Bulk and Area Requirements
7.6.A. I-1 Districts - Uses in an I-1 District shall be governed by the following requirements
(1) The floor space index shall not exceed 1.0. This index does not include
underground or basement storage areas and basement areas devoted to plant
maintenance.
(2) A front yard shall be required not less than thirty-five (35) feet from the
property line along the public right-of-way which the lot fronts.
a. A front yard shall be planted with grass or other suitable cover, except
for necessary drives and walkways.
b. Lighting necessary to reasonably illuminate a structure, may be placed
in front yard.
(3) A side yard shall be provided at least twenty-five feet (25') in depth, plus one
foot (1') for each foot by which the building exceeds twenty feet (20') in
height.
a. On a corner lot, the side yard adjacent to a street shall be treated as if a
a front yard.
(4) A rear yard shall be provided which shall be at least twenty-five (25') in
60
depth, plus one foot (1') for reach foot by which the building exceeds twenty
feet (20') in height.
(5) Where an I-1 District abuts a residential district or use, a transitional yards of
at least fifty feet (50') shall be required in addition to the yards listed above.
(6) No structure shall exceed fort-five feet (45') in height.
7.6.B. I-2 Districts - Uses in an I-2 District shall be governed by the following requirements:
(1) The floor space index shall not exceed 1.0. This index does not include
underground or basement storage areas and basement areas devoted to plant
maintenance
(2) The minimum front yard required is forty-five (45’) measured from the
property line.
a. A front yard shall be planted with grass or other suitable cover, except for
necessary drives and walkways.
b. Lighting necessary to reasonably illuminate a structure, may be placed in
a front yard.
(3) A side yard of at least fifty feet (50') in depth shall be provided, plus one foot
(1') for each foot by which the building exceeds twenty feet (20') in height.
(4) A rear yard shall be provided which shall be at least thirty-five feet (35') in
depth plus one foot (1') for each foot by which the building exceeds twenty
feet (20') in height.
(5) Where an I-2 District abuts a residential district or use, a transitional yard of
at least fifty feet (50') shall be required.
(6) No structure shall exceed forty-five feet (45') in height.
7.6.C. I-3 Districts - Uses in an I-3 District shall be governed by the following requirements
(1) When the proposed use is an I-1 use, the bulk and area regulations of the I-1
District, Section 7.6.A., apply.
(2) When the proposed use is an I-2 use, the bulk of the I-2 District, Section
7.6.B., apply.
61
(3) When the use is a sexually oriented establishment, the bulk and area
regulations of the I-1 District, Section 7.6.A, apply.
7.7 I-Districts - General Regulations - All I Districts are subject to the applicable provisions of
Section 10 regarding performance standards and any other applicable provision of this
ordinance, as well as all applicable provisions of Ordinance #2136, as amended, the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
62
SECTION 8 MIXED USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The following uses are permitted in the M District. No use in this district is to be conducted on the
public right-of-way. Uses of land and structures not clearly permitted in an M District, are
prohibited.
8.1 M District - Permitted Uses
8.1.A. Permitted uses in an M Use District are as follows -
(1) Permitted uses within an R-5, R-6, or R-7 District
(2) Self-storage warehouses, warehouses, and light industrial uses (Uses
permitted in an I-1), except advertising signs and billboards.
(3) Permitted uses within the B-1 District
(4) Permitted uses within the B-2 District
(5) Permitted uses within the B-3 District
(6) Fast food restaurants, subject to the following conditions:
a. The operators of a fast food restaurant are required to collect, daily, the
litter from the fast food restaurant in an area within two-hundred-fifty
feet (250') of their restaurant. This two-hundred-fifty foot (250') area
includes both sides of all roadways in the area.
b. There shall be a minimum of five (5) parking spaces plus one (1) space
for one-hundred square feet (100 sq. ft.) of gross floor area.
c. Compliance with any and all additional conditions imposed by this
ordinance, the site plan ordinance, and any other applicable ordinance,
is mandatory.
(7) Auto laundries, subject to the conditions of Section 6.8.A.1.
(8) Auto service stations, repair garages and bus garages, subject to the
conditions of Section 6.2.A(9).
(9) Auto sales and rentals, including either new or used cars, truck and van
rentals, boat and trailer sales and similar uses subject to the following
conditions:
a. With the exception of incidental maintenance, all repairs must be done
indoors.
b. The use must be in conjunction with a permanent structure to be used as
an office. A trailer is not a permanent structure for purposes of this
section.
63
c. Outdoor storage of vehicles must be appropriately screened from adjacent
properties and the roadway.
d. All signage must be in conformance with Section 9 of this ordinance.
8.2 M District - Conditional Uses
8.2.A. Auto pounds
8.2.B. Conditional uses in B-1 and B-2 Districts, except for mixed commercial and
residential structures which shall be permitted uses.
8.2 C Forestry
8.3 M District - Special Exceptions - There are no special exceptions in an M District.
8.4 M District - Bulk and Area Regulations
8.4.A. Where a use is a multi-family dwelling, the bulk and area regulations of the R-5
District apply.
8.4.B. Where a use is an I-1 use, the bulk and area regulations of the I-1 District apply.
8.4.C. In all other uses, the following bulk and area regulations apply:
(1) Maximum floor space index, 0.8
(2) Minimum front yard depth, 25 feet
(3) Minimum side yard width, 10 feet
(4) Minimum rear yard depth, 10 feet
(5) Transitional yards, if required, are regulated by Section 6, 6.10.D and Section
7, 7.6.A.(5).
8.5 M District - General Regulations - All M Districts are subject to the applicable provisions of
Section 10 regarding performance standards, and any other applicable provision of this
ordinance.
64
SECTION 9 SIGN REGULATIONS
9.1 Residential Districts - Signs shall be permitted in residential districts subject to the following
conditions:
9.1.A. Nameplate Sign - Only one such sign shall be permitted for each front yard per
dwelling unit. Each sign shall not exceed .75 square feet in area.
9.1.B. Identification Sign - One such sign shall be permitted for each front yard per nonresidential
building and per multi-family dwelling containing more than five (5)
dwelling units. Each sign shall not exceed thirty two square feet (32sq.ft.) in area and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property line. Non-residential uses
approved in residential districts as conditional uses approved in residential districts
as conditional uses may install signage in accordance with Section 9.2 of this
ordinance.
9.1.C. For Sale or For Rent Sign - Only one such sign shall be permitted for each front
yard. Such sign shall not exceed ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) In area and shall not be
closer than five feet (5') to any property line.
9.1.D. Signs advertising lots or houses for sale in real estate developments, where ten (10)
or more contiguous lots in common ownership are for sale simultaneously, only one
(1) such sign shall be permitted for each primary entrance to the development, but no
more than two (2) signs shall be permitted per development. Each sign shall not
exceed twenty-five square feet (25 sq. ft.) In area and shall be within 1,300 feet of the
nearest lot originally for sale and shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property
line.
(1) Such sign shall not be erected unless an application for permit to erect such
sign is applied for and issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Pursuant to
the issuance of such permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall receive from
the applicant a performance bond of $200 per sign. Such sign shall be
removed within two (2) years after receipt of a permit, or when all of the
original lots have been sold, whichever is sooner, at which time the
performance bond will be returned.
(2) Failure to remove the sign within the stated time period shall result in the
forfeiture of the bond and shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
9.1.E. Signs Identifying a Subdivision or Real Estate Development (not including
identification of the owner, developer, or realty) -
(1) Letters not exceeding twelve (12) inches in height may be affixed to or
65
engraved on an ornamental structure, giving the name of a real estate
development or subdivision, and serving as a permanent indication of the
entrance(s) to such development.
(2) Each sign shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property line.
9.1.F. Bulletin Signs for Houses of Worship - Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted in
each front yard. Each sign shall not exceed fifteen square feet (15 sq. ft.) in area and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property line.
9.1.G. No flashing, animated, or moving signs shall be permitted. With the exception of
signs advertising real estate developments, all signs may be illuminated by a small,
white light shining on the sign, sufficient to permit the sign to be read from the
nearest roadway when dark.
9.1.H. Signs permitted with a home occupation shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
9.2 Commercial, Industrial and M Districts - In B-1, B-2, B-3, I-2, I-2 and M Districts, nonflashing,
non-animated business signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions:
9.2.A. Permits Required:
1. A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected. No sign whether free
standing or attached to a structure shall be erected, re-erected, enlarged, altered
or, replaced without the issuance of a permit in accordance with this ordinance.
2. Maintenance of a legal sign by painting, repainting, or cleaning shall not be
considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit. Changes in the
text/graphics or an expansion of the text/graphics would require a permit.
3. A sign permit fee shall be paid in accordance with Ordinance 2146 the
Municipality’s schedule of fees, as amended from time to time.
9.2.B. Number of Business Signs Permitted
(1) Unless otherwise specified each individual detached building in a commercial
district shall be permitted one (1) freestanding and any number of flushmounted
signs in accordance with the requirements of 9.2.C. and 9.2.D.
(2) If more than five (5) business establishments are together in a detached
building or a contiguous group, such group or building is permitted an
additional free-standing sign to identify this group of businesses as a single
unit.
66
(3) A contiguous group of more than thirty (30) business establishments is
permitted two (2) additional free-standing signs identifying the group of
businesses as a single unit.
(4) The additional signs above may be combined on one pole provided the total
square footage does not exceed one hundred square feet (100 sq.ft.).
9.2.C. Size of Signs Permitted
(1) The total area of flush-mounted signage shall not exceed one square foot (1
sq. ft.) of signage for each lineal foot of building frontage. The square
footage of signage shall be determined by boxing the periphery of letters
and/or symbols.
(2) The total area of free-standing signs shall not exceed one square foot (1 sq.
Ft.) For each lineal foot of building frontage, but in any case, shall not exceed
fifty square feet (50 sq. ft.) unless as described in 9.2B of this ordinance
where the sign shall not exceed one hundred square (100 sq. ft.).
9.2.D Location of Signs
(1) All portions of signs shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any
right-of-way unless flush-mounted.
(2) All parts of a sign shall be within fifteen feet (15') of the existing
grade over which it is located, unless flush-mounted or in cases where
more than one free standing sign is permitted and they are combined
on one pole, all parts of the sign shall be within twenty five feet (25’)
of the existing grade over which it is located.
(3) A sign shall be placed so as not to interfere with the regular and
orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Flush-mounted signs shall be permitted on all sides of a building
provided they are in conformance with the area requirements and
other provisions of this ordinance.
Free-standing signs shall be permitted in any yard area provided they
are in conformance with the performance standards of this section and
other provisions of this ordinance.
9.2.E. Temporary Signs
67
(1) Temporary signs, in conjunction with the issuance of a new
occupancy permit shall be permitted for a period not to exceed
fourteen (14) days. There shall be no limit as to the number or size of
temporary signs, except that such signs must be located on the lot of
the business whose opening, or ownership is being advertised, and
that such signs shall not constitute a hazard or impediment to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Temporary signs may be erected for a period of thirty (30) days in
conjunction with an approved temporary use. The total area of
temporary use signage shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
9.2.F. Directional Signs - Only two directional signs are permitted per curb opening.
A directional sign may not exceed two square feet (2 sq. ft.) in size.
9.2.G. Menu Boards - In addition to other permitted signs, a fast-food restaurant
may provide a menu board for drive-thru customers. A menu board shall not
be located within the required front yard setback area, shall not exceed twenty
square feet (20 sq. Ft.), and shall not impede the safe flow of traffic.
9.2.H. Automobile Service Stations
(1) Gasoline price signs (not to exceed two and not exceeding twenty
(20) square feet each) may be erected in addition to a free-standing
business sign. The total of all signs shall not exceed ninety (90)
square feet.
(2) Signs are permitted on and above gasoline pump islands, provided
they do not extend beyond the edge of the island and are within ten
feet (10') of the ground.
(3) State Inspection shingles, where applicable, shall not exceed 24" x
26" and may be mounted at any place on the property, provided they
do not interfere with regular and ordinary flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
9.2.I. Awning Signs - In addition to other business, signage normally permitted,
each business establishment in a shopping plaza is entitled to one awning
sign perpendicular to the structure, not exceeding two (2) square feet, and
visible only to pedestrians using the sidewalk.
68
9.2.J. Marquee Signs
(1) Building permit - A building permit is required before a sign is
erected.
(2) Number - Only one (1) sign shall be permitted for each use.
(3) Size - The maximum depth of the sign shall be one foot (1') and the
maximum area of the sign shall be five square feet (5 sq. ft.).
9.2.K. For Sale or For Rent Signs
(1) Number - Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each front
yard.
(2) Size - Such sign shall not exceed thirty two square feet (32sq.ft) in
area and shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property line.
(3) Signs advertising the sale or lease of vacant land shall not exceed
thirty two square feet (32 sq.ft.) and must meet all other performance
standards.
9.2.L. Billboards
(1) Billboards are not permitted in any R, C. B, or M District within the
Municipality of Penn Hills, or in any residential use in a nonresidential
district. Billboards are permitted in I-1 and I-2 Districts
only.
(2) Billboards must have a minimum separation distance of 1,000 feet.
(3) Billboards shall not exceed 100 sq. ft. in size.
(4) Billboards may not be mounted on the roof, wall, or other part of a
building or any other structure.
(5) All billboards must conform to Section 9.1.G, 9.2.D and 9.3 of this
ordinance.
9.2.M. Special Use Signs-Businesses and community facilities which traditionally
rely on seasonal sales, weekend events, community events, and entertainment
may have one additional sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet for the
sole purpose of promoting this activity. Examples include, but are not limited
69
to, lawn and garden centers and fruit markets that obtain a supply of seasonal
products, restaurants and taverns that feature live entertainment, church
bazaars, and fire department reader boards. Special use signs do not include
reduced price retail sales, promotional ads, and signs that promote standard
retail activity. Special Use Signs must be specifically approved by the chief
zoning officer and otherwise meet all performance standards of this section.
9.3 Performance Standards - All Signs - Any and all signs are subject to the following
performance standards:
9.3.A All signs shall be properly maintained so as to present a legible appearance.
All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in good repair. The display
surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. There
shall be no nails, tacks, or wires protruding from the sign or other advertising
structure. Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put into
a good state of repair. If panels and/or display surfaces of a sign are removed,
the entire sign shall be removed.
9.3.B. All non-operative or broken interior-illuminated signs shall be repaired or
removed. All temporary signs shall be removed at the expiration of the event
or sale for which they were erected. This section shall apply retroactively to
all existing signs and any new signs.
9.3.C. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to be distractive or hazardous, or
to obstruct visibility with respect to the safety of motorists or pedestrians
proceeding along any public way, or entering or leaving a lot.
9.3.D. No sign shall be erected or maintained on the roof or eaves of any building.
9.3.E No signs of any type shall be permitted on an accessory structure
9.4 Removal of Temporary Signs
9.4.A The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to remove or cause to be removed
any temporary sign or other advertising structure which has been constructed,
erected, altered, relocated, or maintained in violation of this ordinance.
9.4.B. Any temporary sign or advertising display unlawfully located in the public
right-of-way may be removed without notice. Upon removal the zoning
officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner or beneficial user of
the sign, informing them that the sign can be reclaimed upon payment of the
prescribed fee and within ten (10) days of removal. The Municipality will not
be responsible for damages to temporary signs that may occur during the
70
removal process. If the owner does not claim the sign within the ten (10) day
period, the Municipality may sell or otherwise dispose of the sign and all
costs associated shall be born by the owner.
9.4.C. The Zoning Officer or Penn Hills Police Officer is hereby authorized to cause
the immediate removal or repair of any temporary sign found to be unsafe,
defective, or a traffic hazard to the extent that it creates an immediate and
emergency hazard to persons or property. Actual notice to the property owner
or sign beneficiary is not required. After removal the zoning officer shall
make a reasonable effort to provide notice as prescribed in section 9.4.B
above.
71
SECTION 10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following regulations shall apply to all uses and use districts unless otherwise specified.
10.1. Off-Street Parking Regulations - The number of off-street parking spaces (serving a building
or use) existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be reduced below that
required for a similar new building or new use by this ordinance, or further reduced if the
number of spaces available is already less than required by this ordinance. Off-street parking
spaces provided to comply with the terms of this ordinance shall not be subsequently reduced
below the requirements of this ordinance. The granting and continued validly of a Certificate
of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance, issued after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be
conditional upon compliance with these parking requirements. Where the owner or operator
of a use of land must satisfy the requirements for off-street parking by leasing spaces he shall
provide an executed copy of the lease agreement and shall provide a signed statement that the
owner understands that an occupancy permit is subject to the continuance of such lease
agreement or to the required parking spaces being otherwise provided.
10.1.A. General Provisions
(1) Computation - When calculation of the required amount of off-street parking
results in a requirement of a fractional space, a fraction shall be counted as an
entire parking space.
(2) Size - A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') wide
by twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles or ramps.
(3) Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or
drive of such design as to provide safe and efficient means of access to a
street in a manner which will least interfere with traffic flow.
(4) Surfacing - All driveways and open off-street parking spaces shall be surfaced
with a bituminous or concrete surface, except those for single-family
residences and properties in I-1 and I-2 Districts, which may be of alternative
dust-free surfaces.
(5) Lighting - All parking areas in B, M, and I Districts shall be suitably
illuminated for night use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be directed away from residential districts or use.
(6) Handicapped Parking - An appropriate number of handicapped parking
spaces must be provided. The number, design, and location of these spaces
must be provided in conformance with Federal and State laws.
72
10.1.B. Collective Parking - Off-street parking for separate uses in B, M, and I Districts may
be provided collectively only if the total of such off-street parking spaces shall be
at least equal to the number of spaces required for the various uses if computed
separately. Applicable regulations regarding parking space, size, location and
accessibility shall be complied with.
10.1.C. Location and Accessibility
(1) All required parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling served.
(2) No off-street parking shall be located in required transitional yards.
(3) All off-street parking shall be reasonably accessible to the uses served. In a B-
1 and B-3 District, all required parking spaces shall be located within twohundred-
fifty feet (250') (direct walking distance) of a main entrance to the `
use served. In B-2, M, and I Districts all required parking spaces shall be
located with seven hundred feet (700') (direct walking distance) of a main
entrance to the use served.
(4) Motor vehicles repair work - No motor vehicles repair work shall be permitted
in conjunction with parking facilities in any district.
(5) No vehicle, other than a recreation vehicle, whose registration gross weight is
in excess or eleven thousand pounds (11,000 lbs.) shall be permitted as an
accessory use in any residential district.
(6) Commercial vehicles and vehicles not in running condition shall not be
permitted within the public right-of-way, except commercial vehicles which
are parked temporarily and otherwise in use for business purposes in
conformance with this ordinance and other applicable legislation.
10.1.D. Required number of parking spaces - The minimum of parking spaces required for
each type of use is as follows :
(1) Retail store, office, of other general commercial use not specified
below - the number of spaces shall be the total obtained using the
following formula:
a. Ground floor space - one (1) space for each two-hundred square
feet (200 sq. ft.) of ground floor area.
b. Other than ground floor space - one (1) space per three hundred
73
square feet (300 sq. ft.) of floor area, excluding basement storage
areas.
(2) Any production , processing, cleaning, testing activity, or repair of
materials, goods or products, and warehouses and storage buildings
not serving a wholesaling or retailing function - one (1) space for each
five hundred sq. ft. of floor area.
(3) Automobile service stations - one (1) space for each service bay, plus
one (1) space for each employee but in no case less than four (4)
employee spaces.
(4) Bowling alleys-ten (10) spaces for each bowling lane.
(5) Churches - one (1) space for each six (6) seats. Where patrons
occupy benches or pews, each twenty-four inches (24") of seating
facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of
determining off-street parking requirements.
(6) Educational institutions - one (1) space for each employees, plus one
(1) space for each four (4) students, based on maximum employee,
faculty and student attendance at one time.
(7) Convention halls, dance halls meeting halls, skating rinks, sports
arenas (other than those incidental to schools) - one (1) space for each
two (2) seats or 50% of capacity (in persons), whichever is greater.
(8) Single-family dwellings - two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
(9) Multi-family dwellings -
a. Fifty (50) units or less - two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
b. Fifty-one (51) units or more - one and one-half (1.5) spaces per
dwelling unit.
c. Senior Citizen Housing - notwithstanding any other provisions of
this ordinance, senior citizen housing shall require a minimum of
one (1)parking space for each two (2) dwelling units. All parking
spaces shall be on the same lot as the dwelling units.
(10) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes - one (1) space for
each two (2) employees, plus one (1) space for each five (5) beds.
74
(11) Hotels, motels one (1) space for each lodging room, plus twenty-five
per cent (25%) of maximum seating capacity in restaurants, or
lounges serving the general public.
(12) Any establishment serving alcoholic beverages other than specified in
(11) above - the number of spaces equal to thirty-five per cent (35%)
of the maximum capacity (in persons). Capacity is the total of the
number of seats plus one person for each four (4) square feet of floor
area in patron service area where stand-up service is provided.
(13) Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages - the number of spaces
equal to twenty - five percent (25%) of seating capacity (in persons).
(14) Libraries, museums - one (1) space for each five hundred square feet
(500 sq. ft) of floor area.
(15) Medical or dental clinics - the number of spaces as determined by
Subsection 1, above.
(16) Private clubs and lodges - the number of spaces as determined by
Subsection 1, above.
(17) Theatres and auditoriums - one (1) space for each four (4) seats.
(18) Business and professional offices in a B-3 Zone -
a. Ground floor space - one (1) space for each one-hundred-fifty
square feet (150 sq. ft.), of ground floor area.
b. Other than ground floor space - one (1) space per three-hundredfifty
square feet (350 sq. ft.) of floor area.
(19) Other - for all uses which could not reasonably be placed in one of the
above classifications, the required number of spaces shall be
determined by the Planning Commission.
10.1.E. Parking Area Designs
(1) Concrete curbing shall be provided along the perimeter of parking
areas to contain and control cars, direct surface drainage, and control
erosion. Curbing may be eliminated or interrupted in approved areas
75
to facilitate storm water management design.
(2) Line markings shall be provided to separate parking stalls. Double 3"
wide lines separated by 12' to 15' are suggested.
(3) Parking lot gradients shall be maximum 5% cross slope, and
maximum 7% longitudinal slope.
(4) The following curb-to-curb widths shall be minimum requirements in
parking areas:
a. 90 degree parking/double-loaded, with cars free to overhang
curbs, width curb-to-curb to be a minimum of 62'. Area behind
curbs shall be clear of structures, trees or hedges for a minimum
distance of 4'.
b. 60 degrees parking/double-loaded, with cars free to overhang
curbs, width curb-to-curb to a minimum of 58'. Area behind
curbs shall be clear of structures, trees of hedges for a minimum
distance of 4'.
c. 45 degree parking/double-loaded, with cars free to overhang
curbs, width curb-to-curb to be 52' minimum.
(5) All parking areas in areas in B and M Districts are to be paved
bituminous or concrete surfaces. Alternative surfaces may be given
consideration in I, R, and C Districts to facilitate proper stormwater
management. (Ordinance 2136)
(6) Parking areas are to be designed in such a way as to avoid the
necessity of vehicles backing onto the street right-of-way in order to
exit.
10.2 Off-Street Loading Regulations - Off-street loading berths accessory to uses permitted in the
various use districts shall be designed in accordance with the following regulations and any
other applicable provision of this ordinance.
10.2.A. General Provisions
(1) Location - All proposed loading berths shall be located on the same
lot as the use served. No loading berths for vehicles over two (2) tons
capacity shall be closer than thirty feet (30') to a residential district or
use unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly
76
painted wall or fence, or any combination thereof, not less than six
feet (6') in height. No loading space shall be located within thirty feet
(30') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No
loading space shall be located in a required front or transitional yard.
Any loading berth located in a required rear yard or side yard may be
covered only by a weatherproof covering.
(2) Size - Unless otherwise specified, a loading berth shall be at least
thirty-five feet (35') long and ten feet (10') wide, not including aisle
and maneuvering space.
(3) Access - Each off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a manner which
will least interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Surfacing - All drives and loading berths shall be surface with a
bituminous or concrete surface.
(5) Repair and Service - No motor vehicle repair work or service shall be
permitted in loading spaces.
(6) Space allocated to off-street loading shall not be used to satisfy the
requirements for off-street parking.
10.3 Number of Buildings on a Zoning Lot - Only one principal residential structure shall be
located on a zoning lot, except in a planned development or in an R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-7 Use
District.
10.4 Accessory Buildings - No permanent accessory building or structure shall be constructed on
any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure to which it is necessary.
10.5 Space and Yards - General Regulations
10.5.A. Continued Conformity with Bulk Regulations - The maintenance of yards, courts and
other open space and minimum lot areas legally required for a building shall be a
continuing obligation of the owners of a structure and the property on which it is
located. No legally required yards, other open space or minimum lot areas shall, by
virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court,
other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other buildings.
10.5.B. Division of Zoning Lots - No zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more
zoning lots and no portion of any zoning lot shall be sold unless all zoning lots
resulting from each subdivision or sale shall conform with all bulk regulations of the
77
use district in which the property is located, and the requirements of the Subdivision
and Land Ordinance, #2136 as amended.
10.5.C. Location of Required Open Space - All yards, courts and other open spaces shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the structure or structures that constitute the use.
10.5.D. Required Yards and Existing Buildings - No yards, now or hereafter provided for a
building existing on the enactment date of this ordinance, shall subsequently be
reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard
requirements of this ordinance for similar new construction.
10.5.E. Permitted Obstruction in Required Yards - The following shall not be considered to
be prohibited obstructions when located in the specified required yards:
(1) In all required yards - recreation equipment, flag poles, window
awnings, permitted open off-street parking space, outdoor lamp posts,
one-story bay windows, cantilever floors, overhanging eaves and
gutters projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard.
(2)a. In required front yards - walls, fences, or hedges not exceeding
four feet (4') in height, shrubs and trees providing there is a
substantially unobstructed view between four feet (4') and ten
feet (10') above ground level, open porches not more than one
(1) story or fourteen feet (14') in height, extending eight feet (8')
or less into the yard, provided no porch shall be constructed
closer to the side lot than the required width of the side yard,
enclosed vestibules not exceeding twenty-five square feet (25
sq. ft.) And not projecting more than five feet (5') into the yard,
and signs as permitted by other provisions of this ordinance
Exception: On corner lots, properties with two or more front yards,
the maximum height of fences, hedges and shrubbery shall be three
feet (3’) in height.
(2)b. In required side and rear yards there are no limits on vegetation.
fences, walls, and retaining walls are limited to eight (8) feet in
height unless a permit is issued by the Department of Planning
and Economic Development. The Department must determine
that fences, walls, and retaining walls in excess of eight (8) feet
in height are not detrimental to adjacent properties and otherwise
in compliance with local ordinances.
(3) Outdoor storage - Uses otherwise permitted may utilize property
for outdoor storage in conformance with the following
78
performance standards:
a. All proposed outdoor storage must be completely screened from
view from all surrounding property. Screening must be in the
form of an opaque fence approved by the Penn Hills Planning
Commission.
b. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in required front and/or
side yards.
c. Fencing must meet the Bulk and Area Regulations of Section
Section 6.10 of this ordinance.
d. The Planning Commission may impose minimum and/or maximum
height requirements for fencing depending upon the nature
of materials to be stored and the conditions of surrounding property.
The Planning Commission may impose location, size,
and height requirements for fencing above and beyond other
bulk and area regulations in this ordinance.
e. The Planning Commission may impose other conditions as
necessary to protect adjacent properties and/or control
aesthetics.
The above standards shall not apply to single-family residences, and
incidental sales of small retail goods, sidewalk sales, outdoor cafes,
and similar outdoor activities. Such incidental sales are subject to the
approval of the Department of Code Enforcement providing they do
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or otherwise present
a detriment t adjacent uses.
10.5.F. Prohibited Obstructions - In all use districts, the accumulation of waste, used or
second-hand dismantled vehicles, paper, rags, tires, and construction materials are
prohibited except where, in conjunction with a permitted use of land, a permit
has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, or where such materials are being
immediately used in the improvement or construction of an approved use or
structure.
(1) Prohibited Parking - In the required front yard of single family
residential areas driveways and parking areas and all other impervious
surfaces shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of the total yard area.
The remaining 50% shall remain as a lawn and/or other landscaped area.
79
10.5.G. Temporary Buildings for Construction Purposes -Such buildings are permitted in all
use districts for the duration of construction, or for two (2) years, whichever is less.
A building permit is required for such buildings.
10.6. Sidewalks
10.6.A. Sidewalks shall be installed along the entire length of portions of the site
which abut municipal, county, or state rights-of-way unless expressly waived
by the Planning Commission. Sidewalks waivers, if granted, shall be on a
temporary basis until sidewalks are constructed on adjacent properties and
only after the applicant has demonstrated just cause.
10.6.B. Sidewalks shall be installed along at least one side of all parking areas,
entrance drives and streets providing for safe, pleasant, and efficient
pedestrian circulation from all parking stalls to all entrances to structures.
10.6.C. At least one means of access to all public and commercial buildings shall be
provided to accommodate handicapped individuals. Ramp gradient,
requirement of railings and treatment of pavement surfacing shall comply
with applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
10.6.D. Sidewalks adjacent to any public right-of-way are to be constructed in
accordance with Penn Hills Ordinance No. 2041 including concrete curbing.
10.6.E. Internal sidewalks shall be of concrete, pre-cast blocks, terrazzo (textured
surface only), brick, flagstone, rubble stone or black stone.
10.7 Drives and Roads - Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family Residential
10.7.A. Location and design of entrance, service and delivery roads shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation guidelines
for design of local roads and streets, the Penn Hills Standards for
Construction and other applicable standards contained in this ordinance.
10.7.B. Concrete curbs shall be installed on sides of roads as required to contain
vehicular traffic, protect pedestrians and reduce maintenance of adjacent
seeded or planted areas. Curbing may be eliminated or interrupted in
approved areas to facilitate storm water management design.
10.7.C. Center line markings on roads and drives shall be installed to guide and
control traffic flows.
80
10.7.D. Line markings shall be installed or define and control parallel
parking on roads and drives.
10.7.E. All surface shall be paved with concrete or bituminous material.
10.8 Driveways - Single-Family Residential
10.8.A. A highway occupancy permit must be approved prior to the issuance of a
building permit for a single-family home, the revision of an existing
driveway, or the connection of a new driveway to a public or private street.
10.8.B. A landowner must obtain a highway occupancy permit from the PA Dept. of
Transportation for connection to a State road and from the Allegheny County
Department of Permits for connection to a County road.
10.8.C. A landowner must obtain a highway occupancy permit to a local public or
private street as follows.
(1)The submission of a plot plan indicating the proposed driveway
location together with an application for a building permit shall be
deemed sufficient when a driveway is associated with the
construction of a new home. The issuance of the building permit will
also be deemed to be the issuance of the highway occupancy permit.
(2) A landowner who desires to substantially modify an existing
driveway, relocate or connect a new driveway shall submit a plot plan
indicating the location and design features of the driveway to the
Department of Code Enforcement together with an application for a
highway occupancy permit.
(3) The Department of Code Enforcement shall issue a highway
occupancy permit upon a finding of compliance with the following
standards:
a. The proposed driveway location and design must provide
for the safe movement of vehicles to and from the property.
b. Whenever possible, the driveway must be designed to
prevent vehicles from having to back up into the street.
c. The driveway location and design must be in conformance
with the Penn Hills Standards of Construction.
81
d. The landowner is responsible for the protection of and
necessary repairs to existing street pavement, curbs and
sidewalks.
e. The Department of Code Enforcement may impose necessary
conditions to adequately safeguard public safety and adjacent
properties.
10.8.D. None of the proceeding requirements of Section 10.8 shall be
construed to prevent the normal maintenance of a driveway, the pavement of
a gravel driveway, or minor changes in the dimensions of an existing
driveway, without a permit. The Department of Code Enforcement’s primary
interest is the design and configuration of the driveway as it intersects with
the street. Under normal circumstances modifications to existing driveways
that have no affect on the intersection, will not require a permit.
10.9 Excavating, Grading, Site Preparation
10.9.A. All grading shall conform to Section 8.8. of Ordinance 2136, the Penn Hills
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended, and Ordinance
1451 when within a designated flood-prone area.
10.9.B. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land; no grading, excavation,
removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees of other vegetative cover of the
land shall be commenced until such time as a plan for minimizing erosion
and sedimentation has been processed with, and reviewed by, the
Municipality that such plans are not necessary. Measures used to control
erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the standards
and specifications of the Allegheny County Conservation district. The
Engineer, or other officials as designated, shall insure compliance with the
appropriate specifications, copies of which are available from the
Conservation District or the Municipality of Penn Hills. The following
measures are effective in minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be
included where applicable in the control plan.
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regarding or other development shall be done
in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut/fill operations to a minimum, and insure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately
handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
82
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of soil exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measure shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively control runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions before, during, and after
construction. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff shall
be structurally retarded.
10.9.C. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regarding, or
other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person, corporation, or
other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses, and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
10.9.D. Maintenance of all roads, streets, parking areas, drainage facilities and
watercourses within any land development is the responsibility of the
developer until formally accepted by the Municipality.
10.9.E. It is the responsibility of any person, corporation, or other entity performing
any act on, or across, a communal stream, watercourse, or swale, or upon the
flood plain or right-of-way thereof, to maintain as nearly as possible in its
present state, the stream, watercourse, swale, flood plain or right-of-way
during the pendency of the activity, and to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
10.9.F. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and completely
on private property, is the responsibility of the owner to the point of open
discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the
property.
10.9.G. No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow of, alter,
83
construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or commit any act,
which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal stream or
watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the Municipality or
Department of Environmental Resources.
10.10 Storm Drainage
10.10.A. All uses or lots in all zoning districts shall comply with the applicable
requirements and standards for managing storm water runoff in accordance
with the Municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
10.10.B. Agricultural activities, nurseries and forestry management operations, where
permitted by this ordinance, shall be required to provide for the safe
management of storm water runoff in accordance with the requirements of the
subdivision/land development ordinance. However, the submission and
approval of a storm water management plan shall be waived when:
(1) Agricultural activities are operated in accordance with a conservation
plan or erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the
Allegheny County Conservation District.
(2) Forestry management operations are following Pennsylvania DER
management practices contained in its publication Soil and Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry and are operating
under an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
10.10.C. Strip mining where permitted by this ordinance shall have a plan for control
of erosion and sedimentation and storm water runoff, which is approved by
the Pennsylvania DER. If the strip mining operation is located within a
watershed (s) for which a storm water management plan has been approved in
accordance with the requirements of the Storm water Management Act, then
the erosion/sedimentation plan and any permanent storm water runoff
controls shall be consistent with the standards and criteria of the watershed
storm water management plan. A copy of the state approved
erosion/sedimentation plan shall be filed with the Municipality prior to
commencing mining operations.
10.10.D. Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate, safe, selfcleaning,
and unobtrusive, and shall be consistent with Penn Hills Standards
for Construction.
10.10.E. Endwalls or discharge points shall be located to discharge into existing
streams or watercourses with no damage to adjacent property. Design of end
84
walls is to be approved by the Municipal Engineer. Secure legal advice on
discharge where private property may be violated.
10.11 Vegetation Preservation Regulations
10.11.A. Vegetation Preservation Regulations - No removal of trees, shrubbery,
foliage, grass, or other natural growth shall be permitted, except in
conformance with the provisions of this article.
10.11.B Clear-Cutting Prohibited - The cutting of trees and clearing of vegetation for
the sole purpose of clearing land, not incidental to imminent development, is
prohibited.
10.11.C. Land Development - No alteration of vegetation incidental to development
shall be undertaken, except in conformance with this ordinance.
10.11.D. Landscaping - General Requirements -
(1) Planting shall complement and accentuate the best features of the
building(s) and site.
(2) Planting shall provide essential shade, effective cooling, sound and
light control by screening and traffic control when required.
(3) Planting shall be organized to minimize maintenance by:
a. Selecting hedge and screen plants which tolerate clipping or
shaping.
b. Installing fences and screens located at the edge of paving,
placed at least six inches (6') inside outer edge of paving.
c. Treating major slope and removed areas with crown vetch for a
permanent, low-maintenance, attractive cover. Comply with
Ordinance 2136, as amended, the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the owner/applicant to assure the
continued growth of all required landscaping and/or to replace the
same in the event of frost, vandalism, or other reasons for
discontinued growth.
(5) All front and side yard areas shall be seeded.
85
(6) All required deciduous trees shall be a minimum of 2 inches (2") in
caliper at a point one foot (1') above the ground.
(7) During the Site Plan Review process, the Planning Department and/or
the Planning Commission may impose additional landscaping
requirements not normally required under the following sections, to
provide for additional erosion control, buffer areas, or additional
screening.
10.11.E. Landscaping Requirements - Residential Areas
(1) In addition to general requirements, at least two (2) deciduous trees
for each single-family dwelling unit and one (1) deciduous tree for
each multi-family dwelling unit shall be required. In single-family
districts, the trees required by this paragraph must be planted in the
front yard area.
(2) In multi-family districts, evergreen trees shall be required to be
planted in all side and rear yard areas which abut any single-family
residential zone. One (1) evergreen tree shall be required for each
ten-foot (10') length of side yard and/or rear yard abutting a singlefamily
residential zone. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of three
feet (3') in height at the time of planting.
(3) In multi-family districts, parking areas shall be divided every ninety
feet (90'), or ten (10) stalls, with a planting strip of three feet (3')
minimum width.
10.11.F. Landscaping Requirements/Commercial and Industrial Zones
(1) In addition to general requirements, at least one (1) deciduous tree for
each three hundred square feet (300 sq.ft.) of floor area shall be
required.
(2) All transitional yards shall require a belt of landscaping at least five
feet (5') in width of massed plantings, which plantings shall consist of
one (1) deciduous tree for each two thousand (2,000 sq.ft.) of paved
area, and one (1) evergreen tree for each five foot (5') length of side
yard and/or rear yard abutting a residential zone. Evergreen trees
shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height at the time of planting.
(3) Parking areas shall be divided every fifteen (15) stalls, or one hundred
86
thirty-five (135') with planting strips of three feet (3') minimum width
unless alternative plans are approved by the Planning Commission.
(4) When abutting public rights-of-way, the exterior perimeters (property
lines) of all parking areas shall be landscaped with a buffer strip or
not less than three feet (3') in width. These buffer strips shall include
one (1) tree for each fifty linear feet (50'), or fraction thereof, of
perimeter. Also, within three buffer strips, a hedge, decorative
masonry wall, or other durable landscape barrier shall be installed in
such a manner as to screen the parking area from the public right-ofway.
If such barrier is of non-living material, its height, design, and
location must be approved, and for each ten linear feet (10') of said
barrier the equivalent of two (2) shrubs shall be planted between the
barrier and the right-of-way. Said barrier is to be placed a minimum
of three feet (3') inside the property line. The remainder of the
landscape strip shall be improved with grass, ground cover, shrubs, or
other landscape treatment, excluding paving or sand.
(5) Where parking areas abut property zoned for non-residential use, the
requirements of Section 10.11.F.(4) and (5) shall be devoted to
interior landscaping. Any perimeter landscaping provided in excess
of that required by Section 10.11.F. (4) and (5) may be counted as
part of the interior landscaping requirement.
(6) An area, or combination of areas, equal to ten per cent (10%) of the
total paved area, exclusive of perimeter landscape buffers required by
Section 10.11.F.(4) and (5) shall be devoted to interior landscaping.
Any perimeter landscaping provided in excess of that required by
Section 10.11.F. (4) and (5) may be counted as part of the interior
landscaping requirement.
10.11.G. Landscaping - R, C, B, M, and I Districts
In addition to the previous requirements listed in this ordinance, uses in any
R, C, B, M, or I District must comply with the following provisions:
(1) All deciduous trees shall be supported by securely anchored guy
wires.
(2) Ground covers shall consist of the following materials: seed, sod or
derivative organic material. Rock or gravel ground cover shall not be
permitted except that large rocks may be used to accentuate a
landscape feature or provide an oriental garden effect.
87
(3) In any district or use, no person shall cut, destroy, cause to be
destroyed, move, or remove six (6) or more trees with a trunk
diameter of six inches (6") or more measured three feet (3') from the
ground, without first obtaining a written permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer. The following requirements shall be met before
a permit is issued:
a. The applicant shall be the owner of the property or must be an
agent of the owner.
b. The applicant shall show that the proposed removal of natural
growth is necessary for imminent development of the property,
for agricultural purposes, or to improve the utility, appearance
or safety of the property.
c. Adequate provision for the disposition of increased surface water
drainage shall be shown to be provided. Such additional surface
water drainage shall be controlled so as to prevent any increased
and undue burden on adjacent streets, public or private property.
d. As a condition for approval of the removal of vegetation, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require that suitable replacement
trees be planted elsewhere on the site, if necessary, for environmental,
health or safety purposes.
10.11.H. Landscaping - Telecommunication Tower Sites - Telecommunications tower
sites shall be required to comply with the following landscaping
requirements:
(1) Landscaping and planting shall be provided for a depth of ten (10)
feet along all public rights-of-way and all property lines abutting the
telecommunications site;
(2) Landscaping, consisting of trees and shrubs, shall be required at the
perimeter of the security fence. Evergreen trees, of a minimum of six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting, shall be planted a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet from each other, around the perimeter of the
security fence;
(3) Landscaping with approved shrubbery of not less than three (3) feet in
height at the time of planting shall also be provided within the
interspersed areas of the evergreen trees around the perimeter of the
88
security fence;
(4) Landscaping, consisting of evergreen shrubs, a minimum of three (3)
feet tall shall be planted around the telecommunications facility
building in planting strips of a minimum of five (5) feet in depth.
(5) Existing landscaping or vegetation that may be used for screening
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
10.12 Lighting
10.12.A. All sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, steps and grade changes shall be suitably
lighted at all times. Details of proposed lighting fixtures and supports, and
the location thereof, shall be submitted as part of the site plan approval
application.
10.12.B. All parking areas shall be lighted with said lighting so arranged as to reflect
the light away from all abutting properties. Flood lights projected from
buildings shall not be approved unless design specifications are submitted
demonstrating that glare will not present a traffic problem or a nuisance to
adjacent properties.
10.12.D. Electrical lighting fixtures are to be installed with underground wiring.
10.13 Noise Regulations - Every use shall be operated so that noise shall be so muffled, or
otherwise controlled, as not to become objectionable as a result of intermittence, beat
frequency, impulse character (hammering, etc.) periodic character (humming, screeching,
etc.) or shrillness.
10.14 Vibration Regulations - Every use shall be operated so that the ground vibration inherently
and recurrently generated is not perceptible without instruments at property boundaries.
10.15 Air Pollution Regulations - Regarding fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of
air pollution, no emission which violates the Air Pollution Control Act, January 8, 1960, P.L.
2119, shall be permitted.
10.16 Heat, Glare, Radiation, and Fumes Regulations - Every use shall be so operated that it does
not emit an obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond the
property boundaries.
10.17 Odor - No use shall emit an offensive odor as to be detectable from property boundaries.
10.18 Performance Standards –All Uses- All uses of land are governed by applicable municipal,
89
county, state and federal regulations regarding the above activities as well as other activities
(e.g., waste treatment and disposal, fire regulations).
10.19 Performance Standards For Temporary Uses - Temporary uses may be approved by the
Planning Department provided the following conditions are met:
10.19.A. The property owner must complete a written application form provided by the
Municipality, together with an application fee in the amount equal to that
required for an occupancy permit.
10.19.B. The proposed use must be temporary, not to exceed thirty (30) continuous
days. Temporary use permits may be renewed provided a new application is
made consistent with the requirements of this section.
10.19.C. The temporary use may be renewed or extended in the following manner:
(1) An application and fee are refiled.
(2) The Code Enforcement Department shall submit a recommendation
to each member of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) If any member of the Zoning Hearing Board wishes to object to the
renewal or extension, he must do so in writing within seven (7) days
of receipt of notice. If a proper challenge is made, the matter shall
come before the full Zoning Hearing Board for approval. If no
challenge is made by a member of the Zoning Hearing Board, the
renewal or extension is approved.
10.19.D. The Department of Code Enforcement must determine that the proposed use
does not create a public nuisance, that sufficient off-street parking spaces are
available and that safe and efficient traffic movement is not impaired.
10.19.E. Applicants are responsible for keeping the property free of rubbish and debris
at all times, as well as the collection of all rubbish and debris on adjacent
properties and rights-of-way generated by the temporary use.
10.19.F. The Department of Code Enforcement may apply any additional conditions
deemed necessary to protect adjacent properties from adverse effects, or to
prevent the creation of a public nuisance.
10.19.G Temporary uses may not operate and sell products within one thousand
(1000) feet of a permanently placed retail vendor who would be in
competition with the temporary use.
90
10.19.H Temporary uses are limited to flea markets, Christmas tree sales, seasonal
produce and roadside fruit stands.
10.19. I Penn Hills community based non-profit corporations and organizations may
apply to the Director of Planning and Economic Development for an
exemption from any of the restrictions regarding temporary uses. In the
process of applying for an exemption non-profit corporations and
organizations must supply sufficient evidence that a majority of the proceeds
from the temporary use shall directly benefit the non-profit organization.
The Department of Code Enforcement may revoke a temporary use permit at
any time if it is determined that the use is not consistent with the
requirements of this section.
10.20 Recreation and Open Space Requirements - For the following types of development, certain
open spaces and recreational amenities must be provided above and beyond the front, side,
rear and bulk and area requirements specified by this ordinance, as amended.
10.20.A. All multi-family residential developments in excess of twenty (20) dwelling
units.
10.20.B. All senior citizen housing.
10.20.C. All public and institutional development.
10.20.D. Commercial development in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand
square feet (125,000 sq.ft.) of floor area.
Recreation and Open Space are to be provided in accordance with ordinance #2136 for
Major subdivisions.
10.21 Recreation and Open Space Development Schedule - A plan and development schedule
meeting the following requirements must be submitted with facilities suitable to serve the
users of the planned structures:
10.21.A. Minimum size of any one (1) recreational area shall be 10,000 square feet.
10.21.B. Five per cent (5%) of gross site area shall be developed for projects up to ten
(10) acres.
10.21.C. Eight per cent (8%) of gross site area shall be developed for projects from ten
(10) to twenty (20) acres.
91
10.21.D. Ten per cent (10%) of gross site area shall be developed for projects over
twenty (20) acres.
Said facilities shall be located so as not to be detrimental to adjacent property
owners by virtue of noise, light, glare, or any other objectionable features
emanating therefrom.
10.22 Other Items to be Considered During Review - When applicable, the site plans should
properly address the following items which will be considered during the review process:
10.22.A. Signs (Must conform to this ordinance).
10.22.B. Refuse storage and pickup.
10.22.C. Service, delivery and loading areas.
10.22.D. Traffic control devices.
10.22.E. Streets furniture - benches, waste cans, planters, tree pots, shelters, etc.
92
SECTION 11 CONDITIONAL USES
11.1 Purpose - Uses that are designated as conditional uses are generally compatible with other
land uses permitted in a zoning district, but, because of their unique characteristics or
potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood or municipality as a whole, require a
determination of appropriateness at a particular location proposed. Such individual
consideration may include the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness
of the use on any particular parcel of land and the compatibility of the use with adjacent uses.
Conditional use approval may only be granted for those uses which are expressly listed as
conditional uses in the zoning district in which the use is proposed.
All previously designated conditional uses are subject to the following express conditions
and procedures:
11.2 Conditional Uses - Conditions - Conditional uses shall fulfill all applicable conditions, as
follows:
11.2.A. Compliance with the provisions of Section 16 of this ordinance and
submission and approval of a preliminary plan and final plan, if requested.
11.2.B. Compliance with any other conditions imposed by provisions of this
ordinance regarding the particular conditional use.
11.2.C. Any other applicable regulations, whether in this or any other Penn Hills
ordinance, or any county, state, or federal regulations.
11.2.D. Any other conditions imposed by the Council, which are deemed necessary
for protection of the public health, safety, or welfare.
11.2.E. The Council may increase or decrease bulk and area regulations, performance
standards, and parking requirements that might otherwise be applicable for
permitted uses.
11.3 Conditional Uses - Procedure - The procedure for requesting a conditional use is as follows:
11.3.A. An owner of property or any authorized agent of an owner may apply for a
conditional use under the provisions of this section. A written application,
twelve (12) copies of a preliminary plan or final plan, and the appropriate fee
as periodically determined by Council, shall be filed with the Planning
Department. All application materials must be filed in the Planning
Department at least thirty-two (32) days before the Planning Commission
meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall be
of a form approved by the Municipality. The preliminary/final plan shall be
93
similar to the preliminary site plan as detailed in Section 16 of this ordinance.
The preliminary/final plan shall address itself to all applicable conditions for
the particular conditional use.
11.3.B. Within five (5) days after receiving an application for conditional use
approval, the Planning Department shall determine whether the application is
complete. If the Planning Department determines that the application is not
complete, the applicant shall be notified of any deficiencies and no further
steps will be taken to process the application until the applicant remedies the
deficiencies.
11.3.C. Once an application is determined to be complete, the preliminary/final plans
and application shall be reviewed by the Planning Department. Copies of the
Planning Department’s review, the plans, and the application shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission. A public hearing by the Planning
Commission shall be set within forty-five (45) days of the filing of a
complete application.
11.3.D. Notice of the Planning Commission hearing shall be advertised in accordance
with the advertising policy of the Municipality and the Municipalities
Planning Code. The subject property shall be conspicuously posted with a
notice of the conditional use request, and the date and time of the conditional
use request, and the date and time of the Planning Commission meeting and
the Council meeting, for at least fourteen (14) days before the Planning
Commission public hearing.
11.3.E. The Planning Commission shall, at the public hearing examine the
preliminary/final plan and listen to relevant testimony from the owner of the
property or his agent, representatives of the Planning Department, and any
interested citizen. The Planning Commission shall pose necessary questions
to any of the above parties.
11.3.F. The Planning Commission shall, within fourteen (14) days of their hearing,
forward a written recommendation to the Council along with the
preliminary/final plan and application. This recommendation shall either
approve the conditional use request, disapprove it, or approve it conditioned
upon specified changes or conditions.
11.3.G. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use request within
forty-five (45) days of receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission. Notice of the hearing is required as specified in Section
11.3.D.
94
11.3.H. The Council shall, at the hearing, examine the preliminary plan and the
recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Council shall also hear
relevant testimony from the owner of the property, or his agent, or a
representative of the Planning Department, if desired, and any interested
citizens, and shall pose necessary questions to any of the above parties. The
Council may request the submission of a final plan, if deemed necessary. The
final plan shall be similar to the final site plan as detailed in Section 16 of this
ordinance.
11.3.I. The Council shall, within fourteen (14) days of the hearing, approve or
disapprove the conditional use request. If the Council disapproves the
conditional use request, the reasons for disapproval should be stated.
11.3.J. A conditional use shall not be approved unless the Council shall determine:
(1) That the proposed conditional use will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property, or from the character of
the neighborhood, and that the use of property change of plan, is
adequately safeguarded.
(2) That the conditional use will serve to protect the best interests of the
Municipality of Penn Hills, the convenience of the community, and
the public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) That the effect of the conditional use will facilitate the logical,
efficient, and economic extension of public services and facilities,
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection, and public
schools.
11.3.K. A majority vote of the Council is required for approval.
11.3.L. The property owner, or his agent, the Planning Commission, and the Planning
Department shall receive written notification of the Council’s decision. Any
other interested party can, at the hearing, request receipt of the written
notification. In any case, the written notification shall be sent promptly
following the Council’s decision.
11.3.M. All appeals from decisions rendered by the Council under this section shall be
taken to the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district where the land in
issue is located and shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the entry of the
decision a provided in 42 PA C.S. Section 5572 (relating to time of entry of
order).
95
11.4 Conditional Uses - General Provisions
11.4.A. When a conditional use has been denied by the Council, no request for that
particular use may be re-filed with the Planning Department for at least one
(1) year from the date of denial. The only exception to this provision shall be
if the landowner, or his agent, can show a change in circumstances regarding
the property, which would warrant re-examination of the conditional use
request within the year’s limitation. Such showing of changed circumstances
shall be submitted in writing, along with a conditional use application, to the
Planning Department.
11.4.B. An approved conditional use shall be completed within two (2) years
following the date of approval. However, the Planning Department may
grant an extension of time if the landowner or his agent requests such an
extension, and if good cause for the extension is shown. There are no other
exceptions to this rule. If, at the end of the two (2) year period, the
conditional use is not completed, and if no extension has been granted, the
approval of the conditional use shall be null and void.
11.4.C. Minor changes in an approved conditional use, may be approved in the
manner described in Section 16.2.E of this ordinance, including appropriate
conditions. Major changes, as defined by the Planning Department Director,
are required to submit a formal application for a Planning Commission
recommendation, and a decision by Council.
11.4.D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, when an application
for a conditional use has been filed with the Planning Department, and the
subject matter would ultimately constitute either a land development, or a
subdivision, as defined in Section 4.2 of Penn Hills Ordinance #2136, as
amended, no change or amendment of this ordinance or Ordinance #2136 as
amended, or other ordinances or plans shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant. The application shall be entitled to a
decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans, as they existed at the time the application was filed. Provided further,
should such an application be approved by the Council, the applicant shall be
entitled to proceed with the submission of either land development or
subdivision plans within a period of six (6) months, or longer if specifically
approved by the Council, following the date of such approval in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was duly filed before the Council. If either a land
development or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such plan shall
be subject to the review procedures and time limitations applicable to land
developments or subdivisions under the Penn Hills Subdivision and Land
96
Development Ordinance #2136, as amended.
11.5 Conditional Uses - Specific Conditions
11.5.A. Churches, Chapels, or Other Places of Worship and Adjunct Residential
Dwellings -
(1) Minimum lot size - two (2) acres.
(2) Lot coverage - total area covered by buildings, parking lots and
vehicular access ways shall not exceed fifty per cent (50%) of the
total lot area.
(3) Maximum building height - forty-five feet (45').
(4) Yard requirements -
a. Front - fifty feet (50') minimum. In the case of corner lots, a
fifty-foot (50') minimum yard shall be required on each street
which the lots abut.
b. Side - minimum thirty feet (30') on each side.
c. Rear - fifty feet (50') minimum.
d. Whenever the lot line abuts a residential use or district, the setback
shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the
property line.
e. As part of the required yards listed above, a transitional yard,
containing landscaping, of twenty-five feet (25') is required
along all property lines. The type of plantings or screens used is
subject to the Council’s discretion.
(5) Must have access onto an arterial street (or collector road, if approved
by the Council).
(6) Parking areas shall be buffered from all buildings by at least fifteen
feet (15') of landscaped open space.
11.5.B. Cemeteries
(1) Minimum tract - ten (10) acres.
97
(2) Access to an arterial street.
(3) Minimum buffer area - fifteen feet (15').
(4) No mausoleum shall be constructed which exceeds thirty five feet
(35') in height, or is located closer than one hundred feet (100') to any
adjacent property line, or fifty feet (50') to any street.
11.5.C. Community Facilities
(1) Same as requirements for a church.
(2) Parking requirements - not more than 20% of the total gross site area
shall be devoted to parking.
(3) Spaces between buildings - the minimum distance between buildings
shall be fifty feet (50') provided, however, that the spacing between a
principal and accessory building may be reduced to thirty-five feet
(35').
11.5.D. Public and Private Recreation Facilities
(1) Direct access to an arterial or collector street.
(2) Minimum lot size - two (2) acres.
(3) A minimum of 30% of the site shall be preserved as undeveloped
open space.
(4) Structures and parking areas must be located a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from any existing single-family home.
(5) Recreation facilities must be adequately buffered from adjacent
properties by elevation, landscaping, fencing, etc.
(6) The Municipality may impose limitations on operating hours to
protect adjacent properties.
11.5.E. (Reserved)
11.5.F. Group Care Facilities
98
(1) Group Care Facilities shall not be located within 5000 feet of any
existing Group Care Facility so as not to impact or adversely affect
any particular neighborhood.
(2) Group Care Facilities shall be located within a reasonable distance of
public transportation, shopping facilities, and community services.
(3) Group Care Facilities shall be located only on property which has
direct access to arterial streets.
(4) Group Care Facilities shall be subject to the development standards
and other requirements of Section 16, Site Plan Approval and
Review. Conversion of existing structures must meet the
development standards required for new construction.
(5) Group Care Facilities shall have a minimum lot size of 10,000 sq.ft.
(6) A buffer area of fifteen feet (15') shall be provided along all adjacent
property lines. Type of screening shall be determined by the Council.
(7) Parking shall be required as follows: - One space for every two (2)
employees, plus one space for every three (3) residents.
(8) Group Care Facilities shall have a minimum of 1000 sq.ft. of lot area
for each resident.
(9) Group Care Facilities must supply to the Municipality (and keep
current) the name of a manager and/or other person responsible for
responding quickly to a complaint filed by the Municipality.
11.5.G. Schools
(1) Shall be licensed and certified by the Board of Education.
(2) Minimum front yard shall be fifty feet (50'). In the case of a corner
lot, a front yard, the depth of which shall be at least fifty feet (50'),
shall be required on each street on which the lot abuts.
(3) For each building there shall be two (2) side yards of not less than
twenty feet (20') each.
(4) A rear yard shall be at least fifty feet (50').
99
(5) Whenever the lot line abuts a residential use or district, the setback
shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the property line.
(6) The minimum distance between buildings shall be fifty feet (50')
provided, however, that the spacing between a principal and
accessory building may be reduced to thirty-five feet (35').
(7) There shall be a buffer area of at least ten feet (10') along all property
lines.
(8) Access shall be from an arterial road (or collector road, where
approved.)
11.5.H. Nurseries (Day Care Centers)
(1) Minimum site - one (1) acre.
(2) Minimum front yard - fifty feet (50')
(3) Minimum side yards - twenty feet (20').
(4) Minimum fifteen foot (15') buffer shall be provided along all property
lines.
(5) Access shall be from an arterial road (or collector road, where
approved.)
(6) Parking - One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) additional
space for each ten (10) students.
11.5.I. Senior Citizen Housing
(1) Must meet the requirements of federal, state, and local laws
pertaining to housing for the elderly.
(2) Must meet the requirements of Section 16, Site Plan Approval and
Review. Conversion off existing structures must meet the
development standard requirements for new construction.
(3) Minimum size of site shall be one (1) acre.
(4) Must provide a minimum of 250 sq. ft. of living area per person,
excluding all common living areas.
100
(5) Must provide full sprinkler system and meet all fire code
requirements.
(6) Cooking and bathing facilities must be provided and available to
residents at all times.
(7) Must provide a common indoor community area that is a minimum of
50 sq. ft. per resident.
(8) Must provide a common outdoor community/recreation area with
facilities suitable to tenants needs.
(9) Must provide open space in accordance with requirements of Section
10.
(10) Fire hydrants must be located within a reasonable distance of the
facility.
(11) Must be located within a reasonable distance of public transportation.
(12) The installation of sidewalks or crosswalks beyond the
requirements of Section 10 may be required to provide accessibility to
transportation.
(13) Facility must be located on property with direct access to either
collector or arterial streets.
(14) Senior Citizen housing must meet the minimum bulk and area
requirements for the respective zoning district in which it is located.
The Council may vary bulk and area regulations when additional
buffering and yard area are proposed.
(15) Operation of the facility must be under full time management.
(16) A laundry service area must be provided.
(17) Must be located within a reasonable distance of shopping facilities.
11.5.J. Mixed Residential/Commercial Structures
(1) Non-residential uses shall be restricted to those uses otherwise
permitted within the respective use district.
101
(2) All activity, except for off-street parking and loading, shall be
conducted completely within enclosed buildings.
(3) The total floor space of all residential uses shall not exceed 50% of
the floor space for the entire structure.
(4) Residential uses shall meet the bulk and area regulations applicable to
R-5 Districts.
(5) Parking spaces must be provided separately for residential and nonresidential
uses.
11.5.K. Libraries
(1) A library shall meet the standards as described in Section 11.5.A.
Churches, except that in non-residential districts there shall be no
minimum lot size.
11.5.L. Nursing Homes
(1) A nursing home shall meet the standards as described in Section
11.5.F. Group Care Facilities.
(2) When applicable and available, a nursing home shall be licensed by
appropriate federal and state agencies.
11.5.M. Public Utilities and Public Services
(1) Public utilities and services shall meet the bulk and area regulations
otherwise applicable to the district in which they are located.
(2) The applicable provisions of the Public Utilities Commission, FAA,
FCC, etc., shall be met.
11.5.N. Half-Way Houses
(1) Half-Way Houses shall not be located within 20,000 feet of any
existing Half-Way House.
(2) Half-Way Houses shall be located only on property which had direct
access to arterial streets.
(3) Half-Way Houses shall be subject to the development standards and
102
other requirements as set forth in Sections 10 and 16 of this
ordinance.
(4) Half-Way Houses shall have a minimum lot size of 50,000 sq.ft. and
a minimum lot area of 5,000 sq.ft. per resident.
(5) Minimum setbacks shall be 50 feet (50') from property unless
abutting a single-family residential district, in which case the
minimum setback shall be one hundred (100) feet.
(6) Half-Way Houses must supply to the Municipality (and keep current)
the name of a manager and/or other person responsible for responding
quickly to a complaint filed by the Municipality.
(7) Half-Way Houses must be licensed by the appropriate state, federal,
and county agencies when required, but in all cases must be
supervised on a 24-hour basis.
11.5.O. Funeral Homes
(1) Minimum lot size - two (2) acres.
(2) Must have direct access onto an arterial street and shall only have one
entrance drive, with the exception of a corner lot.
(3) Lot coverage - total area covered by buildings, parking lots and
vehicular access ways shall not exceed thirty-five per cent (35%) of
the total lot area.
(4) Yard requirements:
a. Front - Seventy feet (70') minimum. In the case of corner lots,
a seventy foot (70') minimum yard shall be required on each
street which the lot abuts.
b. Side - Minimum thirty-five feet (35') on each side.
c. Rear - Seventy feet (70') minimum.
(5) Parking requirements - Not more than twenty per cent (20%) of the
total gross site area shall be devoted to parking. Parking areas shall
also meet the above yard setback.
103
(6) Buffer area - A sufficient buffer area must be provided along all
property boundaries and parking areas with landscaping, fencing, or
other methods suitable to the immediate neighborhood and approved
by Council.
(7) The establishment may or may not be used as a residence.
(8) Sign requirement - Signs should be in compliance with Section 9.1.B.
11.5.P. Conference Centers
(1) Direct access to an arterial street.
(2) Minimum lot size - thirty (30) acres.
(3) A minimum of 50% of the site shall be preserved as undeveloped
open space.
(4) Structures and parking areas must be located a minimum of three
hundred (300) feet from any single-family home.
(5) Maximum building height shall be forty-five (45) feet.
(6) Outdoor facilities such as parking, recreation, patios, must be
adequately buffered from adjacent properties by elevation,
landscaping, fencing, etc.
(7) The Municipality may impose limitations on operating hours to
protect adjacent properties.
(8) Overnight stay and food services may be provided to conference
attendees but not to the general public.
(9) Residency by the owner and the owner’s employees is permitted.
11.5.Q. Sexually Oriented Establishments
(1) A Sexually Oriented Establishment shall not be permitted to be
located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented
establishments whether situate in Penn Hills or otherwise.
(2) No Sexually Oriented Establishment shall be located within four
104
hundred (400) feet from any residentially zoned land (excluding
Conservation Districts) or lot used principally as a residential use,
whether situate in Penn Hills or otherwise. However, at Council’s
discretion, this distance may be reduced when there is significant
topographical change between the residential use or zoning and the
site for the Sexually Oriented Establishment.
(3) No Sexually Oriented Establishment shall be located within 1000 feet
of any parcel of land situate in Penn Hills or otherwise which contains
any one of more of the following specified land uses:
a. Camp (for minor’s activities)
b. Day Care Centers and related uses
c. Places of Worship
d. Community Center
e. Park/Playground
f. Educational facilities
g. Museum
h. Child-oriented business
i. Public library
j. Amusement park
(4) The distance between any two (2) Sexually Oriented Establishments
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of each
Establishment. The distance between any Sexually Oriented
Establishments and a land use specified in (3) above, shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the closest point on the exterior property line of the Sexually
Oriented Establishments to the closest point on the property line of
said land use.
(5) No materials, merchandise, film offered for sale, rent, lease, loan or
for view upon the premises shall be exhibited or displayed outside of
105
a building or structure.
(6) Any building or structure occupied as a Sexually Oriented
Establishment shall be windowless, or have an opaque covering over
all windows or doors of an area in which materials, merchandise, or
film are exhibited or displayed, and no materials, merchandise or film
shall be visible from outside of the building or structure.
(7) Signs for Sexually Oriented Establishments shall contain no
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representation of any
manner.
(8) Each entrance, where minors are not permitted either by established
policy or law, to the premises shall be clearly posted with a notice of
a minimum size of 8-1/2 x 11 inches specifying that persons under
the age of eighteen (18) years are not permitted to enter therein and
warning all other persons that they may be offended upon entry.
(9) No Sexually Oriented Establishment may change to another sexually
related facility except upon approval of an additional Conditional
Use. A Sexually Oriented Establishment License shall not be
transferred to another, nor may a Licensee operate a Sexually
Oriented Establishment under the authority of a license at any place
other than the address designated in the application.
(10) A license shall be required for Sexually Oriented Establishments as
follows:
a. Any person who operates a Sexually Oriented Establishment
without a valid permit issued by the Municipality is guilty of a
violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
b. An application for a permit to operate a Sexually Oriented Establishment
must be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Officer. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the floor plan and plot plan configuration of
the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied
by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (6').
c. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
106
this section and the premises must be inspected and found to be
in compliance with the law by the Zoning Officer and the Fire
Marshal.
d. If a person who wishes to operate a Sexually Oriented Establishment
is an individual; he must sign the application for a permit
as applicant. If a person who wished to operate a Sexually
Oriented Establishment is other than an individual, each individual
who has a ten per cent (10%) or greater interest in the business
must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a Sexually Oriented Establishment
or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business,
which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having
a direct or indirect interest of ten per cent (10%) or greater in
the corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
e. The fact that a person possesses other types of Municipal permits
does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a
Sexually Oriented Establishment permit.
(11) Issuance of License
a. The Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application
unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
1. An applicant is under the eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant or an applicant’s spouse or someone the
applicant is residing with is overdue in his payment to the
Municipality for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against him or imposed upon him in relations to a Sexually
Oriented Establishment.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the applicant form.
4. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Municipality to operate a Sexually Oriented
Establishment within the preceding twelve (12) months, or
residing with a person whose license to operate a Sexually
107
Oriented Establishment has been revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
5. The premises to be used for the Sexually Oriented
Establishment have been reviewed and have been disapproved
by either the Zoning Officer or the Fire Marshal as not being
in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
6. The permit fee required by this Ordinance has not been paid.
7. An application of the proposed establishment is in violation
of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
8. An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or
indirect interest of more than ten per cent (10%) of a
corporate applicant, or any of the officers and directors of a
corporate applicant, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of
the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership; or the manager or other person in charge of the
operation of the applicant’s business, has or have been
convicted of an offense involving sexual misconduct within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not
limited to, prostitution, obscenity and possession of child
pornography, or convicted of any offense in any jurisdiction
other than the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would
have constituted an offense involving sexual misconduct if
committed within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In
order for approval to be denied pursuant to this subsection,
the person or person’s conviction or release in connection
with the sexual misconduct offense must have occurred
within two (2) years of the date of application in the event of
a misdemeanor and within five (5) years of the date of
application in the event of a felony.
b. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and
the address of the Sexually Oriented Establishment. The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to
the Sexually Oriented Business so that it may be easily read at
any time.
c. The Zoning Officer and Fire Marshal shall complete their certifi108
cation that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance
within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the
Zoning Officer. The certification shall be promptly presented to
the Zoning Officer.
(12) Fees
a. Every application for a Sexually Oriented Establishment license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license)
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and
investigation fee in an amount set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council.
b. In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every Sexually Oriented Establishment that is granted a
license (new or renewal) shall pay to the Municipality an annual
non-refundable license fee in an amount set by resolution of the
Mayor and Council within thirty (30) days of license issuance or
renewal.
c. Every application for a Sexually Oriented Establishment employee
license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing
license) shall be accompanied by an annual non-refundable
application, investigation, and license fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
d. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Department
of Code Enforcement for review and investigation and
approval or denial.
(13) Inspection
a. An applicant or licensee shall permit authorized Municipal
officials and their agents or consultants to inspect the premises
of a Sexually Oriented Establishment for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
b. A person who operates a Sexually Oriented Establishment or his
agent or employee commits a violation of this Ordinance if he
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
109
(14) Expiration of License
a. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in
Section 11.5.Q.(11). Application for renewal shall be made at
least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made
less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the date of
expiration of the license will not be extended.
b. When the Municipality denies renewal of a license, the applicant
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
if, subsequent to denial, the Municipality finds that the basis for
denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(15) Suspension
a. The Department of Code Enforcement shall suspend a license
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that
a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
Ordinance;
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the Sexually Oriented
Establishment premises as authorized by this ordinance; or
3. Knowingly or negligently permitted gambling by an person on
the Sexually Oriented Establishment premises.
(16) Revocations and Appeals of Denials, Suspensions or Revocations
a. The Department of Code Enforcement shall revoke a license if
a cause of suspension in Section 11.5.Q.(15) occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
b. The Department of Code Enforcement shall revoke a license if it
determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;
110
2. A licensee has knowingly or negligently allowed possession,
use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee knowingly or negligently allowed prostitution on
the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly or negligently operated the Sexually
Oriented Establishment during a period of time when the
licensee’s license was suspended;
5. A licensee has knowingly or negligently allows any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
other sex act to occur in or on the license premises; or
6. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Municipality for
any licensing fees past due.
c. When the Municipality revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a
Sexually Oriented Establishment license for one (1) year from the
date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation,
the Municipality finds that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective.
d. All license application, renewal, suspension or revocation
decisions shall be sent in writing to the applicant or licensee. All
such decisions which deny, suspend or revoke a permit shall
state specifically the ordinance requirement not met and any
other basis for the decision. After denial of an application, or
denial of a renewal of an application, or after suspension or
evocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may appeal
pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170.
e. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Municipality may
appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. The Municipality
shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to any request by a
license applicant or licensee to the court to give expedited
review to such appeal. The Municipality shall certify any record
to the court within twenty (20) days of any request by the court
to do so.
111
(17) Transfer of License
a. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a Sexually Oriented Establishment under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated
in the application.
(18) Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films,
Video or Live Entertainment in Viewing Rooms -
a. A person who operated viewing booths or causes them to be
operated shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of
one or more
Manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint
shall not be required; however, each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions
of all areas of interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six (6) inches. The Municipality may waive the
foregoing diagram or renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
3. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside
the premises.
112
4. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from the manager’s
station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted to access for any purpose excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from
the manager’s station. In addition, all viewing booths shall
have at least one side fully open so that all of the area inside
the booth is open to the view of persons in the public area of
the Establishment.
5. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in #4 remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls merchandise, display racks or other materials
and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area
in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to 11.5.Q.(10) of this Section.
6. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.
7. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than (5.0) foot candle as measured at the floor level.
8. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.
9. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
10. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any
kind between viewing booths or rooms.
113
11. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if
any openings or holes exist.
12. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths
to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
13. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces
in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently
covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be
used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor.
14. A person having a duty under 17 above, commits a violation
of this Ordinance if he knowingly or negligently fails to fulfill
that duty.
(19) Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies -
a. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
b. A person commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person acts
as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
(20) Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios -
a. A Nude Model Studio shall not employ any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
b. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits a violation
of this Ordinance if the person appear semi-nude or in a
State of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if the person
Under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public
View or visible to any other person.
c. A person commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person
appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly or negligently allows
another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model
studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of114
way.
d. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be
placed in a reception room open to the public.
(21) Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity -
a. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a person to knowingly
and intentionally, in a public place.
1. Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania Crime Codes; or
2. Appear in a state of nudity; or
3. Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
b. For purpose -
door areas owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings
and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public,
including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants,
clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls
limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons
invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.
this Section shall not apply to:
1. Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
2. Any individual exposing a breast in the process of
breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years of age; or
3. The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form of
artistic and theatrical performances. It is the intention of the
Municipality that this Section be construed, enforced and
interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible
infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech, free
expression, due process, equal protection or other
fundamental rights.
4. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a person who
knowingly or intentionally in a Sexually Oriented
Establishment appears in a semi-nude condition unless the
115
person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least
ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at
least two (2) feet from the floor.
c. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for an employee, while
semi-nude in a Sexually Oriented Establishment, to solicit or
accept any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for
(22) Prohibitions Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Establishment -
a. A person commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person
knowingly or negligently allows a person under the age of
eighteen (18) years on the premises of a Sexually Oriented
establishment.
(23) Hours of Operation
a. No Sexually Oriented Establishments shall be open for business
before ten o’clock (10:00) a.m., Monday through Saturday or
after twelve o’clock (12:00) p.m., Monday through Saturday.
Sexually Oriented Establishments shall be closed at all times on
Sundays and legal holidays.
(24) Exemptions
a. It is a defense to prosecution under Section 11.5.Q.(20) that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; and
3. In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior or
structure and no other advertising that indicates a
nude person is available for viewing; and
116
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class;
and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
11.5R Forestry
(1) Forestry-Minimum lot size – 10 acres
(2) Yard requirements: A transitional yard or buffer area of one
hundred (100) feet shall be maintained for front, side, and rear
yards. No vegetation shall be removed from these transitional
yards or buffer areas other than the minimum necessary to
provide access roads. Neither shall these transitional yards be
used for loading equipment, storage, or staging areas. Neither
shall vegetation be removed from within 150 feet of any
residential, commercial, or industrial structure or from within 200
feet of any church, school, community facility, or municipal
parkland.
Exception: Select cutting may be approved by the Director of the
Department of Code Enforcement in the above transitional yards
when an owner/operator can demonstrate no additional negative
impact on adjacent properties. In approving select cutting the
Director may impose conditions necessary to protect adjacent
property and the integrity of the ordinance.
(3) Site Plan-The application must include the submission of a site
Plan in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.8.A of
Ordinance 2121 as amended. The site plan must clearly show the
limits of tree harvesting and clearly describe areas where trees are
to be removed where trees are to be loaded and access roads.
(4) Management Plan-The Plan should include an inventory of
resources on the property including general plant/tree
communities, water resources, soil, and unique areas. It should
include an assessment on regeneration, a plan for minimizing
negative impacts, and a plan for minimizing erosion and sediment
control for roads and landings. The plan must also include
measures for minimizing adverse visual effects from harvesting
and other considerations established as Best Management
Practices for Pennsylvania Forests as set forth by the Penn State
117
University College of Agricultural Sciences. A forester or similar
qualified professional must prepare the plan.
(5) Other application requirements- A forestry application must
Include the submission of a logging plan in accordance with
Sections 4B and 5 of this ordinance, an erosion and sediment
control plan together with a review by the Allegheny County
Conservation District, and copies of and state, county, or federal
required permits.
(6) Hours of operation shall be limited from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
(7) Local Municipal Street must be bonded in favor of the
Municipality of Penn hills in an amount to be determined by the
Director of the Department of Public Works. The owner and
applicant will be solely responsible for any damage to municipal
streets and property. A transportation route plan shall be
submitted with the application.
11.5.S. Telecommunication Towers and Facility Buildings
(1) A Telecommunications Tower may not be located on a lot that is
listed on a historic register or in an officially designated state or
federal historic district.
(2) The applicant shall submit to the Municipality, evidence of the need
for the proposed Telecommunications Tower and that the applicant
has exhausted all alternatives to constructing a Telecommunications
Tower.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate via written evidence, including
coverage diagrams and technical reports that, in terms of location and
construction, there are no existing towers, telecommunications
towers, buildings, structures, elevated tanks, or similar uses able to
provide the platform for the telecommunications antenna.
(4) The applicant shall also provide evidence that co-location is not
possible based on the following criteria:
a. Planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
existing and approved Telecommunications Towers considering
existing and planned use of those Telecommunications Towers;
118
b. Existing and approved Telecommunications Towers cannot be
reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at
a reasonable cost;
c. Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF) interference
with other existing or planned equipment for the proposed
Telecommunications Tower; and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost;
d. Existing or approved Telecommunications Towers do not have
the space on which planned equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and at least in parity with other similar
equipment in place or planned; or
e. Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment planned
by the applicant on existing and approved Telecommunications
Towers.
(5) All Telecommunications Towers shall be designed and constructed
and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National
Standards Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, as amended.
(6) Except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
other Federal or State agencies, no Telecommunications Towers may
use artificial lighting or strobe lighting at night.
(7) A chain-link security fence with self-latching gate, of an approved
design, and compatible with surrounding land uses, of not less than
eight (8) feet, and no greater than ten (10) feet, shall completely
enclose the Telecommunications Tower Site.
(8) A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required and shall
meet the requirements as specified in Section 10.1 of the Penn Hills
Zoning Ordinance 2420.
(9) Telecommunications Tower Site shall be designed to be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis.
(10) The Telecommunications Site shall be restricted; and the gate and
Telecommunications Facility Buildings shall remain locked.
(11) Telecommunications Facility Buildings shall be equipped with a
twenty-four (24) hour security system.
119
(12) Telecommunications Tower Sites shall be visited only for periodic
maintenance.
(13) Telecommunications Facility Buildings shall be considered as an
accessory use to the principle Telecommunications Tower only.
(14) A Telecommunications Facility Building must setback a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines, and the Planning
Commission and Mayor and Council can increase this setback if
deemed necessary depending on the site.
(15) Guy wires, if utilized, shall be anchored no closer than twenty-five
(25) feet from any property line or outside of the minimum yard and
building setback requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
(16) Guy wires shall not cross or encroach any telephone or electric power
lines.
(17) Guy wires shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times.
(18) A Telecommunications Tower may exceed the maximum height for
the district in which it is located. However, the maximum height of
the Telecommunications Tower shall not at any time exceed three
hundred fifty (350) feet. No equipment mounted or attached to the
Telecommunications Tower including antennas shall exceed this
three hundred fifty (350) foot maximum height in any district. A
Telecommunications Tower must set back a minimum of one (1) foot
from each property line for each one (1) foot of height of the Tower.
(19) Telecommunications Tower heights shall be measured from the
foundation of the tower to the top point of the tower or antenna,
whichever is higher.
(20) Telecommunications Towers shall be subject to a minimum setback
from all overhead transmission lines of a distance no less than two (2)
times the height of the proposed Telecommunications Tower.
(21) Telecommunications Towers are limited to one per site.
(22) No sign shall be mounted on the Telecommunications Towers, except
as may be required or approved by the FAA, Federal
Communications Commission, Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation or
other applicable government agency.
120
(23) Telecommunications Facility Buildings shall be totally enclosed by
the required chain-link security fence.
(24) Telecommunications Towers shall be designed in accordance with the
provisions of the Penn Hills Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance particularly in terms of access roads, sidewalks, storm
water management, erosion and sediment control and pavement.
(25) The applicant shall present documentation that the
Telecommunications Tower Site and Tower is designed in accordance
with all applicable State and Federal regulations.
(26) The applicant shall submit evidence that the Telecommunications
Tower Site, Tower, Facility Buildings, and related structures or
equipment have been designed installed as per the approved final
plan.
(27) Any citation from another regulatory agency must be reported to the
Municipality upon receipt of the citation.
(28) An Annual Inspection Program performed by a Registered
Professional Engineer (P.E.) and paid for by the owner of the
Telecommunications Site, Tower, Antennas, and Facility Building(s)
shall be required;
a. The Annual Inspection Report shall be submitted to the Municipality
on June 1 of each year, documenting that an inspection
has been performed within thirty (30) days and that the structure
and surrounding site is in compliance with the requirements of
this Ordinance;
b. The Annual Inspection Report shall certify that the structure
will withstand wind, storm, ice and other natural forces;
c. The Annual Inspection Report shall guarantee that the Telecommunications
Tower is structurally capable of housing the
antennas, dishes, and tower equipment already mounted and/or
attached.
(29) Transfer or Removal -
a. Owners of Telecommunications Site, Telecommunications
121
Towers Telecommunications Antennas, and related equipment and
structures shall inform the Municipality of any transfers in ownership
or responsibility immediately after the transfer occurs.
b. The Telecommunications Tower and related equipment and
structures shall be promptly removed by the applicant if the
Telecommunications Site is not used for communication purposes
for any continuous one (1) year period.
122
SECTION 12 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
12.1 Purpose - Uses that are designated as special exceptions are generally compatible with other
land uses permitted in a zoning district, but because of their unique neighborhood or
municipality as a whole, require a determination of appropriateness at a particular location
proposed. Such individual consideration may include the imposition of conditions in order to
ensure the appropriateness of the use on any particular parcel of land and the compatibility of
the use with adjacent uses.
12.2 Special Exceptions - Conditions - Special exceptions shall fulfill all applicable conditions, as
follows:
12.1.A. Compliance with any conditions imposed by provisions of this ordinance
regarding the particular special exception.
12.2.B. Any other applicable regulations, whether in this or any other Penn Hills
ordinance, or any county, state, or federal regulations.
12.2.C. Any other conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board, which are
deemed necessary for protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
12.3 Special Exceptions - Procedure - The procedure for requesting a special exception is as
follows:
12.3.A. An owner of property or any authorized agent of an owner may apply for a
special exception under the provisions of this section.
A written application and accompanying materials sufficient to describe the
application which may include a site plan if required by the Planning
Department, shall be filed with the Planning Department. The application
shall be a form approved by the Municipality. The appropriate fee, as
periodically determined by Council, must also be submitted. All application
materials must be filed in the Planning Department at least thirty-two (32)
days before the Zoning Hearing Board meeting at which the application will
be considered.
12.3.B. Within five (5) days after receiving an application for special exception
approval, the Planning Department shall determine whether the application is
complete. If the Planning Department determines that the application is not
complete, the applicant shall be notified of any deficiencies, and the Planning
Department shall take no further steps to process the application until the
applicant remedies the deficiencies.
123
12.3.C. Once an application is determined to be complete, the application materials
shall be reviewed by the Planning Department. Copies of the Planning
Department’s review and copies of all application materials shall be
forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board. A public hearing by the Zoning
hearing Board shall be set within forty-five (45) days of the filing of a
complete application.
12.3.D. Notice of the Zoning Hearing Board hearing shall be advertised in accordance
with the advertising policy of the Municipality, and the Municipalities
Planning Code. The subject property shall be conspicuously posted with a
notice of the special exception request and the date and time of the Zoning
Hearing Board public hearing, for at least fourteen (14) days before the
Zoning Hearing Board public hearing.
12.3.E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall, at the hearing, examine the application
materials and listen to relevant testimony from the owner of the property or
his agent, representatives of the Planning Department, and any interested
citizen. The Zoning Hearing Board shall pose any necessary questions to any
of the above parties.
12.3.F. The Zoning Hearing Board shall, within fourteen (14) days after the hearing,
approve or disapprove the special exception request. If the Zoning Hearing
Board disapproves the request, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated.
12.3.G. A special exception shall not be granted unless the Board shall determine:
(1) That the proposed special exception will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character of
the neighborhood, and that the use of property adjacent to the area
included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded.
(2) That the proposed special exception will serve to protect the best
interests of the Municipality of Penn Hills, the convenience of the
community, and the public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) That the effect of the special exception will facilitate the logical,
efficient, and economical extension of public services and facilities,
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection, and public
schools.
12.3.H. A majority vote of the Zoning Hearing Board is required for approval.
124
12.3.I. The property owner, or his agent, and the Planning Department shall receive
written notification of the Zoning Hearing Board’s decision. Any other
interested party can, at the hearing, request to receive such written
notification. In any case, the written notification shall be sent within fourteen
(14) days of the Zoning Hearing Board’s decision.
12.3.J. Appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board are governed by the
applicable provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
12.4 Special Exceptions - General Provisions
12.4.A. When a special exception has been denied by the Zoning Hearing Board, no
request for a special exception may be re-filed with the Department of Code
Enforcement for at least one (1) year from the date of that denial. The only
exception to this shall be if the landowner or his agent can show a substantial
change in circumstances regarding the property, which would warrant reexamination
of the special exception request within the year’s limitation.
Such showing of changed circumstances shall be submitted in writing, along
with a special exception application, to the Department of Code Enforcement.
12.4.B. An approved special exception shall be completed within two (2) years
following the date of approval. However, the Department of Code
Enforcement may grant an extension if the landowner, or his agent, requests
such an extension and if good cause for the delay is shown. There are no
other exceptions to this rule. If, at the end of the two-year period, the special
exception is not completed, and if no extension has been granted, the
approval of the special exception shall be null and void.
12.4.C. Minor changes in an approved special exception, may be approved in the
manner described in Section 16.2.E. of this ordinance.
12.4.D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, when an application
for a special exception has been filed with the Planning Department, and the
subject matter would ultimately constitute a land development or a
subdivision as defined in Section 4.2 of Penn Hills Ordinance #2136, as
amended, no change or amendment of this ordinance or Ordinance #2136, as
amended, or other ordinances or plans shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant. The application shall be entitled to a
decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans as they existed at the time the application was filed. Provided further,
should such an application be approved by the Council, the applicant shall be
entitled to proceed with the submission of either land development or
subdivision plans within a period of six (6) months, or longer, if specifically
125
approved by the Council, following the date of such approval in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was duly filed before the Council. If either a land
development or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such plan shall
be subject to the review procedures and time limitations applicable to land
developments or subdivisions under the Penn Hills Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, #2136, as amended.
12.5 Special Exceptions – Specific Provisions
12.5.A Home Occupations –
The following conditions shall apply to all home occupations unless expressly waived by the
Board after a demonstration of
good cause:
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in
such occupation.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental to, and
subordinate to, its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25
percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be in the conduct of the home
occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other
visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign, nonilluminated,
and non-animated not exceeding one square foot in area.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
E. There shall be no stocking of goods or keeping of an inventory of finished goods for the
purpose of selling retail out of the home in connection with such home occupation.
Retail goods must be made to order or selected from catalogues and/or samples, and
delivered to customers, or the customer may pick up the goods, as long as there is no
overlapping of customers at any one time. There shall be no “over-the-counter” sales of
retail or wholesale goods. Nothing in this section, however, is meant to imply that there
can be no stocking of goods necessary for a business such as vending machine items, or
any other item when the product is not sold at the home, or when the items are used to
complete work at another location.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would
normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated
by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and in other than a
required front yard.
126
G. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses
off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the
dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
H. No home occupation shall involve the use of toxic materials or any materials which
present a deleterious effect on adjacent properties.
I. Professional and service-oriented businesses, such as doctors, lawyers, barbers, etc., shall
be conducted by appointment only to prevent overlapping of customers.
J. For Group Day Care Homes, Items A and B, above, shall not apply and 100% of a home
and surrounding property may be used for such purpose. Day care homes must, however,
meet the following additional conditions:
1. Operators are responsible for compliance with PA Department of Public Welfare
licensing requirements and any other county, state or federal regulations.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board may require buffering along all property boundaries
with landscaping, fencing, or other methods suitable to protect the children and
the immediate neighborhood.
3. A minimum of 100 square feet of usable outdoor play space, and 40 square feet of
usable indoor space, must be provided for each child present at the facility,
including resident children.
4. Care shall not be provided to more than twelve (12) children who are not
residents of the property.
5. A minimum of two care-givers shall be available at the facility whenever there
are more than six children at the facility, including resident children.
6. Operators must supply to the Municipality (and keep current) the names of
persons responsible for responding quickly to a complaint filed by the
Municipality.
K. There shall be no home occupation for the wholesale and/or retail sale of firearms or
ammunition. Neither shall there be a home occupation for the service or repair of
firearms or the loading of bullets or preparation of ammunition
127
SECTION 13 NON-CONFORMING USES
13.1 Regulation of Non-Conforming Lots, Structures, Signs, and Uses - Lots, structures, signs and
uses of land which are lawful and pre-existing, but which are restricted or prohibited by this
ordinance, its successors or any amendments, are permitted to remain and continue, subject
to the following regulations:
13.1.A. The owner of any non-conforming lot, structure, sign or use, made nonconforming
by the enactment of this ordinance, or any preceding zoning
ordinance, must register such non-conforming lot, structure, sign or use with
the Department of code Enforcement. In addition, the owner of any nonconformance
shall provide, upon request, information required by the Code
Enforcement Officer, which is deemed necessary to ascertain the extent of the
non-conformity.
13.1.B. Upon the change of a non-conformance to a conforming use, or in the event
of a lapse or destruction of a non-conformance, the owner of such use can
request that the use be deleted from the list of non-conformance.
13.2 Non-Conforming Lot of Record
13.2.A. In any residential district, a single-family dwelling and normally permitted
accessory buildings may be erected on any non-conforming single lot of
record where no conforming, permitted structure and use can be erected. The
erection of a non-conforming single-family dwelling is permitted upon, or
after, the effective date of this ordinance, notwithstanding other limitations
imposed by other provisions of this ordinance.
Such non-conforming lot of record must be of separate ownership from
adjoining lots and must not have contiguous frontage with other lots under
the same ownership.
Except for lot size, any single-family dwelling on a non-conforming lot of
record must conform to all other applicable area and use regulations, unless a
variance is requested and granted in accordance with this ordinance.
13.3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land
13.3.A. No non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, expanded, or
changed in any manner unless a variance is requested and granted in
accordance with this ordinance.
128
13.3.B. Continuation -Any non-conforming use of land is permitted to continue as
long as the use is still lawful, identical, existing non-conformance use.
13.3.C. Discontinuance - A non-conforming use, if operations of the use shall cease,
or if any structures are abandoned, for twelve (12) consecutive months, shall
be deemed to be extinguished. Subsequent uses of this property shall be in
accordance with this ordinance.
13.4 Non-Conforming Structures and Signs
13.4.A. No non-conforming structure or sign shall be enlarged, increased, expanded
or changed in any manner unless a variance is requested and granted in
accordance with this ordinance.
Exception-The Department of Planning and Economic Development may
grant a variance administratively for the replacement of non-conforming
residential structures and commercial signs provided that the replacement
does not increase the extent of non-conformity. In granting this variance the
Department of Planning and Economic Development may impose whatever
conditions on the landowner that may be necessary to protect adjacent
properties and/or the integrity of this ordinance.
13.4.B. Continuation - Any non-conforming use of a structure or sign is permitted to
continue as long as the use is still lawful, including subsequent sales of the
property for the identical, existing uses.
13.4.C. Moving of Structure or Sign - No non-conforming structure or sign shall be
moved in whole or in part to another location on the lot unless every portion
of said structure or sign shall conform with the provisions of this ordinance.
13.4.D. Damage or Destruction - Should such non-conforming structure or sign be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty per cent (50%) of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
13.4.E. Repairs or Maintenance - Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoration for safety reasons of any structure, or
part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon the order of such official.
13.5 Determination of Replacement Cost
13.5.A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within thirty (30) days of such request,
determine in a written report the replacement cost of a destroyed or
129
damaged non-conforming structure or sign.
13.5.B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear all appeals from the report and
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer regarding replacement
value. Zoning Hearing Board procedure is governed by the applicable
provisions of Section 15 of this ordinance.
130
SECTION 14 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
14.1 General Rules of Construction
14.1.A. The provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted and applied so as to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, welfare
and morals of the citizens of the Municipality of Penn Hills.
14.1.B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance upon uses
of land or structures are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable of conditions imposed by any other provision of the ordinance, or
of another applicable law, municipal ordinance, rule or regulations of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern.
14.1.C. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other
private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are
more restrictive than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements,
the requirements of this ordinance shall govern.
14.1.D. No structure shall be erected, converted, or altered, nor shall any structure or
land be used except for a purpose permitted in the use district in which the
structure or land is located, except as hereinafter provided. No structure shall
be erected, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the area
regulations, minimum yard requirements, performance standards and
minimum off-street parking space requirements of this ordinance for the
district in which such structure is located.
14.1.E. Any person, partnership, or corporation found to have violated any of the
provisions of this ordinance, shall be notified by the Code Enforcement
Officer in writing, of the nature of the violation and the action necessary to
correct it.
14.1.F. All applications for variance, special exception, amendment, conditional use,
permit, or any other application for certificate within the scope of this
ordinance, shall be made on printed forms as approved by the Council, and
shall contain accurate information as to size and location of structures on the
lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces, the sections of this
ordinance applicable to the request, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. A file of such
applications shall be kept in the Department of Planning and Economic
Development.
131
14.1.G. General Administration - The duty of administering the provisions of this
ordinance is conferred upon the Department of Code Enforcement, the
Planning Commission, the Department of Planning and Economic
Development, the Municipal Council, and the Zoning Hearing Board.
14.2 Department of Code Enforcement
14.2.A. Powers and duties:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a. Administer and enforce this ordinance.
b. Issue all building permits, and make and maintain records thereof.
c. Issue all Certificates of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance, and
make and maintain records thereof.
d. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, and
make and maintain records thereof.
e. Maintain permanent and current records of this ordinance, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special
exceptions, variances, non-conforming uses, conditional uses,
appeals, and applications for, and records of, hearings thereon.
f. Provide and maintain public information relative to all matters
arising out of this ordinance.
g. Receive, file, and forward all applications or appeals requiring
action by the Zoning Hearing Board.
h. Prepare and maintain a list and description of all non-conforming
lots, uses, signs, and structures.
i. Provide written notifications of violations of this ordinance, as
prescribed in this section.
j. Receive complaints from residents regarding alleged violations of
this ordinance. The Department of Code Enforcement shall act
on a complaint within three (3) business days, and shall keep
records of complaints, as well as action taken on them.
132
(2) Receive and approve, after a demonstration of good cause, waivers of
bulk and areas regulations and performance standards. Such waivers
shall be documented and limited to dimensional waivers of no more
than twelve (12) inches or deviations from performance standards of
no more than 1% of the minimum or maximum standard. Such
waivers may be approved with or without conditions.
14.2.B. Appeals
Any appeal from action of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be made to the
Zoning Hearing Board within thirty (30) days of such action, in accordance
with Section 15 of this ordinance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
immediately transmit to the Zoning Hearing Board all of the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
14.3 The Planning Commission
14.3.A. Powers and duties -
(1) The Planning Commission is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
a. To receive copies of all applications for amendments, conditional
uses, to make findings and recommendations thereon, and to forward
such findings and recommendations to the Council.
b. To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this ordinance, and to make reports of its findings
and recommendations to the Council no less frequently than
annually.
c. To supply information to the Code Enforcement Officer as
required in this ordinance.
d. To study, after examination, and, with the aid of expert assistance
where required, determine and define all arterial highways within
the Municipality and to make a report of their findings to the
Zoning Hearing Board and to the Council.
e. To receive applications for site plan approval under the provisions
of Section 16 and other applicable provisions of this ordinance.
133
f. To receive and administer applications for subdivision and land
development.
g. To otherwise assume powers and duties and administrate the
provisions of Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
h. Upon the request of the Manager, the Mayor and Council or the
Planning Director, to conduct workshops, public hearings, and
open forums on a wide variety of issues of community interest
and to provide, when appropriate, recommendations to the Manager,
the Planning Director, and the Mayor and Council.
14.4 Building Permits
14.4.A. Building Permits - General -
(1) Before the use of any land, or the erection, alteration or enlargement
of any structure in any use district begins, a building permit shall be
applied for and shall be issued.
(2) No building permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
unless the building activity is in strict conformity with the provisions
of this ordinance, except after a written order from the Zoning
Hearing Board or the Council. Any building permit issued which
does not comply with these requirements is not lawful and is null and
void.
(3) If the work described in any building permit has not begun within
one-hundred-eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, the building
permit shall expire, and it shall be canceled by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Written notice of cancellation shall be given to the applicant
for the permit within three (3) days of cancellation.
(4) If the work described in any building permit has not been
substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance,
the permit shall expire and be canceled by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Written notice of cancellation shall be given to the property
owner by the Code Enforcement Officer within three (3) days of
cancellation, together with notice that further work, as described in
the canceled permit, shall not proceed unless and until a new building
permit has been obtained.
134
(5) Any building permit may be revoked and withdrawn by the Code
enforcement Officer if the Officer finds that the permit holder has
failed to comply with the conditions under which the permit was
issued.
(6) Recipients of building permits must comply with Section 10.5.F. of
this ordinance (Prohibited Obstructions) and are responsible for
keeping the construction site free of rubbish and debris at all times,
and are responsible for the collection of rubbish and debris on
adjacent properties and rights-of-way where such material is
generated by the activity covered by the permit.
14.4.B. Building Permits - Application
(1) An application for a building permit in any use district shall be
accompanied by the following information. No application shall be
deemed to have been filed until all required information is submitted
and is of a form and content satisfactory to the Code Enforcement
Officer.
a. A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings, drives, parking lots, and other constructional
features on the lot, and in B, M, and I Districts, a plan showing
all buildings, streets, alleys, highways, streams and other topographical
features outside the lot and within fifty feet (50') of any
lot line. However, a plot plan will not be required unless permission
is requested to erect a new structure or to enlarge the
ground floor area of an existing structure.
The Code enforcement Officer may waive the requirement of a
plot plan in a residential district or use, where a plot plan is not
necessary and where submission of such plan would pose an
undue burden upon the applicant.
b. A general description of the proposed use.
c. Architectural plans for any proposed structure or sign.
d. Any other data, evidence or statements, and any reasonable
number of duplicates of same that the Code Enforcement
officer may require.
e. Site Plan Approval based on conformance with Section 10,
135
Performance Standards, Section 16, Site Plan Review, and other
applicable standards in this ordinance; as well as Ordinance
#2136, the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall act upon an application within
thirty (30) days after the filing of the application. Failure to act within
this time shall be deemed approval of the application, and in such
case, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the permit.
(3) In acting upon an application for a building permit for a structure or
land use, the Code Enforcement Officer shall assure himself that all
of the requirements of this ordinance are met and that all of the
standards and limitations established by this section shall be
observed. In approving an application, the Code Enforcement Officer
may require such changes in plans for land use, buildings, or
operation, as may be necessary to assure compliance with this
ordinance and the limitations established.
14.5 Certificates of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance
14.5.A. Necessity of Obtaining Certificate
(1) It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of
any building, land, or premises, or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, altered in its structure, or enlarged in its use until a
Certificate of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance shall have been
issued therefore by the Code Enforcement Officer, stating that the
proposed use of the land, building, or premises conforms to the
requirements of the grading and zoning ordinances and the building
and fire codes.
(2) It shall be unlawful to change ownership, tenants, or occupants of a
building, land, or premises unless a Certificate of Use, Occupancy,
and Compliance shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer prior to said change, stating that the building, land, or
premises conform to the requirements of the grading and zoning
ordinances and the building and fire codes. In the case of multiple
tenants of either commercial, industrial, or residential properties, a
Certificate of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance shall be required for
each tenant.
14.5.B. Application for Certificate
136
(1) Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an
application for a Certificate of use, Occupancy, and Compliance,
except for building permit applications for swimming pools, window
replacement, single-family residential storage sheds, gutters and
downspouts, new siding, and other minor repairs to existing
structures, as determined by the Director of the Department of Code
Enforcement.
(2) The applicant, in all cases, shall be the owner, of a duly authorized
representative of the owner. In the case of a change in ownership of
the property, the applicant may be the current owner or the proposed
new owner. In the case of a change in ownership of the property, the
applicant may be the current owner or the proposed new owner. In
the case of a change of tenants, the applicant shall be the owner, and
the owner shall provide the names and any other information deemed
necessary to clearly identify the proposed new tenants.
14.5.C. Inspections
(1) The applicant for a certificate required by 14.5.A.(1) shall notify the
Department of Code Enforcement of the date on which such
construction, erection, structural alteration, or enlargement of use
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the
building or structure involved within ten (10) days of such notice.
(2) An inspection for the purpose of determining whether a certificate
required by 14.5.A.(1) should be issued, shall extend only to the
immediate area upon which such construction, erection, structural
alteration, or enlargement of use took place, and to such appurtenant
areas as are reasonably necessary to determine whether the grading
and zoning ordinances and building and fire codes are complied with.
(3) The applicant for a certificate required by 14.5.A.(2) shall notify the
Department of Code Enforcement of the date upon which such
change of tenants or occupants shall take place, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building or structure involved
within ten (10) days of such notice.
14.5.D. Issuance of Certificates
(1) A temporary Certificate of Use, Occupancy and Compliance may be
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer for a period not to exceed
137
one (1) month during alterations or partial occupancy of a building
pending its completion, provided such temporary certificate may
require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
(2) Upon inspection of land, building, or premises to determine whether
or not a Certificate of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance, required by
14.5.A.(1), shall be issued, if the Code Enforcement Officer shall find
that such construction, alteration, or erection is in accordance with
this ordinance, a Certificate of Use, Occupancy and Compliance shall
be issued. Written notice shall be given to the applicant stating why a
certificate cannot be issued when the Code Enforcement Officer finds
that such construction, alteration, or erection is not in accordance
with this ordinance.
(3) Upon inspection of land, building, premises to determine whether or
not a Certificate of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance, required by
14.5.A.(2), shall be issued, if the Code Enforcement Officer finds that
this ordinance has been complied with, a Certificate of Use,
Occupancy, and Compliance shall be issued. Written notice shall be
given to the applicant stating why a certificate cannot be issued when
the Code Enforcement Officer finds that this ordinance has not been
complied with.
(4) Upon transfer of ownership of property, the current owner shall
produce and deliver a copy of the approved Certificate of Use,
Occupancy, and Compliance to the new owner including notice of
any conditions associated with the certificate.
14.5.E. Revocation or Suspension
(1) A Certificate of Use, Occupancy, and Compliance may be revoked or
suspended by the Code Enforcement Officer if the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that the holder of the Certificate has failed to comply
with conditions attached to the issuance of the certificate, or if the
Code Enforcement Officer finds that the operations of the building or
land use fail to comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
14.6 Amendments
14.6.A. Purpose - This section is intended to provide an orderly process for the
consideration of proposed amendments to the text of this ordinance or the
zoning map of the Municipality.
138
14.6.A. Who May Initiate Amendments
(1) Non-Curative Amendments - Amendments other than those prepared
by the Planning Commission, but not including amendments prepared
by a landowner, shall be introduced by a member of the Council.
Prior to the introduction of the proposed zoning amendment on
Council’s agenda, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public
hearing on the proposed zoning amendment after giving public notice
of the hearing in accordance with Section 14.6.F. The Council shall
submit each proposed amendment to the Planning Commission at
least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the Planning Commission an opportunity to
submit recommendations.
(2) Landowner-Initiated Amendments - (Curative Amendments) A
landowner who desires to challenge the validity of this ordinance or
any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest on substantive
grounds, may submit a curative amendment to the Council with a
written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
and decided by the Council.
(3) Municipal Curative Amendments - The Municipality of Penn Hills
may determine that its zoning ordinance, or any portion thereof, is
substantially invalid and prepare a curative amendment to correct the
defect. Procedures are regulated by the Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 170, as amended.
14.6.C. Application Requirements For Landowner-Initiated Curative Amendments
Applications for landowner-initiated curative amendments shall be filed with
the Planning Department on forms provided by the Planning Department.
The application shall be accompanied by the legal description of the property,
twelve (12) copies of the survey or plot plan, a letter of intent, a written
challenge and explanatory materials, describing the applicant’s proposed
development or purpose for the curative amendment. Such plans nor other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for any
approval under this ordinance so long as they provide reasonable notice of the
proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the
challenged provision of this ordinance or the zoning map.
14.6.D. Review by Planning Commission and County Planning Department
139
(1) Non-Curative Amendments
In the case of an amendment other than an amendment prepared by
the Planning Commission, the Council shall submit the amendment to
the Planning Commission for review at least thirty (30) days prior to
the public hearing required in Section 14.6.E(2) below. At least thirty
(30) days prior to the public hearing which the Council is required to
conduct pursuant to Subsection 14.6.D(1) below, the Planning
Commission shall submit the proposed amendment to the Allegheny
County Planning Department for review and comment.
(2) Landowner Initiated Curative Amendments
The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the
Planning Commission and County Planning Department as provided
in Subsection 14.6.D (1) above.
14.6.E Public Hearing
(1) Non-Curative Amendment - Before voting on the enactment of a noncurative
amendment, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon,
pursuant to public notice in accordance with Subsection 14.6.F. If the
proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of the
public hearing shall be posted by the Code Enforcement Officer at
points deemed sufficient by the Code Enforcement Officer along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. Notice
shall be posted on the affected tract or area at least one (1) week prior
to the date of the hearing.
(2) Landowner-Initiated Curative Amendments - The Council shall
commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60) days after an
application for a landowner curative amendment is filed unless the
landowner requests or consents to an extension of time. Public notice
of the hearing shall be given as provided in Subsection 14.6.F(1).
The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following
requirements:
a. The hearings shall be conducted by the Council or the Council
may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or
where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the
Council, however, the applicant or the Municipality may, prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decisions or findings of the
140
hearing officer as final.
b. The parties to the hearing shall be the Municipality, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Council, and any other person including civic
or community organizations permitted to appear by the Council.
the Council shall have the power to require that all persons who
wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided for that purpose.
c. The presiding officer of the Council or the hearing officer shall
have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
d. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel
and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present
evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on
all relevant issues. The Council may retain an independent
attorney to present the defense of the challenged provisions of
this ordinance or the zoning map on its behalf and to present
witnesses on its behalf.
e. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
f. The Council, or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep
a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee
for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and
the Council. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Council if such
appeal is made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In
other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear
the cost thereof.
g. The Council, or the hearing officer, shall not communicate directly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issues involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties
to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from
their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or
141
its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any
party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity
to be present.
h. Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing, the Council
shall, within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of the hearing,
determine whether the challenged provision of this ordinance
or the zoning map is invalid as alleged by the landowner. If the
challenge is found to have merit, the Council shall proceed to
consider the landowner’s curative amendment pursuant to the
standards of this section. If the Council fails to act on the landowner’s
challenge within forty-five (45) days, the challenge shall
be deemed to be denied on the forty-sixth (46) day after the date
of the hearing, unless the time is extended by mutual consent of
the landowner and Municipality.
i. The Council, or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render
a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days
after the conclusion of the hearing.
j. Where an application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons, therefore including references to
the provisions of any ordinance rule or regulation relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the
light of the facts found.
k. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has
been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the
Council shall make his report and recommendations available to
the parties within forty-five (45) days and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Council
prior to final decision or entry of findings. The Council’s
decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the
the report of the hearing officer.
l. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of
the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or
mailed to him no later than the day following its date. The
Council, shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the
place at which the full decision or findings may be examined to
all other persons who have filed their name and address with the
142
Council no later than the last day of the hearing.
14.6.F Notice Requirements
(1) Notice in General - Notice of proposed zoning amendments shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Municipality where
copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined
without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost
thereof. The Council shall publish the proposed ordinance or
amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality not more than sixty (60) days nor less than seven (7)
days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and
brief summary, prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth
all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included,
a copy of the proposed ordinance shall be supplied to a newspaper of
general circulation in the Municipality at the time the public notice is
published and an attested copy shall be filed in the County
Administration Office.
(2) Notice of Landowner-Initiated Amendments - The notice of a hearing
to consider a landowner-initiated amendment shall include notice that
the validity of this ordinance or the zoning map is in question. The
notice shall also state where and when a copy of the challenge,
including any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments
maybe examined by the public. Written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the zoning officer, and such other persons as the Council
shall designate by ordinance, and to any such person who has made
timely request for same, written notices shall be given at such time
and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the
absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Council. All other
procedures as stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, shall be followed.
14.6.G. Re-advertising Requirements When Substantial Changes Are Made Prior To
Enactment - In the event substantial amendments are made to the proposed
ordinance amendment before voting upon enactment, the Council shall at
least ten (10) days prior to enactment re-advertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Municipality, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments.
14.6.H. Changes To Proposed Amendment After Public Hearing - If after any public
143
hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
substantially, or is revised to include land previously not affected by it, the
Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
14.6.I. Mediation Option - The parties to the amendment proceeding any voluntarily
elect to utilize this section. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, the
procedures initiated under this section. In each case, the mediating parties
shall develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Selecting a mediator, who at a minimum shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation;
(2) Setting time limits for completion of mediation;
(3) Suspending time limits otherwise set forth in this section, provided
there is written consent by the mediating parties, and by an applicant
or the Council, provided either is not a party to the mediation;
(4) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate;
(5) Determining, within legal constraints, whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public;
(6) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review by the Council; and
(7) Funding mediation.
No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent administration or judicial proceeding.
14.6.J. Action by Council
(1) Non-Curative Amendment - After holding a public hearing and
giving notice as required by Section 14.6.F above, the Council shall
vote to either enact or reject the proposed amendment.
(2) Landowner-Initiated Curative Amendment - If the Council determines
that a validity challenge has merit, it may accept a landowners
144
curative amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects.
(3) Municipal Curative Amendment - Council will take action in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170, as
amended.
14.6.K. Standards
(1) Non-Curative Amendment - Non-curative amendments shall be
prepared in conformance with the Penn Hills Comprehensive Plan,
and shall be prepared in conformance with the regulations set forth in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code.
(2) Required Considerations For Landowner-Initiated-Curative
Amendments - The Council’s decision on a challenge and proposed
amendment shall take into consideration the curative amendment,
plans, and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall
also consider:
a. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools, and other public service facilities;
b. If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available and affordable
by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of this ordinance or the zoning map;
c. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site’s soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
d. The impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands,
wetlands, flood plains, natural resources and natural features,
the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental
impacts;
e. The impact of the proposed use on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
145
(3) Required Findings For Municipal Curative Amendments - Findings
will be made in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 170, as amended.
14.6.L. Appeals: Effect of Court’s Reversal of Denial of Landowner’s Curative
Amendments If the Council rejects a landowner’s curative amendment under
this section and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the
Court’s decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire
zoning ordinance and map, but only for those provisions which specifically
relate to the landowner’s curative amendment and challenge.
14.6.M. Waiting Period Following Action On Municipal Curative Amendments -
Following a Municipal Curative Amendment, the waiting period shall be in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170, 1988, as
amended.
14.6.N. Submittal of Adopted Amendments To County Planning Department - Within
thirty (30) days after enactment of an amendment to this ordinance, a copy of
the amendment to this ordinance shall be forwarded to Allegheny County
Planning Department.
14.6.O. Time Limit For Filing Application For Subdivision, Land Development Or
Building Permit Approval After Approval of Curative Amendment - Where
a curative amendment proposal is approved by the Council, or a validity
challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board, or a proposed
amendment or validity challenge is approved by a Court of Appeal, and the
proposed amendment or challenge requires a further application for
subdivision or land development approval, the developer shall have two (2)
years from the date of such approval to file an application for tentative or
preliminary approval pursuant to the Subdivision Ordinance of the Planned
Residential Development provision of this ordinance. When the approved
zoning amendment does not require further application for subdivision or
land development approval, the developer shall have one (1) year within
which to file for a building permit. With the one-year or two-year period, as
applicable, no subsequent change or amendment in this ordinance, the
subdivision ordinance or other land use ordinances shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge.
14.6.P. If a petition for an amendment is denied by the Council after public notice
and public hearing, no subsequent petition shall be accepted which involves
the same amendment affecting the same property, or any part thereof for at
least six (6) months after final action on the petition by the Council.
146
SECTION 15 ZONING HEARING BOARD
15.1 Creation -The Zoning Hearing Board (Board) presently in existence, shall continue to
constitute the Zoning Hearing Board of the Municipality of Penn Hills under this zoning
ordinance. Matters pending before the Zoning Hearing Board at the time of this ordinance
becomes effective, shall continue and be completed under the law in effect at the time such
Board took jurisdiction of them.
15.2 Continuity of Office - Those members of the Board existing under the prior zoning ordinance
are hereby reappointed and shall serve out their unexpired terms as members of the present
Board, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
15.3 Membership, Term of Office - The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five (5) residents
of the Municipality of Penn Hills appointed by the Council. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the Municipality of Penn Hills.
The terms of office shall be five (5) years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for
the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other public office in
the Municipality.
15.4 Vacancies - The Board shall promptly notify the Council of any vacancies, which occur.
Appointments by the Council to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term.
15.5 Removal of Members - A member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance or
nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by a majority vote of the Council. The Board
member must receive fifteen (15) days advance written notice of the intent of the Council to
vote on the member’s removal. The written notice shall be accompanied by a clear, written
statement of the specific charges. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
Board member shall so request in writing.
15.6 Organization of the Board - The Board shall elect its officers from its own membership. The
officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action , a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the
members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership
to conduct any hearings on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Board,
as provided by the M.P.C.
15.7 Rules and Regulations - The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and regulations, and
forms for its procedures, such as are consistent with the ordinances of the Municipality of
Penn Hills and the laws of Pennsylvania. The Board shall keep full public records of its
147
business and shall submit a report of its activities to the Council annually. All records and
rules of the Board shall be on file for public inspection in the Department of Planning and
Economic Development.
15.8 Expenditures - Within limits of funds appropriated by the Council, the Board may employ or
contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants, and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of their
duties as may be fixed by the Council, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate
of compensation authorized to be paid to Council members.
15.9 Meetings and Public Hearings - Meetings for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held:
(1) At the call of the Chairman
(2) Within sixty (60) days from the date of any application to the Board
(3) At such other times as the Board may determine
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure in accordance with Section 15.7. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing whether a member was present or absent and the vote of each member upon each
question, and shall keep stenographic records of its hearings, and other official actions. All
Board records shall be filed in the Department of Code Enforcement and shall be available
for public inspection. Upon the filing of an application or appeal, the Board shall fix a time
and place for a public hearing and shall, in the manner prescribed by this ordinance and the
M.P.C., give public notice thereof. The Board shall conduct the hearings and render
decisions in the manner prescribed by the M.P.C. as now established or as hereafter
amended.
15.10 Notice - Public notice shall be given by publication once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general subject circulation in the Municipality of Penn Hills. The
owner of the property, or his agent, shall be notified by mail not more than thirty (30) day
and not less than fourteen (14) days in advance of the Board hearing. In addition, notice of
said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
15.11 Powers and Duties - The Board shall have the power and duty to perform the following
functions in accordance with the M.P.C.:
15.11.A. To hear and decide appeals from any order, decision, determination, or
requirement made by the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance, where it is alleged that the Code Enforcement
Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures, or has misinterpreted or
148
misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance, map, or rule or regulation
governing the action of the Code Enforcement Officer.
15.11.B. To hear challenges to the validity of this ordinance or the zoning map, as
prescribed by the M.P.C.
15.11.C. To hear and decide requests for a variance from the requirements of this
ordinance, where it is alleged that the strict application of the provisions of
this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship that would deprive the
owner of the reasonable use of the land. The Board shall also have the power
to attach such conditions to the variance as it deems necessary to implement
the general purpose and intent of this ordinance. No variance shall be granted
unless the Board determines and fully describes in its findings, the following:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning
ordinance, in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
locate.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance, and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
15.11.D. To hear and decide requests for special exceptions expressly allowed by the
provisions of this ordinance, and subject to the standards and criteria set forth
in Section 12 of this ordinance.
149
15.11.E. To hear, where the Board has jurisdiction over zoning matters in this section,
all other appeals which the applicant may elect to bring before it with respect
to any municipal ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same
development plan or development. The Board shall take evidence and make
findings on all relevant issues of fact. However, the Board shall have no
power to pass upon the non-zoning issues.
15.11.F. The Board shall also have such other powers as are set forth in the M.P.C.
now, and as hereinafter amended.
15.12 Appeal to Court - Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Board may appeal therefrom
within thirty (30) days to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, in the manner
prescribed by the M.P.C.
15.13 Time Limitations - Variances and Special Exceptions: Upon receiving an approval for a
variance or special exception a landowner will have twelve (12) months from the date of the
Zoning Hearing Board decision to obtain a building permit, an occupancy permit, or
otherwise establish or develop the property in accordance with the Board approval or the
variance or special exception shall become null and void. The Planning Director may,
however, grant an extension of time if the landowner requests such an extension, and if good
cause is shown.
150
SECTION 16 SITE PLAN APPROVAL AND REVIEW
16.1 General Purposes - New development has a substantial impact on the character of the area in
which it is located. Some harmful effects of one land use upon another can be prevented
through traditional zoning, subdivision controls, and housing and building codes. Other
aspects of development are more subtle and less amenable to exacting rules-of-thumb
promulgated without regard to specific development proposals. Among these are the general
form of the land before and after development, the special relationships of the structures and
open spaces to proximate land uses, and the appearance of buildings and open spaces as they
contribute to an area as it is being developed. The site plan review process addresses these
factors by promoting qualities in the environment which bring value to the community,
protecting public and private investments in the community, raising the level of community
expectations for the quality of its environment, and increasing the quality of development as
it occurs in Penn Hills.
16.2 Site Plan Review
16.2.A. Aspects of review - The Planning Commission, in examining applications for
Site Plan approval, will primarily consider the terms and provisions of the
Penn Hills Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance as amended. Land
developers are encouraged to consult with municipal officials and become
familiar with both ordinances. Additionally, the Commission shall consider
the various aspects of design, with special emphasis on the following:
(1) The written report and recommendation of the Department of
Planning and Economic Development
(2) The standards and requirements as specified in Section 10 of this
ordinance.
(3) The landscape and the environment - to prevent the unnecessary
destruction or blighting of the natural landscape or of the achieved
man-made environment.
(4) The relationship of structures and open spaces - to ascertain that the
treatment of built-up and open spaces has been designed so that they
relate harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings that have a
visual relationship to proposed development.
(5) Circulation - to determine that the proposal facilitates appropriate
pedestrian access, servicing and parking, and when necessary,
compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, the very
151
young and the elderly.
(6) Protection of neighbors - to protect neighboring owners and users by
making sure that reasonable provision has been made for such matters
as surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, the preservation of
views, light and air, and those aspects of design not adequately
covered by other regulations, which may have substantial effects on
neighboring land users.
(7) Compliance with other regulations - to coordinate compliance with
other municipal ordinances which affect design, such as the sign and
billboard control provisions of municipal code sections, and the
provisions for underground utilities of municipal code sections.
16.2.B. Limitations of Review
(1) The Planning Commission shall not design or assist in the design of
any buildings or projects submitted for approval, except on request of
the proponent or his architect. The Planning Commission shall
restrict its considerations to a reasonable and professional review of
the proposal and plans, leaving full responsibility for the design and
development to the applicant.
(2) Individual initiative and experimentation are to be encouraged.
(3) In its endeavor to improve the quality of design, the Planning
Commission shall keep consideration of cost in mind. However,
consideration of cost shall not override the other objectives of this
ordinance.
(4) The Planning Commission is not to use design review intentionally
or inadvertently to exclude housing for minority groups or housing
for low and moderate-income persons.
(5) The Planning Commission is not to use design review intentionally or
in advertently to prohibit or unduly restrict building types, materials,
or methods to vary the specific allowances or prohibitions of the
Municipality’s zoning, subdivision, or other development controls.
16.2.C. Review Authority and Responsibilities
(1) The Planning Commission shall be the authority for all stages of Site
Plan approval.
152
(2) The Department of Planning and Economic Development is to assist
the Planning Commission by:
a. Providing technical and administrative assistance to the Planning
Commission.
b. Providing advice and administrative assistance to applicants
when requested.
c. Providing a written recommendation to the Planning Commission.
16.2.D. Types of Development Included
(1) Except as provided hereafter, a site plan shall be required of all
subdivisions and land development. Site plans shall be required for
the conversion of residential structures to non-residential uses, for
additions to existing non-residential and multi-family residential
structures, and for changes in use of non-residential structures or land.
Site plan applications shall also be required for significant changes to
vehicle circulation patterns, revisions to highway occupancy permits
and parking lot design.
(2) A site plan shall not be required for single-family residential
structures. A plot plan, however, must be submitted to a Code
Enforcement Officer indicating the location of the structure and the
driveway connection prior to the issuance of a building permit.
16.2.E. Exemptions - Whenever the Department of Planning and Economic
Development finds that a proposal raises no substantial design problems, it is
hereby authorized to approve an exemption. Such an exemption may be
granted for minor additions to existing buildings which in the opinion of the
Director have no negative impact on local traffic conditions or adjacent
properties, are in compliance with other local development ordinances, and
are otherwise in conformance with related performance standards. An
exemption may also be approved for small free standing accessory buildings
and principal buildings under five hundred (500) sq. ft. in size. In approving
such an exemption, the Director shall do so in writing and maintain a record
explaining the basis for exemption. A short written summary detailing all
approvals during the previous month shall be given to the Planning
Commission each month.
The Director, in approving and an exemption, may impose appropriate
conditions including the imposition of appropriate performance standards, the
153
construction of sidewalks, fire hydrants or other improvements, or other
conditions deemed necessary.
16.3 Environmental Reports
16.3.A. Environmental Report Requirements - If one or more of the following
circumstances exist as part of the Site Plan application, the Department of
Planning and Economic Development and/or the Planning Commission may
determine that an Environmental Impact Statement will be required as part of
the application:
(1) Development in undermined areas with less than 100 feet of
overburden, as designated by the United States Geological Survey.
(2) Development or encroachment involving a natural stream or
watercourse.
(3) Development within a landslide-susceptibility areas a designated by
the United States Geological Survey.
(4) Development disturbing slopes of 25 per cent (25%) or greater as
designated by the United States Geological Survey.
(5) Development involving the removal of 10,000 sq. ft. or more of
woodland, as designated by the United States Geological Survey, or
development involving the removal of natural vegetation of five (5)
acres or more in area.
(6) Residential development of 100 or more housing units, commercial
developments with 50,000 sq. ft. or more of floor area.
(7) Any industrial development.
16.3.B. Environmental Report Content - When required, the applicant shall submit a
written report including the following:
(1) A description of the project.
(2) An assessment of the environmental impact of the proposed
development with particular attention paid to those items as outlined
in Section 16.3.A.
154
(3) A list of all licenses, permits and other approvals required by
municipal, county, or state law and the status of each. The approvals
and permits should be required before final consideration of the site
plan.
(4) A list of steps proposed to minimize environmental damage to the site
and region during construction and operation. The consideration of
soil erosion, preservation of trees, protection of water courses,
protection of air resources, and noise control are some factors to be
considered.
(5) Evidence that the environmental impact statement was prepared by a
professional, competent in the field of concern, i.e., a soils engineer
for excavation or soils problems, a geologist or geo-technical
consultant for undermining and land sliding problems, etc.
16.4 Waiver of Environmental Report Requirement - The Planing Commission may waive the
requirement for an Environmental Impact Statement upon recommendation from the
Department of Planning and Economic Development, and if an applicant requests a waiver
in writing, and further, provided said development meets all the standards of the zoning
ordinance, will be served by both public water and sewer systems, does not involve the
relocation, improvement or alteration of any stream way, and no portion of the site is located
with a flood hazard or floor-prone area as designated by the United States Geological
Survey.
16.5 Waiver of Requirements - Provided the site plan application is in conformance with all other
applicable municipal ordinances, that the applicant has requested such in writing, and that the
Department of Planning and Economic Development has made a recommendation, the
Planning Commission may waive, alter, or reduce any requirement or standard of this
ordinance under the following circumstances:
(1) Suitable alternative - whenever a proposal presents an alternative which conforms to
the spirit and intention of this ordinance.
(2) Unusual site characteristics - whenever a physical feature may exist on or adjacent to
the site which prevents a literal conformance to requirements or standards.
16.6 Request for Additional Information - Whenever it is determined by the Department of
Planning and Economic Development and/or the Planning Commission that additional
information is needed in order to make a proper decision related to the site plan application,
the applicant will be informed of such and the information must be provided at the
applicant’s expense before the application will be considered complete.
155
16.7 Additional Requirements - Whenever unusual circumstances arise not normally considered
by requirements and standards, the Planning Commission may impose conditions upon
application approvals that are consistent with the purpose and objectives of this ordinance.
16.8 Submissions
16.8.A. The applicant shall submit to the Department of Planning and Economic
Development with five (5) copies:
(1) A site plan or plans, drawn at a scale adequate to show clearly the
following:
a. The dimensions, orientation and acreage of such lot or plot to be
built upon or otherwise used.
b. Location and dimensions of present and proposed street and highway
dedications.
c. Location of adjacent property lines and names of owners.
d. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed utilities and
utility easements.
e. Indication of existing zoning.
f. Location of existing streams or watercourses and an indication of
existing and proposed storm water drainage patterns.
g. The seal of a registered surveyor.
h. Layout of the entire project and its relation to surrounding properties
and the existing buildings thereon.
i. All existing and proposed topography at two-foot intervals when
average site slope is less than 10%. When average site slope is
greater than 10% contour intervals of five (5) feet are required.
j. Location and design of proposed circulation system, both vehicular
and pedestrian, including dimensions and specified materials.
k. The size, shape and location of existing and proposed construction.
l. The seal of a registered architect or landscape architect.
156
(2) A landscape plan and/or plans drawn at a scale adequate to show
clearly the following:
a. Location of existing natural features, including streams or watercourses,
wooded areas, ground cover, any other important
natural features, and individual trees of four-inch (4") caliper, or
greater.
b. Location of all proposed landscaping, including trees, shrubs, and
ground cover, with an indication of types and sizes.
c. Indication of location and types of exterior lighting adequate to
determine its character and to enable review of possible hazards
and disturbances to the public and to adjacent properties.
d. Location, size and design of exterior signs and outdoor advertising.
e. Location of walls, fences, or railings and an indication of their
height and materials of construction.
f. The seal of a registered architect or landscape architect.
All of the above shall, whenever possible, be presented on the
standard 24” x 36" sheet at a scale of not less than 1"=50', nor
greater than 1"=10'. Each sheet shall bear the signature of the
applicant and an appropriate location for the signature of the
Director of the Department of Planning and Economic Development
and the Chairman of the Planning Commission.
16.8.B. A completed application form as provided by the Department of Planning and
Economic Development.
16.8.C. The appropriate fees payable to the Municipality of Penn Hills.
16.9 Fees, Stages of Inquiry, Time Limitations
16.9.A. Fees -
In order to offset the municipal costs of advertising, posting, reviews, etc.,
applications for Site Plan Approval must be accompanied by a fee as
established by the Council. (See Municipal Schedule of Fees).
157
Fees paid for Preliminary Site Plan Approval may be credited toward Final
Site Plan submissions, Conditional Use applications and Subdivision
applications, but not toward variances, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance
or other jurisdictions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
16.9.B. States of Inquiry
(1) Advisory Meeting - Prior to filing an application for Site Plan
Approval, the owner and/or a designated agent shall meet with the
Department of Planning and Economic Development. Requirements
of this ordinance, the relationship to the overall Comprehensive Plan,
and other developments either existing or proposed, and any unique
features regarding the proposed development, should be determined
in advance of formal application.
(2) Preliminary Site Plan Approval - The applicant or applicant’s agent,
is entitled to request Preliminary Site Plan Approval at any stage of
design. The Planning Commission shall act on all matters that can
reasonably be evaluated on the submission as they appear, and shall
expressly reserve action on any aspects of development that cannot
be assessed until later stages in the design process.
Those items that are once approved cannot be reopened at later
sessions. The only topics to be treated at later stages for the same
project are those that were impossible to resolve on the earlier
submissions. The applicant may choose to bypass preliminary
approval and apply directly for Final Site Plan Approval.
(3) Final Site Plan Approval - The Planning Commission will
conditionally approve, approve with minor conditions, or disapprove
an application on the submissions described in Section 16.8 of this
ordinance, their relationship to the standards and requirements as
described in Section 10, and the policies, purposes, and objectives of
this ordinance.
16.9.C. Time Limitations
(1) The Department of Planning and Economic Development shall
submit its recommendation and report to the Planning Commission
within thirty (30) days of any full and complete submission, and shall
schedule a hearing before the Planning Commission within forty (40)
days of any full and complete submission.
158
(2) The Planning Commission will meet within ninety (90) days of
hearing on the submission.
(3) If, upon ninety (90) days after a full and complete submission has
been filed, the Planning Commission has reached no decision, the
proposal shall be treated as if approved.
(4) Upon written notification of Site Plan Approval, the applicant will
have twelve (12) months in which to apply for grading and building
permits. If, after twelve (12) months, these applications have not
been submitted, the Site Plan Approval shall be null and void.
16.10 Rights of Public to Attend Proceedings, Public Notice, Conflicts of Interest, Minor Changes
After Approval, Appeals and Site Plan Conformance
16.10.A. Rights of Public to Attend Proceedings - All meetings of the Planning
Commission shall be open to the public and to the applicant and applicant’s
agent, and any person who has a legitimate interest in the outcome may
testify before the Planning Commission.
16.10.B. Notice - Entitlement to, and method and time of notice under this ordinance,
shall be determined by the Planning Department in consultation with the
municipal solicitor. Notice should be calculated to reach all interested
members of the community in sufficient time to enable them to participate
meaningfully in the Council proceedings, and at the same time avoid undue
expense and delay to the developer. For this purpose, notice may be had by
posting, through advertisements in newspapers of general circulation and
readership, by postcards or any other means approved by the Planning
Department and the solicitor.
Any person or organization desiring to be notified of any or all hearings held
pursuant to a submission required by this ordinance, shall be entitled to notice
by filing a request with the Planning Department and paying a fee reasonably
calculated to meet the cost of such notice.
16.10.C. Conflicts of Interest - All members shall be entitled to vote, provided,
however, no member shall participate in reviewing, or vote on any work of
which he, or any partner or professional associate, is the author, or in which
he, or they, have any direct or indirect financial interest.
159
16.10.D. Minor Changes After Approval - It is understood that from time to time
certain minor changes will be necessary to alter approved site plans due to
unforeseen circumstances which may arise during the construction period.
These minor changes may be approved by the Planning Department in the
same manner as exemptions, as prescribed in Section 16.2.E. of this
ordinance.
16.10.E. Appeals - All appeals are to be filed in accordance with the provisions set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170, 1988, as
amended.
Whenever the Planning Commission shall approve a submission either
wholly or with conditions, or whenever the Chairman of the Planning
Commission shall exempt a submission from review, any interested person or
group of persons shall have the right to appeal and be heard before the
Council.
The time for filing an notice of appeal with the Planning Department shall be
fourteen (14) days after the Planning Commission renders the decision. Each
filing shall be accompanied by a check or money order for $200 to cover the
costs of appeal.
16.10.F. Site Plan Conformance - Failure to comply with any of the conditions of site
plan approval subsequent to the receipt of a building permit, grading permit,
zoning permit, or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, shall be
construed to be a violation of this ordinance and shall be grounds for
revocation of any building, grading, or zoning permit, or certificate of
occupancy. A written notice of revocation sent by certified mail by the
zoning officer, requiring compliance with the conditions of site plan approval
within a five-day period, shall effectively revoke said permit if compliance is
not achieved within that time period.
16.10.G. Temporary Occupancy Permit - Situations may arise in which a building has
been constructed and is safe and otherwise ready for occupancy, but does not
meet all of the conditions of the approved site plan. These circumstances
may result through no fault of the applicant, but are caused by snow,
inclement weather, contracting problems, etc. In these instances, where
landscaping, sidewalks or other site plan conditions cannot be completed but
the building is ready for occupancy, the Zoning Officer may issue a
temporary occupancy permit.
A written request for a temporary occupancy permit shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer by the applicant. The request shall explain the reasons for the
160
applicant’s inability to comply at that time with the site plan conditions and
shall give an estimated date when full compliance will occur.
Within ten (10) days after receiving the request, the Zoning Officer shall
either approve or deny the temporary occupancy permit. If the request is
denied, Section 16.10.F. of this ordinance shall apply.
If the request is approved, the Zoning Officer may issue a temporary
occupancy permit for a period of time which shall not exceed 180 (one
hundred eighty) days. In granting approval, the Zoning Officer may require
any of the following:
(1) A bond to cover the cost of improvements necessary for site plan
approval. The amount of the bond is to be determined by the
Municipal Engineer or the Zoning Officer.
(2) A cast amount to cover the cost of improvements given to the
Municipality and held in escrow.
(3) A copy of a contract between the applicant and contractor for the
work to be performed.
Upon completion of the necessary improvements or at the
expiration of the temporary occupancy permit, the applicant shall
apply for a final occupancy permit.
Failure to comply with the conditions of site plan approval by the
expiration of the temporary occupancy permit constitutes a
violation of this ordinance, and the enforcement penalties as stated
in Section 1.5 of this ordinance shall apply.
161
SECTION 17 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
17.1 Interpretation - The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Section shall be
made pursuant to and by authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
170, as well as pursuant to the Penn Hills Comprehensive Plan, adopted by the Mayor and
Council, so that the community may develop in an orderly and well considered manner; it
being the intention of the Mayor and Council and they do hereby declare that the
Municipality of Penn Hills is, and in the future, shall be developed primarily as a residential
community.
17.2 Introduction - The purpose of this Section is to encourage innovation in residential
development so that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type,
design, and layout of dwellings and other structures, and by the conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses; so that greater opportunities
for better housing and recreation may extend to all residents of Penn Hills.
17.3 Decision Making Power - The Planning Commission shall have the power to administer the
Planned Residential Development provisions pursuant to the provisions of this Section and
ordinance.
17.4 Permitted Uses
17.4.A. Permitted Principle Uses
(1) Single-family detached dwellings
(2) Two-family detached dwellings or duplexes
(3) Townhouses
(4) Walk-up garden apartment buildings
(5) High-rise apartments
17.4.B. Permitted Accessory Uses
(1) Private or group garages and parking areas.
(2) Structures or facilities to serve the Planned Residential Development
only, but not including any commercial structures or uses, as such
uses are not permitted in a Planned Residential Development.
162
(3) Community assembly hall, recreation center, recreational facilities,
and/or membership clubhouse related to the Planned Residential
Development. The recreation center and recreational facilities may
consist of any of the recreational uses permitted in residential
districts, referenced in Section 3.2 of this ordinance.
17.5 Approval Procedures - It is the intention of this procedure to encourage and assist developers
in their design using modern planning practice, as well as to provide the shortest and most
flexible procedures and, at the same time, protect the community against undesirable
conditions. Another purpose of this procedure is to create an undisputable legal base for
property descriptions for both the developer as well as the Municipality and its citizens.
17.5.A. Pre-Application Consultation - Before any design or engineering work and
before any formal application, the applicant may consult with the Planning
Department concerning the following information relative to the
Development:
(1) Type of development on the particular site
(2) Access to and from the site
(3) Public facilities - Such as sanitary and storm sewers, water supply,
schools and parks, police and fire protection, etc.
(4) Other agencies involved in obtaining all permits for the development
(5) Sketch Plan - showing the full property, type, size, and location of all
buildings included in the development with the proposed street and
sewer patterns, and the location and intended use of any common
open space for public use.
(6) Location Map - Showing the relation of the proposed development to
existing community facilities within and in the area of development
influence beyond the property lines. The following features shall be
included:
a. Traffic arteries (highways and streets)
b. Public transportation lines
c. Existing schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public sites
d. Shopping centers
e. Other commercial enterprises
f. Natural water courses and drainage areas
g. Topography of site
163
17.5.B. Application for Tentative Approval
(1) An application for tentative approval shall include a development
plan for a Planned Residential Development and shall be filed by or
on behalf of the landowner or, if several adjacent parcels are included
in the plan, one application shall be filed by a single development
ownership organization formed by all the landowners, which
organization shall then be known as the landowner.
(2) Twelve (12) prints of site map showing:
a. Contours of property and one hundred (100) feet beyond, at
vertical intervals of two (2) feet of the general slope if the site
is less than ten percent (10%), and at intervals of five (5) feet
if the general slope is greater than ten percent (10%). The
Planning Department may relieve the land owner of providing
contours beyond the property if, on prior discussion with the
Planning Department, setting forth his reasons, the Planning
Department was of the opinion that contours are not necessary
in order to administer these regulations properly in connection
with the Development.
b. Terrain features, wooded areas, buildings, and other natural or
artificial features, which would affect the plan of the Development,
as well as structures planned and a statement deemed to
be appropriate concerning non-residential uses of buildings.
c. Contours at intervals of two (2) feet of all grades to be altered.
d. Tract boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings, and corners.
e. Streets and rights-of-way on adjoining site, showing roadway
widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of pavements,
curbs, sidewalks, and other pertinent data.
f. Easements - Location, widths, and purposes.
g. Utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage
facilities, water lines, fire hydrants, gas mains, street lighting,
electric utilities and other facilities. Size or capacity of each
should be shown and the locations of or distance to such existing
utility indicated. All utilities, including all types of trans164
mission lines, to be underground except at outdoor meters or
other necessary equipment. This includes but is not limited to
all electric power feeders and telephone lines.
h. Existing use of adjacent land within two hundred (200) feet of
the proposed subdivision and other conditions on the adjacent
land including: approximate direction and gradient of ground
slope, including embankments or retaining walls, character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, gas lines, towers,
and other nearby non-residential land uses or adverse influences,
owners of adjacent land, and its zoning use classification.
i. Areas of past, present, or anticipated ponding or overflow of
flood or storm waters.
j. Other features or conditions which would affect the Development
Favorable or adversely, including previous or new cut and/or fill
Areas. (Refer to Ordinance No. 1280)
k. Title, graphic scale, north point, and date.
l. Subsurface conditions or tract including information re-grading
past mining activity, remaining mineable material, and future
possibility of mine activity, as well as burning mine fires, and
whether the mineral rights to the property have been deeded out
or leased to other persons or parties. Landowners must provide
this information from the State Bureau of Mines records showing
subsurface conditions. Evidence shall be required of having
requested such information and information showing acceptable
conditions must be provided before tentative approval may be
granted.
m. Site map shall be drawn to scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch,
if practical or, one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch if
necessary. The site map shall be twenty-four (24) by thirty-six
(36) inches in size, or made in multiples of this size and cut along
match lines.
(3) Landowner shall request from the Allegheny County Planning
Department a report from the United States Conservation Service
concerning soil conditions. One (1) copy of this report shall be
required for consideration of preliminary plat approval.
165
(4) Twelve (12) prints of a preliminary plat of the Development shall be
drawn to a scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch and may be part of
the site map if it is to this scale. Sheet size information for the site
map shall apply to the Preliminary Plat which shall show:
a. Proposed name of Development.
b. Names and addresses of landowner, developer, land planning
consultant, engineer, surveyor, and/or others who are associated with
the Development.
c. Street patterns, showing the names and widths of right-of-way
of streets and approximate grades. The street lines shall be oneone
hundredth (1/100) of a foot. Curving lines should have the
radii, center angles, and the arc distances.
d. Layout of structures, showing dimension numbers, location,
height, and use.
e. Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for common open
space, schools, parks, playgrounds or public, semi-public or
community purposes. Sizes are to be specified as well as proposed
development and development schedule of each.
f. Key plan, legend, and notes.
g. Building setback or front yard lines.
h. Screening and outdoor lighting plans.
i. Title, graphic scale, north point, and date.
j. Arrangement of parking and loading areas.
k. Boundary of the Plan in heavy line, with courses and distances
to the nearest one-one hundredth (1/100) of a foot, based upon
an accurate field survey, which must be balanced and closed.
(5) Twelve (12) prints of engineering plans showing profiles, typical
cross-sections and specifications for proposed street improvements,
and profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation of
utility distribution systems. Cross section of street right-of-ways are
also to show all types of transmission line locations. Scale used shall
166
provide for clarity of information displayed. The sewage systems
data shall include the first of the following two items:
a. A report on the feasibility of connections to any existing or proposed
public sanitary sewage and storm drainage system shall be
made. This study shall include the distance from the nearest
existing or proposed system intended to handle the additional
sewage or storm drainage load.
b. Evidence shall be required of having submitted to the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources,
a formal application for a permit as required by the laws of the
Commonwealth.
(6) A Written Report Indicating
a. Density of land use (dwelling-unit density) to be allocated to
various parts of the site, such parts to be outlined on the map.
b. The landowner or form of organization proposed to own the
development and maintain the common open space.
c. The substance of any covenants, grants, easements, or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of lands or buildings in
the development or required for adjacent properties.
d. A development schedule showing the approximate dates when
the developer proposes to make application for final approval
of various segments to be outlines on the plan and such schedule
to be updated annually on the anniversary of its initial approval.
e. A statement prepared by the landowner setting forth the reasons
why, in his opinion, a Planned Residential Development on his
site would be in the public interest and would be consistent with
the Community Development objectives of Penn Hills.
f. Deviation from zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise
applicable to the property.
g. Impact of the Development on the neighborhood as well as on
the local and general road network in the Municipality.
h. Impact of sanitary sewage to Municipal sanitary system and of
167
storm water on adjacent properties and continuing stream beds.
17.5.D. Request for Additional Information - when it is determined by the Planning
Department or Planning Commission that additional information is needed in
order to make a proper decision related to the Planned Residential
Development application, the applicant will be informed of such and the
information must be provided at the applicant’s expense before the
application will be considered complete.
17.5.E. Waiver Requirements - Provided the Planned Residential Development
application is in conformance with all other applicable ordinances, that the
applicant has requested such in writing, and that the Planning Department has
made a recommendation, the Planning Commission may waive, alter or
reduce any requirement or standard of this Planned Residential Development
section.
17.5.F. Fees, County Review, Completeness of Application, and Approval of Unique
Conditions -
(1) Fees - The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as
determined from time to time by Council resolution.
(2) County Review - All applications for tentative approval of Planned
Residential Developments shall be referred by the Planning
Department to the Allegheny County Planning Department for study
and recommendation and such planning agency shall be required to
report to the Penn Hills Planning Department within thirty (30) days
or forfeit the right to review.
(3) Completeness of Application - An application for tentative approval
shall not be considered as having been made until all information
required by this ordinance for such application is received by the
Planning Department.
(4) Approval of Unique Conditions - Upon the recommendation of the
Planning Department, the Planning Commission may approve such
changes made necessary by unique land conditions when such
changes are consistent with the stated intent of this ordinance.
17.5.G. Tentative Approval Proceedings
(1) Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a Planned Residential Development pursuant to this
168
Article, a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said application
shall be held by the Planning Commission in the manner prescribed in
Section IX of Act 170, the Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) The Planning Commission may continue the hearing from time to
time and may refer the matter back to the Planning Department for a
report provided, however, that in any event the public hearing or
hearings shall be concluded within sixty (60) days after the date of the
first public hearing.
(3) The Planning Commission, within sixty (60) days following the
conclusion of the public hearing provided for in this Article, shall, by
official written communication to the landowner, either:
a. Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted.
b. Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included
in the development plan as submitted, or
c. Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
(4) Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that the tentative approval is granted, subject to
conditions, the landowner may, within thirty (30) days after receiving
a copy of the official written communication of the Planning
Commission, notify the Planning Commission of his refusal to accept
all said conditions, in which case, the Planning Commission shall be
deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan.
In the event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify the
Planning Commission of his refusal to accept all said conditions,
tentative approval of the development plan, with all said conditions,
shall stand as granted.
(5) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in public interest including
but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the following:
a. In those respects in which the development plan is or is not con169
sistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Municipality.
b. The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in
the pubic interest.
c. The purpose, location, and amount of the common open space in
the Planned Residential Development, the reliability of the proposals
for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose
of the common open space as related to the proposed
density and type of residential development. Also details on
portions to be conveyed in ownership to the Municipality.
d. The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic
and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment.
e. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed Planned
Residential Development to the neighborhood in which it is
Proposed to be established.
f. In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the Planned Residential Development in the integrity of the
development plan.
(6) In the event of a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Planning Commission may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application
for final approval of the development plan shall be filed, or in the
case of a development plan which provides for development over a
period of years, the periods of time within which application for final
approval of each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent
of the landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative
approval and application for final approval shall not be less than three
(3) months, and, in the case of developments over a period of years,
170
the time between applications for final approval of each part of a plan
shall not be less than twelve (12) months.
(7) Status of Plan after Tentative Approval
a. The official written communication provided for in this section
shall be certified by the Manager of the Municipality and shall
be filed in his office and a certified copy shall be mailed to the
landowner. Whereas, tentative approval has been granted, the
same shall be noted on the zoning map.
b. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat
of the Planned Residential Development for recording nor authorize
development of the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as
submitted, or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any
of the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not be modified
or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of Penn Hills
municipality pending an application or applications for final
approval, without the consent of the landowner, provided an
application for final approval is filed or, in the case of development
or applications over a period of years, provided applications
are filed, within the periods of time specified in the official
written communications granting tentative approval.
(8) In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Planning
Department in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file
application or application for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval
shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not
been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and the
same shall be noted on the zoning map and in the records of the
Municipal Deputy Clerk.
17.5.H. Application for Final Approval
(1) An application for final approval may be for all the land included in
171
the development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to the
Planning Commission within the time or times specified by the
official written communication granting tentative approval.
Application for final approval shall be accompanied by:
a. Twelve (12) copies of a final plan, one (1) copy certified by a
registered engineer showing the final location and widths of all
streets, the location and size of all buildings, parking areas,
pedestrian ways, utility easements, lot lines, the location and size
of all open space not devoted to parking lots, streets, or driveways,
the proposed use of all lands and buildings and the mete
and bounds of all proposed dedicated areas and lots.
b. The application shall contain, for the area for which final approval
Is sought, all requirements of the development plan and written
reports necessary to obtain tentative approval.
c. Covenants executed by all owners of the premises within the
section covered by the final plan which, if approved, shall be
recorded in the Recorder’s Office of Allegheny County. The
restrictive covenants shall be effective for a period of thirty-five
(35) years, except reference to parks, recreation, and other open
space areas shall provide that the same remain as such perpetually.
d. Construction documents for the building of streets, sidewalks,
parking areas, sewer lines, water lines, and recreation areas.
e. A certified performance bond running in favor of Municipality of
Penn Hills or other financial security as provided under Section
6.9 of Ordinance #2044 for the amount of construction of streets,
sidewalks, parking areas, sewer lines, water lines, and recreation
areas, such amount being established by the Municipal Engineer
and approved by the Planning Department, and an inspection fee
in the amount of one percent (1%) of the bond amount payable
to the Municipality of Penn Hills.
f. Rights of easement, in the form in which they will be filed as legal
documents, affecting development.
g. Any additional conditions set forth at the time of tentative
approval, including the development schedule if only a section of
the development is submitted for final approval.
172
h. Maintenance agreement between the landowner (or development
ownership organization) and the Municipality for all areas of
development, including but such agreement that the development
will be adequately maintained so as not to create a public
nuisances or liability to the Municipality.
(2) A public hearing on the application for final approval of the
development plan, or part thereof, shall not be required provided the
development plan, or the part thereof, submitted for final approval, is
in compliance with the development plan theretofore given tentative
approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto.
(3) In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together
with all drawings, specifications, and other documents in support
thereof, and as required by the ordinance and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Planning Commission shall,
within forty-five (45) days of such filing, grant such development
plan final approval.
(4) In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Planning
Commission may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within
forty-five (45) days from the filing of the application for final
approval, so advise the landowner in writing of said refusal setting
forth in said notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are
not in the public interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner
may either:
a. Re-file his application for final approval without the variations
objected, or,
b. File a written request with the Council that is hold a public hearing
on his application for final approval. If the landowner wishes
to take either such alternate action he may do so at any time within
Which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or within
thirty (30) additional days if the time for applying for final
approval shall have already passed at the time when the landowner
was advised that the development plan was not in substantial
compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take
either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be
deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such
public notice hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice with173
in thirty (30) days after request for the hearing is made by the
landowner, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in this Article for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion
of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall by official written
communication either grant final approval to the development
plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval
of the development plan shall, in cases arising under this Article,
be in the form and contain the findings required for an application
for tentative approval set forth in this Article.
(5) A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the approving body
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County before any
development shall take place in accordance herewith. Upon the filing
of record of the development plan the zoning and subdivision
regulations applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to
apply thereto.
Pending completion within the time limit set by the Planning
Commission of said Planned Residential Development or of that part
thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provision of said development plat, or part
thereof, as finally approved, shall be made excerpt with the consent of
the landowner. Upon approval of a final plat the developer shall
record the plat in accordance with the provisions of Section 513(a) of
the Municipalities Planning Code, and post financial security in
accordance with Section 6.9 of Ordinance 2044.
(6) In the event that a development plan or a section thereof, is given
final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such plan
or the section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so
notify the approving body in writing, or, in the event the landowner
shall fail to commence and carry out the Planned Residential
Development in accordance with the time provisions stated in Section
508 of the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170, 1988 as amended,
after final approval has been granted, no development or further
development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after the said property is reclassification by
enactment of an amendment to the municipal zoning ordinance in the
manner prescribed for such amendments in Section 14.6 of this
ordinance.
174
a. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and
structures and other similar minor changes may be authorized by
the Planning Department if required engineering or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final development plan was
approved.
b. All other changes in use, any rearrangement of lots, block, and
building tracts, any changes in the provision of common open
spaces, and all other changes in the approved final development
plan must be made by the Planning Commission, under the procedures
authorized for the amendment of the zoning map. No
amendments may be made in the approved final development
plan unless they are shown to be required by changes in condition
that have occurred since the final development plan was approve
or by changes in the development.
17.5.I. Enforcement Remedies - See Section 712.2 of the Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 170, 1988, as amended.
17.5.J. Appeals Procedure - Any decision of the Planning Commission granting or
denying tentative or final approval of a Planned Residential Development
plan can be appealed in accordance with the provisions set forth in the
Municipalities Code, Act 170, 1988, as amended.
17.6 Use Requirements
17.6.A. Requirements and Approvals - A Planned Residential Development may be
located in any residentially zoned area, or combination of residentially zoned
areas. Notwithstanding restrictions as to permitted principal uses and
permitted principal uses dwelling unit density shall not exceed approved
maximum densities as established by the zoning ordinance for the particular
district in which the Planed Residential Development is located in two (2) or
more zoning districts, an overall site density may be established on a prorated
basis. Each Planned Residential Development shall include the various uses
in an aesthetically pleasing proportion of each consistent with restraints
specified in this section and as recommended by the Planning Department
and approved the Planning Commission. In addition to the principle
permitted uses, the Development shall include permitted accessory uses.
17.6.B. Permitted Principle Uses Dwelling Unit Percentages - Of the total dwelling
units to be provided in a development, no more than fifty (50) percent shall
be high-rise, garden-apartment dwelling units, and no less than fifty (50)
percent shall be one of, or a combination of, the following: single-family
175
dwelling units, double-family dwelling units, townhouse dwelling units.
17.6.C. Performance Standards, Codes, and Associated Requirements - Planned
Residential Developments must meet the performance standards identified in
Section 10 of this ordinance and Section 8.20 and 8.21 as recreational and
open accordance with Section 5.6 of this ordinance.
17.6.D. Area, Density, Access, and Ownership
(1) Area - The area of land to be developed as a Planned Residential
Development shall not be less than ten (10) acres.
(2) Developments designed solely as single-family and/or two-family
and/or townhouses may not exceed the stated single-family density
of the zoning classification in which the Planned Residential
Development is located.
(3) Finish - Contoured land in excess of twenty-five (25) percent slope
and up to forty (40) percent slope shall be allowed only two-thirds
(2/3) density credit (one actual acre equals (2/3 gross acre) and land
over forty (40) percent slope shall be allowed only one-third (1/3)
density credit when determining gross site area.
(4) The Planning Commission may decline or refuse to allow maximum
density normally permitted if they consider that such density would
create inconvenient or unsafe access to the Planned Residential
Development, create traffic congestion in the streets which adjoins
the Planned Residential Development, exhibit poor design or
planning, or create other problems as determined by any reviewing
boards, including but not limited to the Planning Department, the
Allegheny County Conservation District, or an architect, landscape
architect, code enforcement officer, or engineer.
(5) The tract or parcel of land must be either in one ownership or the
subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all property
included wherein all joint owners signify having formed a single
development ownership organization. All portions of the
development shall forever remain under single ownership or a single
development ownership organization, except for such portions for
which ownership is conveyed to Penn Hills Municipality.
17.6.E. Setback, Coverage, Height Restrictions
176
(1) Setback - A Planned Residential Development may be developed
with the utmost flexibility in terms of bulk and area regulations
including zero front, side, and rear yard setbacks within the complex.
Setbacks for all structures shall be required from peripheral
boundaries only, and shall be twenty-five (25) feet for a one story
structure and an additional five (5) feet for each additional story.
(2) Maximum Building Coverage - The maximum building coverage
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site area. The
gross site area shall be all that area within the metes and bounds
description, reduced as necessary by excess slope restrictions.
(3) The Maximum Height for any structure within a Planned Residential
Development is one hundred (100) feet.
17.6.F. Area Devoted to Residential Units, and Open Space
(1) A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the gross site area shall be set
aside as open space and usable recreational areas, for use by the
residents of the Planned Residential Development. However, if the
open space is accepted by the Municipality of Penn Hills, the
Municipality, at its option, may allow the open space to be available
for use by the public.
(2) The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space
shall be provided in a manner to meet the needs of the Planned Unit
Residential Development and shall be consistent with the
Municipalities open space standards.
(3) Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational
purposes. The uses intended for the common open space must be
appropriated to the scale and character of the Planned Residential
Development, considering its size, density, expected population,
topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.
(4) Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use,
but common open space containing natural features, existing trees and
ground cover, worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The
buildings, structures, and improvements which are permitted in the
common open space shall be appropriate to the uses which are
authorized for the common open space and shall conserve and
enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard to its
topography and unimproved condition.
177
17.6.G. Required Improvements - All improvements required under Section 7 of
Ordinance No. 2044 are also required for Planned Residential Developments.
17.6.H. Utilities -
Water - If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the Planned
Residential Development, applicants shall present evidence to the Planning
Department and Planning Commission that the Planned Residential
Development is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide
cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation,
authority, or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement, or a commitment
for agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
17.7 Common Open Space
17.7.A. Conveyance of Ownership and Maintenance
The Municipality may, at any time and from time to time, accept the
dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and maintenance, but
the Municipality need not require, as a condition of a Planned Residential
Development, that land proposed to be set aside for common open space be
dedicated or made available to public use. The Municipality may also require
that the landowner provide for and establish an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space, and that such
organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the common open
space, by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the common open space) without first
offering to dedicate the same to the public.
17.7.B. Maintenance
(1) In the event that the organization establishment to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any time
after establishment of the Planned Residential Development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Municipality may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the
Planned Residential Development setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
178
reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within thirty (30) days
thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which
shall be held within fourteen (14) days of the notice. At such hearing,
the Municipality may modify the terms of the original notice as to the
deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which they
shall be corrected.
(2) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said thirty (30)
days or any extension thereof, the Municipality, in order to preserve
the taxable values of the properties within the Planned Residential
Development and to prevent the common open space from becoming
a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one (1) year. Said maintenance by
the Municipality shall not constitute a taking of said common open
space, nor vest in the public any rights to use the same.
(3) Before the expiration of said year, the Municipality shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a
public hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the residents of
the Planned Residential Development, to be held by the governing
body or its designated agency, at which hearing such organization of
the residents of the Planned Residential Development, to be held by
the governing body or its designated agency, at which hearing such
organization or the residents of the Planned Residential Development
shall show cause why such maintenance by the Municipality shall not,
at the option of the Municipality, continue for a succeeding year. If
the governing body, or its designated agency, shall determine that
such organization is ready and able to maintain said common open
space in reasonable condition, the Municipality shall cease to
maintain said common open space at the end of said year. If the
governing body or its designated agency shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Municipality may, it its
discretion, continue to maintain said common open space during the
next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter.
(4) The decision of the governing body or its designated agency shall be
subject to appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same
time limitation, as is provided for zoning appeals by this act.
179
(5) The cost of such maintenance by the Municipality shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the Planned Residential
Development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space, and shall become a lien on said properties. The Municipality
at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose
of maintenance shall file a notice of lien in the office of the
prothonotary of the county, upon the properties affected by the lien
within the Planned Residential Development.
180
SECTION 18 EASTGATE DISTRICT
18.1 Purpose - Whereas the Eastgate District lies within an area that has been legally certified as
blighted and in need of redeveloping, the purpose of this ordinance is to encourage economic
growth in line with the goals of the Municipality of Penn Hills and the Community
Development Objectives listed in Section 18.2.
18.2 Community Development Objectives
1. Encourage new commercial investments and light industrial development along the
Frankstown Road and Robinson Boulevard corridors;
2. Connect local residents to employment opportunities;
3. Create opportunities for senior, youth and family recreation; and
4. Eliminate existing blighting influences.
18.3 Conflicts With Other Provisions
Unless specifically regulated in this Section 18, all other applicable provisions of Section 1,
Section 2, Section 3, Section 4, Section 9.2, Section 9.3, Section 10.4, Section 10.6, Section
10.7, Section 10.9, Section 10.17, Section 14, Section 15, and Section 16 shall also apply to
all uses and all lots and lands within the Eastgate District (EGD).
18.4 Severability
The provisions of this Section 18 are severable. Any section, paragraph, phrase, sentence,
word or other part hereof, which may be found unconstitutional, illegal, unenforceable or
otherwise invalid, shall not invalidate any other provisions of this Section 18, which shall
remain in full force and effect.
18.5 Definitions
18.5.A. Application - Notwithstanding other conflicting definitions which may be contained
in Section 3 of the Zoning Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall
have the specific meanings indicated herein for the purpose of interpreting
this Section 18, and shall apply specifically to the EGD.
(1) Definitions
1. Accessory Use - A use clearly and customarily incidental and
181
subordinate to a principal permitted use. Accessory uses
permitted in the EGD are listed in Section 18.6.B.
2. Child Care Center - A place or child care arrangement, which
is intended for the care of children, that provides care and
educational programs to six (6) or more children who are not
related to the operator, and that receives a payment, fee or
grant for any of the children in child care. Such facilities shall
be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare (DPW), and must be operated in accordance with the
requirements of the DPW.
3. Commercial Development, Planned - A group or cluster of
commercial businesses, uses, and structures, primarily retail
establishments, which is planned, developed, owned and
managed as a unit, including shopping centers, enclosed
malls, strip malls, farmers markets, antique malls and similar
uses.
4. Community Facility - A facility operated by a non-profit
agency or organization, which is open to the general public,
and is intended and designed for educational, recreational,
leisure-time or other similar purposes.
5. Distribution Facilities - Any establishment in which goods
manufactured on-site or off-site are stored temporarily for the
purpose of being picked up for delivery to retail or wholesale
establishments or other end-users. Such businesses shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
6. Employee Cafeteria/Dining Room - A food service facility
located within a business, including cafeterias and dining
rooms that serve the employees of that business and their
guests. Outdoor employee picnic/areas may also be included,
as part of an approved landscape and/or open space plan.
7. Financial Institutions - Banks, including drive-thru banking
services, savings and loans associations, credit unions, bank
processing centers and other similar financial institutions.
8. Gas Station - A commercial establishment, intended primarily
for the selling of petroleum fuels and other petroleum-based
products to passenger vehicles, which may include an
182
ancillary convenience store, but shall not include repair and/or
washing of vehicles.
9. Gross Floor Area (GFA) - The total area of a building, equal
to the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building, measured between the exterior faces of the exterior
building walls; or from the centerline of the wall
separating two (2) attached buildings (party wall).
10.Industry, Light - A use engaged in the manufacture, primarily
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including the processing, fabrication, treatment,
assembly and packaging of materials and products, and
incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but
not including basic industrial processing. Light industry uses
permitted under this Section 18 typically do not, and shall not,
create or produce noise or vibration that has a measurable
effect on adjoining property, air or water pollution, fire
hazards, noxious emissions or other similar conditions, which
may endanger or disturb other properties.
11.Industry, Heavy - Those uses listed under Section 7.3.A, and
any other industry or activity which produces hazardous
wastes or substances subject to regulations promulgated under
Section 3001 of the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976, as amended (P.L. 94-580), or any
subsequent Federal or Commonwealth statute or regulation.
12.Lot Coverage - The total amount of all impervious surfaces,
including pavement, buildings and other structures. For the
purposes of this Section 18, lot coverage shall be expressed as
a percent of the total lot area.
13.Manufacturing, Pilot - An establishment, or part thereof, used
to test concepts and ideas, to determine physical layouts,
materials flows and processes, types of equipment required,
costs and other necessary information prior to undertaking
full-scale production.
14.Offices, Business, Medical and Professional - The office of an
accountant, architect, attorney, dentist, doctor, engineer,
insurance broker, real estate agent, travel agent, veterinarian
(but not including boarding kennels), or other similar
183
professional person or office; and/or any office used for
accounting, administration, clerical services, communications,
drafting, editing or research.
15.Recreation, Commercial - A commercial business
establishment, indoors or outdoors, for active or passive
leisure-time activities and entertainment, including bowling
alleys, skating rinks, commercial play facilities intended for
children, movie theaters, and health and exercise centers.
16.Recycling Facility - A facility intended for the collecting,
sorting, processing and/or consolidating of recyclable
materials, for onsite treatment or for distribution to other
facilities. For the purposes of this Section 18, recycling
facilities shall include trash transfer stations and junkyards.
17.Research and Development Facility - An establishment,
including laboratories and testing facilities, which conducts
investigations and research in natural, physical, social or
medical sciences, and/or in engineering and development,
primarily for the purpose of developing and/or testing end
products. Such facilities may include supporting storage and
shipping facilities, and/or pilot manufacturing, as defined
herein.
18.Restaurants, Conventional - An eating establishment where
food is sold primarily for on-premises consumption, to
patrons seated at tables and/or at counters. Conventional
restaurants may include bakeries, coffee shops, sidewalk
cafes, delicatessens and ice cream parlors, where seating is
provided for on-premises consumption of the specialty food
and/or beverage. Conventional restaurants shall not include
establishments where food service is incidental or subordinate
to the serving of alcoholic beverages, or fast-food restaurants.
19.Restaurants, Fast Food - An eating establishment which has a
drive-thru window and external menu board for the purpose
of providing drive-through and/or take-out services, and
which is intended and designed primarily for fast service and
high customer turn-over.
20.Services, Business and Professional - A commercial
establishment, which renders service and support to other
184
business, commercial, professional and industrial enterprises.
Business and professional services include service, repair and
rental/leasing of office and business equipment; printing and
reprographic services; accounting services; advertising and
public relations services; management and consulting
services; security and maintenance services; and computer
and data processing services.
21.Services, Personal - A commercial establishment which
provides retail services to the general public, such as dry
cleaning and laundry services, tailor and dressmaking
services, shoe repair, beauty salons, barber shops, small
appliance repair shops, printing and reprographic services,
professional photography studios, and similar services.
22.Sexually Oriented Businesses - As per Ordinance 2250.
23.Substantial Variation - Any change in an approved,
preliminary or final land development plan which involves a
change in the means of ingress or egress; any change of use;
any change of more than 10% of the total number of required
parking spaces; any increase or decrease of more than 10% of
the total floor area of a proposed building; or any change in
the approved location of a proposed building.
24.Warehouse Business - The storage and handling of freight or
merchandise, not including the maintenance and/or fueling of
commercial vehicles. Such business shall be conducted
within an entirely enclosed building.
25.Wholesale Business -A business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to institutional, commercial, retail or
professional businesses or to other wholesalers, but not to the
general public, and which may include the warehousing of
merchandise and the distribution of merchandise. Such
businesses shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed
building.
18.6 Permitted Uses
1. Principal Permitted Uses -
(1) Light industrial uses, including:
185
1. Planned light industrial parks
2. Flex space buildings
(2) Research and development, including:
1. Pilot manufacturing
(3) Wholesale, warehouse and distribution businesses
(4) Business, medical and professional offices, including:
1. Planned office/business parks
(5) Business, professional and personal services
(6) Financial institutions
(7) Commercial uses:
1. Retail stores, including:
1. Grocery store/supermarket
2. General mercantile
3. Department store
4. Specialty store
2. Recreation and entertainment facilities, including:
1. Bowling alley
2. Children’s recreation and entertainment facility
3. Health and exercise center
4. Movie theater
5. Skating rinks
3. Conventional restaurants, including:
186
1. Bakeries
2. Delicatessens
3. Coffee shops/cafes
4. Ice cream parlors
3. Planned commercial developments
(8) Community facilities
(9) Child care centers
(10) Fast food restaurants
(11) Gas station
(12) Private, vocational, business and professional schools
2. Accessory Uses
(1) Bus stop shelters
(2) Caretaker/security facilities
(3) Employee cafeteria/dining room
(4) Signage, shared and off-premises
3. Prohibited Uses
(1) Auto pounds
(2) Bars, taverns and bottle clubs
(3) Heavy industry
(4) Junk yards
(5) Pool halls and billiard rooms
187
(6) Recycling facilities
(7) Sexually oriented businesses
18.7 Procedures
18.7.A. Development Plan Required - No building, structure or land within the EGD
shall be constructed, altered, converted or used except in accordance with an
approved final land development plan.
18.7.B. Coordination with Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations -
(1) Zoning Ordinance - The provisions of this Section 18 establish the
uses of land that are permitted in the EGD; size, height, location and
bulk and area standards for structures in the EGD; population density,
density of development and intensity of land use within the EGD;
requirements for parking, landscaping, open space, signage and other
specific design standards applicable to the EGD; and provisions for
conditional uses potentially permissible in the EGD.
(2) Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance - Unless specifically
regulated in this Section 18, the provisions in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance shall establish that the land is suitable
for the purposes and uses proposed within the EGD; shall govern the
design, improvement and provision of all required public and private
improvements within the EGD; and shall govern the provision of site
drainage, storm water management, and soil erosion and
sedimentation pollution control facilities within the EGD.
18.7.C. Required Plans and Procedures
(1) Preliminary Land Development Plan - A preliminary land
development plan for a land development within the EGD shall
include all contiguous real property within the Municipality of Penn
Hills and the Borough of Wilkinsburg, which is either held under
common ownership or control, or is proposed to be held under
common ownership or control. Such plan shall be prepared,
submitted and processed in accordance with the requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. If a preliminary land
development plan encompasses land within more than one
municipality, approval by the Municipality of Penn Hills shall be
conditioned upon the applicant’s providing proof of approval by the
188
Borough of Wilkinsburg.
1. In addition to the submittal of plans required by Ordinance
2136, Section 6.6, the applicant shall also provide two (2)
copies of the preliminary application to the Borough of
Wilkinsburg.
(2) Final Land Development Plan - Applications for final land
development plan approval shall be submitted and processed in
accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
1. If land is to be subdivided for transfer of ownership, or if land
is to be developed by an entity other than the applicant
responsible for the preliminary land development plan, the
new owner or developer shall be entitled to file the final land
development plan.
2. After a preliminary land development plan has been approved,
the applicant shall be entitled to approval of the final land
development plan, provided that the final land development
plan is in accordance with the approved preliminary land
development plan, which shall include any conditions
attached to the preliminary land development plan approval.
1. A final land development plan which contains
substantial variations from the approved preliminary
land development plan shall be considered not in
compliance with the approved preliminary land
development plan.
3. In addition to the submittal of plans required by Ordinance
2136, Section 6.7, the applicant shall also provide two (2)
copies of the final application to all of the other municipalities
which are part of the EGD.
18.8 Design Standards
18.8.A. Application - The following design standards are hereby established for all
permitted principal and accessory uses in the EGD.
18.8.B. Required Bulk and Area Standards -
189
(1) Minimum site area -
1. Planned light industrial parks - 10 acres
2. Planned office/business parks - 10 acres
3. Planned commercial developments - 25 acres
4. All other principal permitted uses - none
(2) Maximum lot coverage
1. All principal permitted uses, other than planned
developments-
80%
2. Planned developments - 75%
(3) Minimum separation between structures
1. Industrial uses - 50'
2. All other principal uses - 30'
(4) Bufferyards
1. Any use, abutting a residential district/use - 30'
2. Any use, abutting a planned development - 15'
18.8.C. Maximum Building Height - No structure shall exceed 45' in height.
18.8.D. Required Parking - Parking within the EGD shall be provided in accordance
with following requirements -
(1) General provisions
1. Computation - When calculation of the required amount of
parking results in a fractional space, a fraction shall be
counted as an entire parking space.
b. Location - All required off-street parking should be
reasonably accessible to the uses served.
190
3. Setbacks - No required off-street parking space, cartway,
driving aisle, driveway, or loading area may be located within
a required bufferyard, or within six (6) feet of a public rightof-
way.
4. Access - Each required off-street parking space should open
directly upon an aisle or drive which provides safe and
efficient access to a public street.
5. Lighting - All parking areas shall be suitably illuminated for
night use. Such lighting shall be designed so that the light
does not spill over onto adjacent residential districts,
properties and/or uses.
(2) Collective Parking - Off-street parking for separate uses may be
provided for collectively. The total amount of parking provided shall
not be less than the total amount of parking required for use, if
calculated separately.
(3) Shared Parking - Shared parking between two (2) or more uses may
be permitted under the following conditions -
1. The parties sharing parking shall provide and be subject to a
written joint use agreement.
(4) Design Standards
1. A required off-street, 90% parking space, other than a
handicapped accessible space, shall be 9' wide by 20' deep,
exclusive of driving aisles.
2. All drives and parking areas shall be surfaced with
bituminous asphalt, concrete pavement or other suitable
material, subject to approval by the municipal engineer.
3. Concrete curbing shall be provided along the perimeter of all
paved areas, including parking lots and drives. Curbing
requirements may be modified where necessary for control of
storm water runoff, as part of an approved storm water
management plan.
4. Finished grades on parking lots shall not exceed 5% cross191
slope, or 7% longitudinal, except handicapped accessible
spaces, which may not exceed 2% in any direction.
5. Parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles in parking
spaces do not overhang sidewalks, public streets or public
rights-of-way.
6. No required off-street parking space shall be located so as to
result in vehicles backing directly from the space into a public
street or right-of-way.
7. For 90 degree parking with two-way circulation, the minimum
required width of abutting driving aisles is 22'. For angled
parking with one-way circulation, the minimum required
width is 18'.
8. Traffic controls, including striping, pavement markings and
traffic control signs shall be provided, as necessary to direct
and control the movement of vehicles and pedestrians safely
and efficiently.
9. Treatment and appearance of roads, drives and parking areas
throughout the EGD shall be generally consistent, in regard to
materials, finishes, and curbing.
(5) Required Number of Parking Spaces
1. Commercial retail stores, less than 25,000 square feet of gross
floor area (SF GFA) - 1 space per 250 SF GFA.
2. Commercial retail stores 25,000 SF or larger, and planned
commercial developments - 4.5 parking spaces per 1,000 SF
GFA.
3. Business and professional offices shall provide the following
minimum number of spaces -
1. Ground floor - 1 space per 200 SF GFA
2. Additional floors - 1 space per 350 SF GFA
4. Medical offices - s
192
office, which ever amount is greater, plus 1 space per each
employee at peak shift.
5. Business and professional services - 1 space per 300 SF GFA.
6. Financial institutions - 1 space per 250 SF GFA.
7. Industrial - 1 space per 800 GFA or 1 space per employee at
peak shift, which ever is greater.
8. Recreation and entertainment facilities shall be as follows:
1. Bowling alley - 3 spaces per lane
2. Health and exercise centers - 1 space per 3 users, as
determined by the maximum lawful capacity of the
facility, plus 1 per two employees at peak shift.
3. Movie Theater - 1 space per 4 seats.
4. All other uses - 1 space per 300 SF GFA or 1 space
per 3 occupants at maximum legal occupancy,
whichever is greater.
1. Research and Development - 1 space per office, plus 1 space
per 800 SF GFA.
10.Restaurants Shall be as Follows:
1. Conventional restaurants - 1 space per 3 seats, plus
one space per employee at peak shift
2. Fast food restaurants - 1 space per 100 SF GFA, plus
5 spaces
11.Wholesale, warehouse and distribution business - 1 space per
office, plus 1 space per 1,500 SF.
12.Other uses not listed here - as determined by the planning
agency.
(6) Handicapped Accessible Parking Spaces
193
1. Location - Handicapped-accessible parking spaces shall be
located as close as possible to a handicapped accessible
building entrance and access route.
2. Gradient - The gradient on all handicapped accessible parking
spaces and related access routes shall be as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act Handbook.
3. Dimensions - Each handicapped accessible parking spaces
shall be at least 13' wide by 19' long. One of every eight (8)
handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be at least 16'
wide, for van access.
4. Signage - Handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be
designated by signs, which shall state that the space is
reversed by law for the physically handicapped. Such signs
shall be located so that they are not obscured by a vehicle
parked in the space.
5. Required number of spaces:
Total Required Parking Handicapped Accessible
Spaces Parking Spaces (minimum)
Up to 25 1
25-50 2
51-75 3
76-150 4
151-250 5
251-350 6
351-450 7
451-600 8
601 and over 2% of total
18.8.E. Off-Street Loading - Off-street loading shall be provided as required by
Section 10.2, with the following modifications -
(1) No require loading berth or space may be located within a required
buffer yard.
18.8.F. Sidewalks - Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with Section 10.6 and
in accordance with the following provision -
194
(1) Treatment of sidewalks required by this Section 18 shall be consistent
throughout the EGD site, in regard to materials, finishes, curbing or
other edge treatment, drainage, typical pavement section and other
related construction details.
18.8.F. Landscaping - All required buffer yards and other areas of the site which are
not occupied by buildings, pavement or other structures shall be landscaped
with trees, shrubs, grasses, groundcovers and other herbaceous plants, in
accordance with the minimum requirements of Section 10.11.D. and Section
10.11.G.
(1) At least 1 tree per 500 square feet of gross floor area (SF GFA) shall
be provided.
(2) For any parking lot with an area of 6,000 SF or more, or containing
15 or more spaces, interior landscaping shall be provided in curbed
islands or peninsulas.
1. The amount of interior landscaping required under Section
18.8.F. shall not be less than 10% of the total area of the
parking lot.
2. Required landscaped islands or peninsulas shall have a
minimum area of 160 SF, and shall not be less than 8.5' in
width, length or diameter.
3. The number, design and location of the required interior
landscape islands may be decided by the applicant, but the
following purposes, goals and design guidelines shall be
considered:
1. Large, unbroken expanses of asphalt should be
avoided, to mitigate and/or reduce the effects of
reflected heat, glare and sweeping winds.
2. Demonstrable reduction in storm water run-off should
be accomplished.
3. Providing adequate soil volume and surface area in
the landscape islands, to ensure that the trees and
other plantings will receive adequate moisture,
nutrients and oxygen should be considered.
4. Protecting the plantings from physical damage that
195
may result from excessive pruning, salt and de-icing
agents, cars doors, shopping carts, vandalism and
other such incidents should be considered.
5. The use of landscaped islands to control and guide
both vehicular and pedestrian circulation should be
considered.
3. Size of required tress shall be as follows - large deciduous
shade trees, including ash, oak, maple and honey locust, shall
have a minimum caliper of 2.5" to 3.5". Smaller ornamental
trees, including Bradford pears, hawthorns, ornamental
crabapples, cherries and plums shall have a minimum caliper
of 2" to 2.5". Evergreens shall be a minimum of 4' in height.
4. Species chosen shall be appropriate to the location and the
purpose, considering factors such as microclimatic conditions
(sun, shade, sweeping winds, reflected heat), soil conditions,
sensitivity to salt and de-icing agents, ultimate size of the
plant, habit of growth, aesthetic value, and disease tolerance.
196
SECTION 19 FORESTRY-REGULATIONS
19.1 Scope: Applicability - These regulations have been established to encourage maintenance and
management of forested or wooded open space and promote the conduct of forestry as a sound and
economically viable use of forested land throughout the Municipality of Penn Hills. Forestry
activities, including timber harvesting, shall be a permitted use by right in residential, business, and
industrial zoning districts. These forestry activities shall be conditional uses and must be in
compliance with Section 11 of this ordinance Sections 19.1 through 19.5 of this ordinance shall also
apply to all timber harvesting within the Municipality of Penn Hills when activity involves the
removal of more than six threes that exceed six (6”) in caliper. These provisions do not apply to the
cutting of trees for agricultural purposes, for imminent land development applications approved by
the Penn Hills Planning Commission or the Penn Hills Department of Economic Development, or to
improve the utility, appearance or safety of the property. Permits for this type of work are subject to
the provisions of Section 10.11.G (3) of Ordinance 2121.
19.2 Notification: Preparation of a Logging Plan
19.2.A. Notification of Commencement or Completion For all timber harvesting
operations, the landowner shall notify the Municipality of Penn Hills
enforcement officer at least 5 business days before the operation commences
and within 2 business days before the
operation is complete. No timber harvesting shall occur until the notice has
been provided. Notification shall be in writing and shall specify the land on
which harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest area, and, as
applicable, the anticipated starting or
completion date of the operation.
19.2.B. Logging Plan Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur
shall arrange for and submit a written logging plan in the form specified by
this ordinance. A logging plan shall be submitted for every timber harvesting
project, shall be prepared by a person with specific knowledge of the forestry
industry, and shall be specific to the site in question. No timber harvesting
shall occur until the plan has been prepared and approved by the Penn Hills
Planning Commission in conjunction with site plan approval as described in
Section 11.5.P (3) of this ordinance. The provisions of the plan shall be
followed throughout the operation. The plan shall be available at the harvest
site at all times during the operation and shall be provided to the Municipality
of Penn Hills enforcement officer.
19.2.C. Responsibility for Compliance - The landowner and the operator shall be
jointly and severally responsible for complying with the terms of the logging
197
plan.
19.3. Contents of the Logging Plan
19.3.A. Minimum Requirements As a minimum, the logging plan shall include the
following:
1. Design, construction, maintenance , and retirement of the access
system including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings:
2. Design, construction, and maintenance of water control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
filter strips and water bars;
3. Design, construction, and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings and
4. The general location of the proposed operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to
those highways.
19.3.B. Map Each logging plan shall include a sketch map or drawing containing the
following information:
1. Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the
property on which the timber harvest will take place and the
boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that property.
2. Significant topographic features related to potential
environmental problems.
3. Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads, landings
and water control measures and structures;
4. Location of all crossings of waters of the Commonwealth; and
5. The general location of the proposed operation to municipal and
state highways, including any accesses to those highways.
19.3.C. Compliance with State Law. The logging plan shall address and comply
with the requirements of all applicable state regulations including, but not
limited
198
to the following:
(1) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in Title
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102 promulgated pursuant to The Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. & 691.1 et seq.); and
(2) Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations contained in Title 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105, promulgated pursuant to the Dam Safety
and Encroachments Act (32 P.& 693.1 et seq.)
19.3.D. Relationships of State Laws, Regulations, and Permits to the Logging Plan
Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be attached to and
become part of the logging plan. An erosion and sedimentation pollution
control plan that satisfies the requirements of Title 25 Pennsylvania Code.
Chapter 102, shall also satisfy the requirements for the logging plan and
associated map specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, provided
that all information required by these paragraphs is included or attached
19.4. Forest Practices The following requirements shall apply to all timber harvesting operations
in the Municipality of Penn Hills.
19.4A. Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is prohibited without
the express written consent of the Municipality of Penn hills or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation whichever is responsible for
maintenance of the thoroughfare.
19.4B. No tops or slash shall be left within 100 feet of any public thoroughfare or
private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property.
19.4C. All tops and slash between twenty-five and fifty feet from a public roadway
or private roadway or private roadway providing. Access to adjoining
residential property or within fifty feet of adjoining residential Property shall
be lopped to a maximum height of four feet above the ground.
19.4D. No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any property
adjoining the operation without the consent of the owner thereof.
19.4.E. Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be removed from the
site before the operator vacates it.
19.5. Responsibility for Road Maintenance and Repair: Road Bonding
Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Chapter 49; and Title 67
199
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the landowner and the operator shall be responsible for
repairing any damage to the Municipality of Penn Hills roads caused by traffic associated
with the timber harvesting operation to the extent the damage is in excess of that caused by
normal traffic, and may be required to furnish a bond to guaranteed the repair of such
damages.





































Note: Please Print or Type This Application
APPLICANT:
Name: Telephone Number:
Address & Zip Code:
Relationship to Owner of Record:
Email:
OWNER OF RECORD OF SUBJECT PROPERTY:
Name: Telephone Number:
Address & Zip Code:
Email:
PROPERTY INFORMATION:
Present Zoning: Lot & Block #:
Location:
Nature of Structures on Property:
Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Width: Depth:
Present Use:
Proposed Use:
APPLICANT'S NARRATIVE / EXPLANATION OF REQUEST:
PROPERTY / LAND USE
MUNICIPALITY of PENN HILLS
12245 FRANKSTOWN RD., PENN HILLS PA 15235 (412) 798-2126
Penn Hills Department of Planning and Economic Development
UNIVERSAL APPLICATION FORM
PAGE # 2
Approval of Site Plan
Subdivision Application
Home Occupation
Home Occupation - No Impact
Conditional Use / Planned Unit Residential Development
Conditional Use / Other
Zoning Amendment
Curative Amendment / Council
Curative Amendment / Zoning Hearing Board
Non-Conforming Use Registration
Special Exception
Variance
Temporary Use
Appeal
Other
CERTIFICATION OF AUTHORIZATION BY OWNER:
I certify that I am either the owner or have been authorized by the owner to submit this application.
I also certify that I am aware of applicable Penn Hills Ordinances and that they are
available for review in the office of the Penn Hills Department of Planning and
Economic Development
Signature of Owner or Agent (PHOTO ID REQUIRED) Date of Application
DSD 05/29/15




CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL
Instructions and General Information
Under the provisions of Ordinance 2420, the Penn Hills Zoning Ordinance, certain land uses
(and building permits to construct such uses) can only be permitted after a conditional use
approval has been obtained from the Mayor and Council. Ordinance 2420 lists all land uses that
are conditional uses in each zoning district.
Steps for obtaining conditional use approval:
1. Advisory meeting with the Department of Planning and Economic
Development.
2. A complete application consisting of the following:
a. Completed application form (provided by the Municipality).
b. Application fee $600.00 – non refundable.
c. Twelve (12) copies of drawings and materials such as site plans, landscaping
plans, architectural plans, etc., necessary to review adequately the proposed
uses and their potential effect on adjacent properties.
3. Legal advertising/public notice (by the Municipality).
4. Planning Commission public hearing---Commission makes recommendation
to the Mayor and Council.
5. Legal advertising and public notice (by the Municipality).
6. Municipal Council public hearing and decision.




