Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Perkasie,
County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 186, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Perkasie, which shall be known and is
hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Perkasie," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, including the provisions of the 1985 Code
adopted December 16, 1985, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances, resolutions and prior Code and not as new enactments, and
the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior ordinance, resolution or Code. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Perkasie, and it is
the intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances and the 1985 Code as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the
provisions of § 1-3 below, and only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Perkasie and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code, including provisions of the 1985 Code, and not contained in
the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 4-18-2000.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 PERKASIE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Ordinance No. 491, adopted 7-10-1978, adopting the Official Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances, resolutions and 1985 Code of the Borough for adoption and
revision as part of this Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and
style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances, resolutions and prior Code so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances, resolutions and
provisions of the 1985 Code included in this Code. These changes are
enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of
the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances,
resolutions and prior Code so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
C. Excluded provisions.
(1) The following chapters/articles of the 1985 Code are hereby
excluded from the 2000 Code as not desired by the Borough
Council, to be repealed effective upon adoption of this ordinance:
(a) Former Chapter 29, Pensions and Retirement.
[1] Article I, Perkasie Firemen's Relief Association (Ord. No.
144) - provisions now covered under 53 P.S. § 895.701.
[2] Article II, Social Security (Ord. No. 217).
[3] Article III, Police Pension Fund (Ord. No. 264).
(b) Former Chapter 55, Aerials and Antennas (Ord. Nos. 128, 397).
(c) Former Chapter 80, Animals, Article I, Pigs and Hogs (Ord. No.
419).
(d) Former Chapter 156, Sound Trucks (Ord. No. 424).
(e) Former Chapter 160, Article IV, Sledding on Streets (Ord. No.
428).
(2) Additionally, the following Appendix chapters from the 1985 Code
have been excluded from the Code as "non-Code material" but are
expressly saved from repeal: former Chapter A192, Electric
Company Franchise; former Chapter A193, Gas Company
Franchise; and former Chapter A195, Telephone Company
Franchise.
D. Reorganization of 1985 Code provisions. The following sections and
chapters of the 1985 Code have been reorganized as follows:
(1) Chapter 70, Building Construction:
(a) Former § 70-5 is relocated to Chapter 85, Article II.
(b) Former § 70-8 is relocated to Chapter 102
(c) Former § 70-9 is relocated to Chapter 96, Part 3.
(2) Former Chapter 120, Parking, Off-Street, is relocated to Chapter
180, Vehicles and Traffic, since it was originally adopted as part of
the ordinance enacting that chapter.
(3) Former Chapter A191, Cable Television Franchise (Ord. No. 791), is
relocated to Chapter 72, superseding the provisions of former
Chapter 72, since the provisions of Ord. No. 791 are broadly
regulatory and not simply a grant of franchise, and should be
included in the body of the Code rather than the Appendix.
following history: "Amended (added) 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835. Schedule A, which
contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-6 PERKASIE CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
(4) Former Chapter A194, Intergovernmental Cooperative Trust, is
relocated to Chapter 15, since it was originally adopted by
ordinance and should be included in the body of the Code rather
than the Appendix.
E. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, wherever the following terms
were used, they have been updated as follows:
(1) The terms "Justice of the Peace" and "Magistrate" are revised to
read "District Justice."
(2) The term "Department of Community Affairs" is revised to read
"Department of Community Affairs and Economic Development."
(3) The term "Department of Environmental Resources" is revised to
read "Department of Environmental Protection" or "Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources," whichever is appropriate.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or his or her designee to keep
up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to
be filed in the office of the Borough Secretary for the use of the public.
All changes in said Code and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Borough Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
the Borough Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code books, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
§ 1-10 PERKASIE CODE § 1-14
1:8
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 18, 2000.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 655]
§ 1-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 1-17. Effect on existing legislation.
To the extent that any existing ordinance is inconsistent with the provisions
of § 1-16A and/or B, such existing ordinance is repealed and such ordinance
is amended to adopt the provisions of either § 1-16A or B as applicable.
A. The maximum fine or penalty for each offense violating a building,
housing, property maintenance, health, fire or public safety code or
ordinance of Perkasie Borough and also for water, air and noise
pollution violations of an ordinance of Perkasie Borough is hereby
amended to not exceed $1,000.
B. The maximum fine or penalty for each offense violating an ordinance of
Perkasie Borough not set forth in § 1-16A hereof is hereby amended to
not exceed $600.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
Chapter 7
BOROUGH DISTRICTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
§ 7-1. Apportioning of districts.
The Borough of Perkasie shall be reapportioned into three districts to be
designated as "District I," "District II" and "District III," which are herein
defined as follows:
A. District I. Beginning at a point marking the intersection of the center
lines of North Fifth Street and Arch Street; thence extending in a
northwesterly direction along the center line of Arch Street to its
intersection with North Seventh Street; thence extending in a
northwesterly direction along the center line of North Seventh Street to
its intersection with Market Street; thence extending in a northwesterly
direction along the center line of Market Street to the boundary line
between the Borough of Perkasie and East Rockhill Township; thence
extending northeasterly along the said boundary line dividing East
Rockhill Township and Perkasie Borough to a point a corner and still
extending along the boundary line dividing the Borough of Perkasie and
East Rockhill Township to a point a corner in the center line of the east
branch of the Perkiomen Creek; thence extending in a southwesterly
direction along the said creek to a point in the center line of Callowhill
Street; thence extending along the center line of Callowhill Street
northwesterly to a point a corner being the intersection of the center
line of Callowhill Street and North Fifth Street; thence extending along
the center line of North Fifth Street southwesterly to the intersection of
North Fifth Street and Arch Street, the point and place of beginning;
and all lands within the boundary hereinbefore defined shall be known
as "Ward 1."
B. District II. Beginning at a point marking the intersection of the center
lines of North Fifth Street and Arch Street; thence extending
southeasterly along the center line of Arch Street to a point a corner
being the intersection of North Second Street and Arch Street; thence
extending in a southwesterly direction along the center line of South
Second Street to a point being the intersection of the center lines of
South Second Street and West Walnut Street; thence extending along
the center line of West Walnut Street southeasterly to a point a corner
in the center line of the east branch of the Perkiomen Creek; thence
extending in a southwesterly direction along the east branch of the
Perkiomen Creek to a point marking the boundary line between the
Borough of Perkasie and the Borough of Sellersville; thence extending
in a northwesterly direction along the said boundary line and the
§ 1-17 PERKASIE CODE § 7-1
7:12
Chapter 10
EMERGENCY AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND COST
RECOVERY
boundary line between the Borough of Perkasie and East Rockhill
Township to a point a corner and still extending in a northerly direction
along the boundary line of the Borough of Perkasie and East Rockhill
Township to a corner and still extending northeasterly along the same
boundary line to a point a corner being in line with the center line of
West Market Street; thence extending along the center line of West
Market Street to a point marking the intersection of West Market
Street and North Seventh Street; thence extending in a northeasterly
direction along the center line of North Seventh Street to a point a
corner being the intersection of the center line of North Seventh Street
and Arch Street; thence extending in a southeasterly direction along
the center line of Arch Street to the intersection of Arch Street and
North Fifth Street, the point and place of beginning; and all lands
within the boundary hereinbefore defined shall be known as "Ward 2."
C. District III. Beginning at a point marking the intersection of the center
lines of Fifth Street and Arch Street; thence extending along the center
line of North Fifth Street in a northeasterly direction to a point a corner
being the intersection of the center lines of North Fifth Street and West
Callowhill Street; thence extending along the center line of West
Callowhill Street and East Callowhill Street in a southeasterly direction
to a point a corner marking the intersection of boundaries between the
Borough of Perkasie and Hilltown Township; thence extending in a
southwesterly direction along the same boundary line to a point a
corner marking the intersection of the boundary lines between the
Borough of Perkasie, Hilltown Township and the West Rockhill
Township to a point a corner in the center line of South Main Street;
thence extending in a northeasterly direction along the center line of
South Main Street to a point a corner marking the boundary between
the Borough of Perkasie and the Borough of Sellersville; thence
extending in a northwesterly direction along the same boundary line to
a point a corner in the center of the east branch of the Perkiomen
Creek; thence extending northeasterly along the center line of the said
creek to a point a corner in the center line of West Walnut Street;
thence extending in a northwesterly direction along the center line of
West Walnut Street to a point a corner marking the intersection of the
center line of West Walnut Street and South Second Street; thence
extending along the center line of South Second Street in a
northeasterly direction to a point a corner being the intersection of the
center lines of South Second Street and Arch Street; thence extending
in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Arch Street to a
point marking the intersection of Fifth Street and Arch Street, the point
and place of beginning; and all lands within the boundary hereinbefore
defined shall be known as "Ward 3."
§ 7-1 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 10-1
7:13
§ 10-1. Establishment of Office of Emergency Management (OEM).
The Borough of Perkasie Office of Emergency Management (OEM) is hereby
established by Borough Council according to 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501. The
mission of the OEM is to provide an organization for the coordination
of public safety of Borough residents through proper mitigation,
preparedness, response and recovery activities in accordance with Title 35,
Health and Safety, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Consolidated Statues,
Chapters 75 and 77 (1989).
§ 10-2. Declaration of disaster emergency.
The Emergency Management Coordinator will inform the chief elected
official of the current state of emergency response in the Borough and will
put forth his or her recommendations. These recommendations will come
from data received from the various emergency response agencies currently
working the emergency event. Declarations will be officially authorized by
the chief elected official according to 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501(b).
§ 10-3. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, the Borough of Perkasie,
pursuant to 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301(c) of the Emergency Management Services
Code, shall be authorized to exercise the powers granted in the chapter
without regard to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed
by law (excepting mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to
the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of
obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment,
the purchase of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes and the
appropriation and expenditure of public funds. In addition, upon the
declaration of a disaster emergency, the Borough of Perkasie is authorized
to avail itself of the provisions of the Act of August 5, 1941 (P.L. 752, No.
286), known as the "Civil Defense Act," in connection with the employment
of personnel in local organizations established pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 10-4. Office of Emergency Management Leadership.
§ 10-5. Duties and responsibilities of Emergency Management
Coordinator (EMC).
A. Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC). The Office of Emergency
Management (OEM) shall be headed by the Emergency Management
Coordinator who is appointed by the Governor of Pennsylvania at the
recommendation of the Borough Council and by endorsement of the
Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency (PEMA).
B. Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) accountability. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall report directly to the
Borough Manager and, if unavailable, the Mayor or Borough Council
President.
§ 10-1 PERKASIE CODE § 10-5
7:14
A. Duties and responsibilities in accordance to established standards. The
duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Coordinator
are outlined herein as well as within the emergency operations plan
approved by the Borough Council in accordance with 35 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 7502 and 7503. The Emergency Management Coordinator provides a
logistical resource coordination and support service to emergency
medical, fire and police services within the Borough of Perkasie. During
an emergency, the Emergency Management Coordinator shall meet
with public safety and public works leaders to determine the need for
emergency operations center activation and, if activated, shall do so
according to the emergency operations plan. The Emergency
Management Coordinator may, at his or her discretion, respond at the
request of an incident commander to provide support services on the
site of an emergency.
B. Establishment of OEM internal policies and support entities. The
Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) may establish internal
policies and procedures to assist in the proper operation of the Office of
Emergency Management (OEM) to fulfill the goals and objectives of
emergency management. This includes but is not limited to creating
relationships with adjacent municipal emergency managers, various
public safety organizations, Borough departments, volunteer
organizations, or the formation of an advisory emergency management
planning committee, etc., to assist him or her in effective emergency
management planning to reasonably fulfill the emergency management
objectives.
C. Responsibility to maintain an emergency operations plan (EOP). The
Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) is responsible to develop
and periodically update an emergency operations plan (EOP), in
accordance with 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7503, and shall at a minimum revise the
plan every two years to be submitted to Borough Council for approval
and then to Bucks County Emergency Management Agency for county
endorsement. The emergency operations plan is considered to be a
living document that shall be updated and improved as new techniques
and response strategies are developed.
D. Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator (DEMC). The Emergency
Management Coordinator shall make recommendation to the Borough
Council to approve a qualified Deputy Emergency Management
Coordinator (DEMC) who shall be a part of the primary EOC staff as
well as function as the Emergency Management Coordinator in the
EMC's absence. The DEMC will report directly to the Emergency
Management Coordinator (EMC). The qualifications and training
requirements set out in 35 Pa.C.S.A § 7502 will apply to the DEMC. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall assist the Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinator in fulfilling the training
requirements in accordance with PEMA Municipal Coordinator training
as outlined in the Municipal Coordinator's Handbook. It shall be the
§ 10-5 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 10-5
7:15
Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator's responsibility to make
themselves available for and to complete the training.
E. Establishment, oversight and maintenance of an emergency operations
center (EOC). The Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) shall
have the overall responsibility to establish, staff and oversee an
emergency operations center (EOC) which shall operate under the
National Incident Management System (NIMS) principles for Multi-
Agency Coordination System (MACS) operations which facilitate and
coordinate response resources and personnel, providing accountability
and support during emergency incidents as requested by the Borough
Council, incident commanders or during critical emergencies and
disasters affecting large Borough populations or property. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible to
coordinate the training of EOC staff members in accordance with local,
state or national standards. The Emergency Management Coordinator
shall also make recommendation to the Borough Manager for the
procuring of the materials and equipment deemed necessary for the
maintenance and operation of the emergency operations center.
F. Mutual aid agreements.
(1) The Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) shall develop and
maintain mutual aid agreements with adjacent political
subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance. The agreements
shall be consistent with the plans and program of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency and the Bucks County Emergency
Management Agency. The agreements shall stipulate, at a
minimum, the following:
(a) That direction of emergency disaster assistance is the
responsibility of the lowest level of government;
(b) That the Bucks County Emergency Management Agency shall
provide coordination and support when more than one
municipality within Bucks County is affected;
(c) That the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency or its
area organization shall provide coordination and support when
more than one county is affected;
(d) That the Perkasie Borough Office of Emergency Management
shall render assistance in accordance with authorized mutual
aid agreements; and
(e) In all cases, support services provided from outside the
affected area shall remain under the command and control of
the receiving area.
(2) All mutual aid agreements shall be ratified by the Borough Council
and by the governing bodies of the other affected municipalities
prior to implementation.
§ 10-5 PERKASIE CODE § 10-5
7:16
§ 10-6. Emergency Management Coordinator remuneration and
reimbursement.
G. Mitigation measures to ensure public safety. In response to a request of
an emergency services incident commander or other spontaneous
emergency event, the Emergency Management Coordinator, after
receiving proper approval by the Borough Manager, Mayor or
subsequent elected official, shall have the authority to call in support
services to help mitigate further dangers to Borough residents. If the
Borough Manager or elected official cannot be reached, and the
situation warrants immediate action based upon imminent danger, the
EMC may take reasonable and appropriate measures to fulfill public
safety objectives. Should this action be necessary, it will be based upon
actual data and feedback from on-site incident command personnel,
and such actions shall be documented in detail and given to the
Borough Manager or elected official at the earliest convenience. This
includes but is not limited to calling for Borough Public Works, Borough
Engineer, building rehabilitation or site cleanup services to remediate a
property so that it is safe until the property owner can have the site
repaired or remediated to Borough safety codes. The EMC shall report
the details of such action to the Borough Manager so that the
determination can be made as to who has responsibility for the incurred
costs. Mitigation measures may also include making recommendations
to the Public Works Director of any measures that could assist in
mitigating potential damages due to flooding, waterway contaminants,
or other hazards.
A. Stipend — EMC. In accordance with Borough Council Resolution No.
2005-56, the Emergency Management Coordinator shall be
remunerated with an annual stipend of $2,000. Compensation covers
the EMC for work, including but not limited to: developing and
maintaining the EOP, developing and maintaining internal OEM
policies, managing the EOC and activities of the various staff and
volunteers, time spent at meetings, public education activities,
emergency deployments and twenty-four-hour on-call.
B. Tuition and travel reimbursement. In order to remain current in the
level of expertise and training and to remain in compliance with local,
state and national standards, the Borough will reimburse the
Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Emergency
Management Coordinator for tuition, travel and lodging expenses
incurred for required training courses or conference seminars. Such
training activities will be properly approved by the Borough Council in
advance of attendance at any such classes. The EMC will provide all of
the details and submit a request with justification within a reasonable
timeframe to the Borough Manager for Council submission.
C. Association dues and accreditation. In order to remain current in the
level of expertise and essential knowledgebase to assist the EMC in
compliance with local state and national standards, the Borough will
§ 10-5 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 10-6
7:17
§ 10-7. Liability coverage for authorized Office of Emergency
Management and support personnel.
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM), Emergency Management
Coordinator (EMC), Deputy Emergency Coordinator (DEMC), emergency
operations center (EOC) staff or other paid or volunteer emergency
management support personnel (such as damage assessment personnel,
CERT, FIRE Corps volunteers, etc.), that have received proper authorization
to be activated in support of Borough emergency management activities,
will be covered by the respective workmens' compensation insurance
carriers for the Borough of Perkasie should they be injured in the line
of duty. Support personnel shall be activated at the recommendation of
the EMC or DEMC with the approval of the Borough Manager, Mayor or
Borough Council President. If the Borough Manager, Mayor or Borough
Council President are not available, the approval authority will fall upon the
next senior Borough Council members, Assistant Borough Manager or the
EMC in accordance with the continuity of government plan outlined in the
emergency operations plan (elected officials checklist). Unauthorized, selfdispatched
volunteers who have not been officially activated through the
Office of Emergency Management will not be covered by this section and
will be responsible for personal injury claims.
§ 10-8. OEM budget.
reimburse the Emergency Management Coordinator for association
dues for the National Emergency Management Association (NEMA)
and International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM). The
Emergency Management Coordinator may also seek accreditation
through IAEM as Associate Emergency Manager (AEM) or Certified
Emergency Manager (CEM). The costs of accreditation will be paid by
the Borough at the approval of the Borough Council.
A. Establish and prioritize OEM needs. The Emergency Management
Coordinator will establish a prioritized needs list to be submitted to the
Borough Manager for review for Borough Council approval. The budget
will cover items used to support the OEM, such as office materials, EOC
equipment (telecommunications, communications, multimedia,
computer, etc.), training costs, association dues, mitigation materials,
etc. Submission of this budget, with supporting justifications, by the
EMC will be scheduled by the Borough Manager accordingly so that it
can be submitted in time for the annual Borough budget approval
process.
B. OEM gifts, donations and grant funding use. The Emergency
Management Coordinator, at the approval of the Borough Manager and/
or Borough Council, may seek purchasing of OEM materials and
equipment through gifts or donations from commercial vendors in
support of local emergency preparedness and also through any county,
state or federal grants that are made available to emergency
management organizations. At no time will special endorsement of any
§ 10-6 PERKASIE CODE § 10-8
7:18
§ 10-9. Emergency service cost reimbursement.
In order to provide for the recovery of costs incurred by any emergency
service or related support agency that has provided emergency response
to the Borough of Perkasie, and so as to minimize the costs involved in
correcting any hazardous situations that could affect Borough residents,
the costs incurred will be charged to the person or entity that caused
the increased hazard to Borough residents and need for a higher level or
protracted emergency response.
§ 10-10. Response services that will be reimbursed.
Agencies who are entitled to cost recovery include but are not limited to:
commercial vendor who donates materials or equipment take place.
Any monetary gifts, donations or grant monies made to the Borough
of Perkasie Office of Emergency Management or to the Borough of
Perkasie for the payment of expenses incurred or to be incurred by
or for the Office of Emergency Management shall be deposited in the
treasury of the Borough of Perkasie and shall be appropriated only for
the purpose for which the gifts, donations or grants were made. These
funds if they are more than what was in the OEM budget will be added
in to the OEM budget.
A. Borough of Perkasie Administration;
B. Borough of Perkasie Office of Emergency Management;
C. Borough of Perkasie Police Department and any assisting police
departments within the Borough;
D. Borough of Perkasie Public Works;
E. Borough of Perkasie Electric Department;
F. Perkasie Regional Authority2 (water and sewer);
G. Perkasie Fire Company and any assisting fire companies within the
Borough;
H. Emergency medical services that supply emergency medical response
within the Borough;
I. Any support service that is called in to assist in maintaining public
safety (authorized volunteer services, window board-up services, site
remediation or cleanup services, traffic signal repair company, etc.).
2. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
§ 10-8 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 10-11
7:19
§ 10-11. Covered hazards.
Reimbursement shall be authorized for hazards involving a higher level or
protracted emergency response, including but not limited to:
§ 10-12. Responsibility for hazards.
A. Industrial accidents;
B. Hazardous materials spills, leaks, vapors, etc.;
C. Multialarm fires (residential, high occupancy, commercial, institutional
or any structures);
D. Structural collapses or compromises;
E. Prolonged, high-risk law enforcement situations;
F. Utility interruptions caused carelessly or maliciously;
G. Waterway contamination;
H. Any hazardous situation, accidental or intentional, that necessitates an
immediate and full emergency response that uses specialized
equipment, resources, manpower and materials in order to maintain
public safety.
A. Any entity who owns or has custody or has control of any motor vehicle
or other instrumentality that creates a hazardous incident or any entity
who owns or has custody or has control of any real property upon which
a dangerous incident, as defined in this chapter, takes place shall bear
all costs of any emergency response that arises as a direct or
consequential result of such incident. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent such entity from recovering any costs from a third party whose
negligence may have caused such dangerous incident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of any official of Perkasie Borough, to clean up or abate the
effects of any dangerous incident, the Borough may take such action as
deemed necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or
abatement. The entity described hereinabove shall be liable to the
Borough for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or
verification.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, costs of a hazardous incident shall
include but are not limited to the following: expenses incurred by
police, fire, emergency management and/or emergency medical
services; actual labor costs of Borough personnel, including benefits
and administrative overhead; costs of consultants or others preparing
reports concerning the hazardous incident; costs of equipment
operations; costs of materials obtained directly by the Borough; costs of
any contractual labor and materials for cleanup and/or abatement;
costs of the Borough Solicitor and Borough Engineer connected with
§ 10-11 PERKASIE CODE § 10-12
7:20
§ 10-13. Emergency management mitigation to ensure public safety.
In response to a request of an emergency services incident commander
or other spontaneous emergency event, the Emergency Management
Coordinator (EMC), after receiving proper approval by the Borough
Manager, Mayor or subsequent elected official, shall have the authority
to call in support services to help mitigate further dangers to Borough
residents. If the Borough Manager or elected official cannot be reached, and
the situation warrants immediate action based upon imminent danger, the
EMC may take reasonable and appropriate measures to fulfill public safety
objectives. Should this action be necessary, it will be based upon actual data
and feedback from on-site incident command personnel, and such actions
shall be documented in detail and given to the Borough Manager or elected
official at the earliest convenience. This includes but is not limited to calling
for Borough Public Works, Borough Engineer, building rehabilitation or site
cleanup services to remediate a property so that it is safe until the property
owner can have the site repaired or remediated to Borough safety codes.
The EMC shall report the details of such action to the Borough Manager
so that the determination can be made as to who has responsibility for the
incurred costs.
Chapter 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 15
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
the hazardous incident; costs to replace or repair any damage caused
to equipment utilized by the Borough or any other service agency which
responded to the incident.
D. The costs resulting from the dangerous incident shall be paid directly to
the Borough within 30 days from the date on which the Borough issues
an invoice or other appropriate demand for such costs. Interest shall
accrue on any unpaid invoice at the rate of 1 1/2% per month
commencing after the expiration of the thirty-day grace period.
§ 10-12 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 10-13
7:21

ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. A194 of the 1985 Code]
§ 15-1. Entering of trust; adoption of declaration by reference.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the trust) and
entering into the declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was adopted.
§ 15-2. Borough authorized to purchase shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
article.
§ 15-3. Trustees of the trust to have custody.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
trust.
§ 15-4. Legislative findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 15-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the trust.
E. The trust shall be managed by a board of trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
§ 15-1 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 15-4
7:23
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 15-4 PERKASIE CODE § 15-4
7:24
ARTICLE II
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
[Adopted 8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 959]
§ 15-5. Authorization to execute and modify agreements.
The Board of Supervisors of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby authorized to
execute the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement for
the participation of the Borough of Perkasie in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, which agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A
and is on file for inspection and review at the offices of the Borough
of Perkasie, 620 W. Chestnut Street, Perkasie, PA 18944. This agreement
may be amended after the enactment of this article to conform to any
requirements imposed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any of
its agencies, including the Department of Labor and Industry, Bureau of
Workers' Compensation.
§ 15-6. Purpose of participation.
The participation of the Borough of Perkasie in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust is authorized for the purposes of enabling the
Borough of Perkasie to reduce the cost of workers' compensation claims
through its participation in a group self-insurance fund.
§ 15-7. Delegation of authority to pay benefits.
The Borough of Perkasie delegates to the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust the authority to pay workers' compensation benefits on
its behalf in accordance with the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act3
and the Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act.4
§ 15-8. Approval of permit.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Bureau of Workers' Compensation has approved the issuance of a permit
to the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust to operate as a group
self-insurance fund, subject to certain conditions.
§ 15-9. Responsibility for payment of claims.
As an approved self-insurance fund, the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust will be responsible for the payment of workers'
compensation claims on behalf of all trust participants.
§ 15-10. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement, the following conditions, among others, apply to the
3. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1201 et seq.
§ 15-5 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 15-10
7:25
participation of the Borough of Perkasie in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust:
§ 15-11. Minimum duration of participation; conditions for
withdrawal.
The Borough of Perkasie agrees to participate in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust for a minimum period of two years, subject
to the terms and conditions of the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation
Trust Agreement. After the expiration of that minimum two-year period,
each participant may withdraw under the following conditions, subject
A. That the trust shall consist of at least five homogeneous municipal
participants organized as local government agencies under
Pennsylvania law;
B. That each participant satisfies all eligibility and admission
requirements for membership in the trust;
C. That each participant pledges and agrees to appropriate funds to pay
all of its annual contributions and assessments which are required for
the creation of a fund maintained at a level sufficient to pay all workers'
compensation claims and related expenses incurred by the trust
participants;
D. That each participant agrees to jointly and severally assume and
discharge the workers' compensation liabilities of each and every other
participant in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement when required to do so by the
Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of Workers' Compensation;
E. That each participant will institute any and all safety regulations, loss
prevention measures or risk management procedures as may be
required for the purpose of minimizing or eliminating workplace risks
to its employees;
F. That each participant cooperate fully with the trust's service and fiscal
agents, attorneys, claims adjusters and any agents or employees of the
trust with respect to the investigation, defense and settlement of
claims;
G. That each participant designate a person to be responsible for all
contacts with the trust;
H. That each participant provide any information to the Administrator or
Board of Trustees as may be required to effect the purposes and
objectives of the trust; and
I. That each participant comply with all applicable statutes and
regulations governing the payment of workers' compensation claims,
including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation
Act and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 15-10 PERKASIE CODE § 15-11
7:26
to the right of arbitration as provided in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement:
§ 15-12. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees,
an Administrator, a claims administrator/loss control consultant and various
service agents appointed by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement and any bylaws
adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 15-13. Provision of funds for creation and operation.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement, the funds required for the creation and operation of the trust
shall be provided by the participating municipalities through annual
appropriations.
§ 15-14. Power to enter into contracts.
The Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust is empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for any of its employees.
A. That an opinion is rendered by the trust-certified actuary that
withdrawal will not result in the number of participants falling below
the minimum required to assure the fiscal and actuarial soundness of
the trust itself;
B. That the withdrawing participant is not then in default of its obligation
to pay premiums, contributions or assessments;
C. That the withdrawing participant shall pay the full amount of a
termination contribution or any additional assessments as determined
by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the trust agreement and
bylaws;
D. That the Board of Trustees shall have received a certification from the
trust actuary that the withdrawal of the participant will not impair the
actuarial soundness of the trust and, if any municipal debt has been
incurred by the participants to finance any portion of the trust reserves,
an opinion is obtained from bond counsel that such withdrawal will not
adversely affect the tax-exempt status of any interest paid and any debt
incurred by the participants, or any legal entity created for the purpose
of incurring such debt. As used herein, the term "debt" includes any
municipal bonds, certificate, letters of credit or other instruments of
municipal indebtedness.
§ 15-11 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 15-15
7:27
§ 15-15. Effective date.
The participation of the Borough of Perkasie in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust will be effective by July 28, 2012, or
thereafter, as approved by the trust Board.
§ 15-16. Borough contributions and assessments.
All contributions and assessments paid by the Borough of Perkasie shall be
made with funds appropriated by the Borough of Perkasie for that purpose.
§ 15-17. Duties and responsibilities of Borough.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, the Borough of Perkasie agrees to:
§ 15-18. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to 53 P.S. § 46006 and the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law.5
A. Pay all annual contributions and assessments as may be required by the
Board of Trustees;
B. Appoint a representative to sit on the Board of Trustees and designate a
contact person for the purpose of communicating with the trust or its
representatives;
C. Not withdraw from the trust for a period of two years following its
admission to the trust, subject to the terms and conditions of the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement;
D. Withdraw from the trust only upon satisfaction of the conditions set
forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement;
E. Perform all covenants contained in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement and delegate to the Board of Trustees
the powers and authorities enumerated in that agreement;
F. Comply with all the conditions set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement governing the handling and payment of
claims, including the defense and settlement thereof;
G. Appropriate the funds needed to pay all contributions and assessments
as may be required by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust agreement;
H. Cooperate with the trust, its agents or employees and provide the trust
with all of the information it needs for the operation of the trust,
including any underwriting or claims data which it may be requested by
the Board of Trustees or its designee.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 15-15 PERKASIE CODE § 15-18
7:28
ARTICLE III
Section 904 Recycling Grants
[Adopted 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 1007]
§ 15-19. Preamble.
The preamble recited above is incorporated by reference herein.6
§ 15-20. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Intermunicipal
Cooperation for Section 904 Recycling Grants Ordinance.
§ 15-21. Approval of agreement.
The agreement among the member municipalities, the form of which is
attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference,7 is
hereby approved, adopted and authorized, but shall only become binding
and effective if and when all municipalities, by appropriate official action,
all approve, adopt, authorize, execute and deliver the same agreement.
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperation agreement are those
conditions set forth therein. The proper officers of the municipality are
hereby authorized to perform any acts necessary to execute the agreement,
carry out this article and deliver the said agreement.
§ 15-22. Provision for implementation resolutions.
The Borough Council of Perkasie may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement the agreement approved by this article, pursuant
to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of December, 19, 1996, P.L.
1158, No. 177, found at 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 15-23. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections, or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that such remainder shall be and shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 15-24. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances or resolutions conflicting or
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article are hereby repealed,
but only insofar as the same are in direct conflict or directly inconsistent
with this article.
6. Editor's Note: Said preamble is on file in the Borough offices.
7. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 15-19 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 15-25
7:29
§ 15-25. Effective date.
This article shall take effect five days after enactment.
§ 15-25 PERKASIE CODE § 15-25
7:30
Chapter 19
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental Cooperative Trust — See
Ch. 15.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
§ 15-25 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 15-25
7:31

ARTICLE I
Perkasie Regional Authority8
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 19, Art. I, of the 1985 Code9]
§ 19-1. Intent to organize.
The Borough Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.10
§ 19-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and the Secretary of the Borough Council are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Perkasie,
Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following
form.11
§ 19-3. Initial project.
The initial project which shall be undertaken by the said Authority is to
acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either in
the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof
and sewage treatment works, including works for treating and disposing
of industrial waste, and waterworks, water supply works and water
distribution systems for the Borough of Perkasie and for such other territory
as it may be authorized to serve.
8. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
9. Editor's Note: The following original sections of Ord. No. 248, adopted 4-6-1955, which
enacted this Authority, have been omitted from this codification as being unnecessary to
the Code: Sections 3 (providing for publication of notice of the ordinance), 4 (providing
for filing with the Secretary of the Commonwealth), 6 (providing the original Board of the
Authority) and 7 (repealing inconsistent ordinances). The entire ordinance is available
and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: The Perkasie Regional Authority Articles of Incorporation, and any
amendments thereto, are available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 19-1 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 19-3
7:33

ARTICLE II
Pennridge Wastewater Treatment Authority
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 19, Art. II, of the 1985 Code12]
§ 19-4. Intent to organize.
The Borough Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.13
§ 19-5. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and the Secretary of the Borough Council are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Perkasie,
Articles of Incorporation for the Authority in substantially the following
form.14
§ 19-6. Initial project.
The project which shall first be undertaken by the Authority is to acquire,
hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either as lessor
or as lessee, a wastewater treatment plant and related facilities for the
transportation, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage for the Boroughs
of Perkasie and Sellersville and for such other territory as it may be
authorized to serve.
§ 19-7. Approval of certificate of joinder.
The application for certificate of joinder as set forth in the resolution of
Pennridge Wastewater Treatment Authority shall be and the same is hereby
adopted and approved by the Borough Council of the Borough.15
12.Editor's Note: The following original sections of Ord. No. 444, adopted 3-12-1973, which
enacted this Authority, have been omitted from this codification as being unnecessary to
the Code: Sections 3 (providing for notice of the proposed filing of incorporation to be
published), 4 (providing for filing with the Secretary of the Commonwealth), 5 (providing
the original Board of the Authority) and 7 (repealing inconsistent ordinances and
resolutions). The entire ordinance is available and on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: The Pennridge Wastewater Treatment Authority Articles of Incorporation
are available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary. The Authority was initially
incorporated as a joint authority with the Borough of Sellersville.
15.Editor's Note: The certificate of joinder approved by Ord. No. 468, adopted 3-5-1976,
which added this section, allowed the Borough of Silverdale, the Borough of Telford, the
Township of Hilltown and the Township of East Rockhill to join the Authority.
§ 19-4 BOROUGH DISTRICTING § 19-7
7:35
Chapter 25
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 29.
Police Department — See Ch. 40.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 46.
§ 19-7 PERKASIE CODE § 19-7
25:36
ARTICLE I
Auditor
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 25, Art. I, of the 1985 Code]
§ 25-1. Certified public accountant to perform audit.16
From and after the effective date of this article17 a certified public
accountant or firm of certified public accountants shall audit the accounts
and other evidences of financial transactions of the Borough and Borough
officers and shall submit a report of such audit to the Council.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46005(7).
17.Editor's Note: Originally enacted by Ord. No. 310.
§ 25-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 25-1
25:37

ARTICLE II
Manager
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 25, Art. II, of the 1985 Code]
§ 25-2. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Perkasie.
§ 25-3. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
the members of the Council. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of
the Council, and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all
its members. At least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the
Council shall furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its
intention to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 25-4. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in or
his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 25-5. (Reserved)18
§ 25-6. Performance bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough in such sum as shall be required by the Council, conditioned for
the faithful performance of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the
Borough.
§ 25-7. Compensation.
The Manager's salary shall be fixed from time to time by the Borough
Council.
§ 25-8. Function.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough and he
shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough.
§ 25-9. Powers and duties.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 25-5, Residency requirement, was repealed 7-18-2005 by Ord. No.
894.
§ 25-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 25-9
25:39
A. His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
Borough business not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon
other Borough officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Council, the powers and duties of
the Borough Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
(2) With the concurrence of the Council, he shall hire and, when
necessary for the good of the service, shall suspend or discharge all
employees under his supervision, provided that persons covered by
the civil service provisions of the Borough Code shall be hired,
suspended or discharged in accordance with such provisions and
provided further that the Manager shall report at the next meeting
thereafter of the Council any action taken by authority of this
subsection. He shall also make recommendations to the Council
with respect to the compensation of all employees under his
supervision, but such compensation shall be fixed by the Council.
(3) He shall prepare and submit to the Council before the close of the
fiscal year or on such alternate date as the Council shall determine
a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the budget, the Manager or an officer
designated by him shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and expenditures
and other supporting data as he requires. The Manager shall
review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the
budget to the Council.
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Council.
(5) The Manager shall also serve as Borough Secretary, for which
services he shall not receive additional compensation. In addition,
he shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of
the municipal departments as the Council may from time to time
direct.
(6) He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, execute and enforce the
laws of the Commonwealth and ordinances, resolutions and bylaws
of the Borough, which authority shall include charge over the
Police Department.
(7) He shall attend all meetings of the Council and its committees, with
the right to take part in the discussion, and he shall receive notice
of all special meetings of the Council or its committees.
(8) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
§ 25-9 PERKASIE CODE § 25-9
25:40
§ 25-10. Delegation of mayoral powers and duties.
With approval of Borough Council, the Mayor may delegate to the Borough
Manager any of his nonlegislative powers and duties.
§ 25-11. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
(9) He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs, submit periodic reports of the condition of the Borough
finances and such other reports as the Council requests and make
such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
(10)He shall submit to the Council, as soon as possible after the close of
the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and
administrative activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(11)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(12)He shall employ, by and with the approval of the Council, experts
and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with
any of the functions of the Borough.
(13)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some
other Borough officer by statute.
(14)He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all of the Borough's claims.
(15)He shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough, and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code,
all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when
directed by the Council, make a full written report thereof. He shall
also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of Council,
governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies
and equipment.
(16) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall
be referred to the office of the Manager. He or an officer designated
by him shall investigate and dispose of all such complaints, and the
Manager shall report thereon to the Council.
§ 25-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 25-11
25:41

ARTICLE III
Secretary and Treasurer
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 25, Art. I, of the 1985 Code]
§ 25-12. Concurrent holding of offices permitted.
The offices of Borough Secretary and Borough Treasurer may hereafter be
held by the same person.
§ 25-12 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 25-12
25:43
Chapter 29
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 25. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 46.
§ 25-12 PERKASIE CODE § 25-12
25:44
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-21-2014 by Ord. No. 97619]
§ 29-1. Enrollment in system.
Perkasie Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects to
amend its Police Pension Plan administered by the System in accordance
with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S.
§ 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be bound
by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 29-2. Administration.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Police Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective January 1, 2014 (the Contract).
§ 29-3. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 29-4. Payments and liability.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 29-5. Intent; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
921 either immediately or on January 1, 2014, which is the effective date of
the Contract, whichever is later.
§ 29-6. Filing.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
19.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Police in Municipal Retirement
System, adopted 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 921.
§ 29-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 29-6
25:45

ARTICLE II
Municipal Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 97720]
§ 29-7. Enrollment in system.
Perkasie Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Requirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 29-8. Administration.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective January 1, 2014 (the contract).
§ 29-9. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 29-10. Payments and liability.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 29-11. Intent; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
943 either immediately or on January 1, 2014, which is the effective date of
the contract, whichever is later.
§ 29-12. Filing.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
20.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Municipal Retirement System,
adopted 6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 943.
§ 29-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 29-12
25:47
Chapter 35
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
§ 35-1. Creation; powers and duties.
§ 35-2. Continuation of previous Commission.
The Borough Planning Commission in existence at the time of enactment
of this chapter shall constitute the Planning Commission hereby created
and nothing herein shall affect the tenure of any member thereof, but all
vacancies in the said Commission, regardless of the cause thereof, hereafter
occurring shall be filled in the manner and for the term prescribed by the
law governing Borough planning commissions in force at the time of the
happening of such vacancies.
Chapter 40
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Powers of Manager — See Ch. 25, Art. II. Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 29.
A. The Borough Planning Commission is to be composed of nine members
to serve the Borough of Perkasie. [Amended 1-19-2015 by Ord. No.
983]
B. Such Commission shall be appointed as prescribed by law and shall
perform all the duties and may exercise all the powers and functions
vested by law in planning agencies for Boroughs.
§ 29-12 PERKASIE CODE § 35-2
40:48
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 40 of the 1985 Code]
§ 40-1. Department established.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Perkasie.
§ 40-2. Chief of Police.
§ 40-3. Continuation of existing Department; tenure.
The Police Department of the Borough as constituted at the time of
enactment of this Article is hereby recognized as the Police Department
hereby established, and nothing herein shall affect the tenure of any of the
members thereof.
§ 40-4. Subordinate classifications.
§ 40-5. Special police.22
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special police during emergencies.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police
Department.
B. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor or of the Borough Manager, if
and when such authority shall be delegated by the Mayor thereto, be in
charge of the Police Department and have supervision over its members
in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
A. Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
classifications of Sergeant and patrol officer are hereby established,
with the priority of authority among such subordinate classifications to
be in the order hereinabove listed.21
B. The number of persons to serve in each of such subordinate
classifications, on a full-time and/or part-time basis, and the
compensation of each shall be as determined by the Borough Council
from time to time.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 40-5
40:49

ARTICLE II
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 1-17-2000 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 40-6. Officers to reside in specific area.
All police officers of Perkasie Borough, now in the employ of Perkasie
Borough and hereafter changing the location of their abode, or hereafter
to be employed by the Borough, are hereby required as a condition of their
continued employment to have their place of abode within a fifteen-mile
radius of Seventh and Market Streets within the Borough. The term "police
officers" shall not include the Chief of Police.
§ 40-7. Failure to comply.
Failure of any police officer to comply with the requirement set forth in
§ 40-6 shall be cause for his or her removal or discharge from Borough
employment and the Borough Police Department.
§ 40-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 40-7
40:51
Chapter 46
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Compensation of Manager — See Ch. 25,
§ 25-7.
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 29.
§ 40-7 PERKASIE CODE § 40-7
40:52
ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 1-2-1990 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 46-1. Salary of Mayor. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
The salary of the Mayor shall be $2,500 per year, payable in equal monthly
installments of $208.33.
§ 46-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 46-1
40:53

ARTICLE II
Council
[Adopted 1-2-1990 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 46-2. Salary of Council members. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 835]
Council members of the Borough of Perkasie shall receive $2,500 per year,
payable in equal monthly installments of $208.33. The President of the
Council shall receive $2,500 per year, payable in equal monthly installments
of $208.33.
§ 46-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 46-2
40:55

ARTICLE III
Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 716]
§ 46-3. Commission and payment of Tax Collector. [Amended
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835; 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 961]
A. The Tax Collector of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby authorized to
collect a certification fee of $10 per year of certification.
B. The Tax Collector of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby authorized to
collect the amount of $6 per tax bill collected or liened, beginning on
January 1, 2018. [Amended 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1002]
C. The Tax Collector of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby authorized to
collect the following additional fees:
(1) Market rate for bad checks returned for insufficient funds;
(2) Ten dollars per duplicate billing, beginning on January 1, 2018; and
[Amended 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1002]
(3) Postage and administrative fees as set forth from time to time by
resolution.
D. The above commission and fees may be amended from time to time by
resolution or by ordinance.
§ 46-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 46-3
40:57
Chapter 50
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 50 was comprised of Art. I, 601 Spruce Street
Investment Partners, LLC (Delbar) LERTA Program, adopted
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1012; and Art. II, Perkasie Borough Airport
LERTA Program, adopted 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1013. Both
ordinances contained a provision that stated they would become
null and void unless the Pennridge School District Board of School
Directors and the County Commissioners of the County of Bucks
adopted similar resolutions or ordinances by 12-31-2018. Since no
similar resolutions or ordinances were adopted by 12-31-2018, Arts.
I and II were removed from the Code.]
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 58
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 40. Fire prevention — See Ch. 92.
§ 58-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Emergency Alarm Ordinance."
§ 58-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 58-3. Definitions.
Certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed as follows:
ALARM EQUIPMENT VENDOR — Any person, firm or corporation who or
which sells or leases or installs or maintains alarm equipment.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees, in
attendance at all times, receive messages from automatic protection
devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and who have the duty
to relay immediately such emergency message over a designated or direct
trunkline to the Bucks County Radio Room.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
§ 46-3 PERKASIE CODE § 58-3
58:58
the building and designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal
act or other emergency requiring the Police or Fire Department to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits a prerecorded alarm over regular telephone line by direct or
indirect communication to the Police or Fire Department of Perkasie
Borough upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has
detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of intrusion
or fire.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTION SYSTEM — A protective system, or
group of such systems, operated privately for customers by a person, firm
or corporation which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded messages
from automatic protection devices at a central station having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times that have the duty to
take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including
the relaying of messages by designated or primary trunkline to the Bucks
County Radio Room.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or other kind of direct or indirect signal or message given
to the Perkasie Borough Police or Fire Department which is not the result of
unauthorized entry, fire or similar emergency.
§ 58-4. Timing mechanism required; method of reporting alarms;
repair service.
A. Timing mechanism required on audible alarms. After enactment,
owners or lessees must equip audible alarms with a timing mechanism
that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum period of 15
minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be
unlawful in the Borough and must be disconnected by the owner or
lessee within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter.
B. Connection to Bucks County Radio Room of reporting alarms. Persons
who have reporting alarm devices shall arrange that such devices
report alarms to the Bucks County Radio Room by a means whereby
there is a human being intermediary reporting and not a machine.
C. Each alarm equipment vendor shall make service available directly or
through an agent on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days a
week, to repair such device or to correct any malfunction that may
occur.
D. At the time of installation, alarm equipment vendors shall furnish buyer
or lessee written repair service information telling how service may be
obtained at any time, including the telephone number of the person
responsible for service. The buyer or lessee and the person supplying
the service shall be responsible for having the device disconnected or
repaired as quickly as possible after notice that the automatic
protection device is not functioning properly.
§ 58-3 ALARM DEVICES § 58-5
58:59
§ 58-5. Prohibited and defective equipment; disconnection;
prohibited connections.
§ 58-6. Registration; human intermediary required.
§ 58-7. Permit application.
All applicants for a permit shall provide the following information on a form
approved by the Borough:
A. Automatic protection devices are prohibited. All reporting alarms shall
be of the answering service or central station protective system type. It
is a violation of this chapter to have a machine use the Police or Fire
Department telephone line.
B. When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth above are received by the Police or Fire
Department, and the Borough Manager concludes that the automatic
protection device sending such messages should be disconnected in
order to relieve the particular department of the burden of responding
to false alarms, the Borough Manager is authorized to demand that the
owner or lessee of the device, or his representative, disconnect the
device until it is made to comply with the operational requirements.
C. If disconnection of any defective device is not accomplished promptly,
and the Borough Manager determines that the malfunctioning device is
repeatedly sending false alarms, the Borough Manager may then take
any steps necessary to disconnect the defective automatic protection
device.
D. Under no circumstance will devices be hooked directly to Bucks County
911 lines.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, all owners and/or
lessees of property in Perkasie Borough, or their alarm equipment
vendors, who have installed therein any alarm reporting device, audible
alarm or other kind of alarm designed to reach, by the Bucks County
Radio Room, the Perkasie Borough Police or Fire Department shall
register such device with the Borough of Perkasie on a form obtained
from the Borough.
B. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to install any
alarm reporting device, audible alarm or other kind of alarm designed
to reach the Perkasie Borough Police or Fire Department without a
human intermediary.
A. The telephone number(s) of the owner or lessee at home and at his
place of employment or business.
B. The address where the device is to be installed and the telephone
number of that address.
§ 58-5 PERKASIE CODE § 58-7
58:60
§ 58-8. Information to be confidential.
All information furnished pursuant to this requirement shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Borough Manager and
designated personnel of the Police and Fire Departments and the Bucks
County Radio Room.
§ 58-9. Permit application fee.23
All applicants for a permit shall pay a fee to the Borough as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 58-10. Adjustment of sensory mechanism.
The sensory mechanism used in connection with an alarm reporting device
or audible alarm must be adjusted to suppress false indications of intrusion
or fire so that the device will not be activated by impulses due to knocking
on or shaking doors, the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows,
vibrations to the premises causes by the passing of vehicles or any other
force not related to genuine alarms.
§ 58-11. Maintenance.
All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the owner
or lessee in good repair.
§ 58-12. Information to be furnished by vendor.
§ 58-13. False alarms.
C. The name, address and telephone number of any person other than the
owner or lessee who is authorized to respond to an emergency and gain
access to the address where the device is installed.
D. The name and telephone number of any person, firm or corporation who
or which is responsible for maintenance and repair of the automatic
protection device or audible alarm.
A. Each alarm equipment vendor shall furnish operating instructions for
each type of automatic protection device or audible alarm and, at the
time of installation, shall furnish to any buyer or lessee using a repair
service written information as to how service may be obtained at any
time, including the telephone number of the alarm equipment vendor or
agent responsible for service.
B. Alarm equipment vendors shall furnish, prior to the time of contracting
and at their expense, a copy of this chapter to owners, lessees or users
of the equipment to be supplied.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 58-7 ALARM DEVICES § 58-13
58:61
§ 58-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
chapter and who or which fails to comply with requirements of a written
notice advising of such violation within five working days of receipt of such
notice shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before any District
Justice, be liable for a fine or penalty not to exceed $300 for each and every
offense; or, if failure to pay is not caused by indigence or lack of sufficient
assets, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that such violation is continued after
notice shall constitute a new and separate offense, punishable by like fine,
penalty or imprisonment; and further notices to the offender shall not be
necessary in order to constitute such continuance as additional offense or
offenses.
§ 58-15. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it, regulate the use of
sirens or other alarms by emergency service vehicles or devices installed on
automobiles to signal illegal entry.
§ 58-16. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 30 days after adoption.
Chapter 60
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses, carnivals and exhibitions — See Ch.
75.
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
A. A person that owns, uses or possesses an alarm device or automatic
dialing device may not, after causing or permitting three false alarms to
occur in a consecutive twelve-month period, cause or permit a
subsequent false alarm to occur in the same twelve-month period. A
person violating this subsection commits a summary offense and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511, or such other amount as established by
state law.24
B. Deliberate false alarms by any person caught doing so or the creation of
three or more false alarms by neglect of the system in one week are
serious violations of this chapter.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 58-13 PERKASIE CODE § 60-1
60:62
§ 60-1. Annual license fee imposed.
There is hereby imposed an annual license fee at the rate hereinafter
specified on all persons, firms, corporations or associations using or
permitting the use for profit in the Borough of Perkasie of any device
or devices for amusement or entertainment which are operated by the
insertion of a coin or token representing such coin.
§ 60-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVICE — Any amusement machine or device operated by means of the
insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement or
skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. A "device" also means
any machine, apparatus or contrivance which is used or which may be
used as a game of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player
initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine. The term
does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming
or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated
mechanical musical devices.
§ 60-3. Fee designated; payment.
§ 60-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or other
legal entity to install, operate or maintain any device or permit to be
installed, operated or maintained on its premises any device without having
first obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 60-5. License application.
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall file a written
application in duplicate with the Borough Secretary, in which application
shall be stated the following:
A. The yearly license fee hereby imposed shall be established from time to
time by resolution for each device used or played or exhibited for use or
play.
B. All proprietors' license fees shall be payable annually, in advance, by
filing with the Borough Secretary a written application accompanied by
the license fee for each device.
C. Where application is made after June 30 of each year, the license fee
shall be 1/2 of the annual fee.
D. In no case shall any portion of said license be repaid to the licensee.
§ 60-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 60-5
60:63
§ 60-6. Fee to accompany application.
The proper license fee shall accompany each application, which shall be
signed by the applicant.
§ 60-7. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of permit.
A. The name and address of the applicant and manager, and, if a firm,
partnership, corporation or association, the principal officers, directors
and shareholders thereof and their addresses.
B. The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to
be operated, with an explanation of the character of the business to be
carried on at such premises.
C. The statement of whether the applicant is the owner or a tenant of the
licensed premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the licensed
premises, the applicant shall state the name and address of the owner
of the premises.
D. The trade name and a general description of the device or devices to be
licensed, the name of the manufacturer of each device, the number of
devices to be licensed and the serial number of each device.
E. The location on the premises where each device is to be located.
F. A statement as to whether the applicant, manager or any partner,
principal officer or shareholder associated with the applicant has been
convicted of a misdemeanor or felony in any jurisdiction. If there has
been a conviction, then the statement shall explain in detail the date,
nature and disposition of the charges.
G. In the event that the manager, officers, directors or shareholders of a
firm, partnership or corporation change during the time that a license is
held, the licensee shall have an obligation to advise the Borough of the
change in ownership.
A. When the application is completely filled out as required by this chapter
and signed by the applicant, it shall be referred to the Chief of Police
who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the applicant's
business, responsibility and character as is necessary for the protection
of the public health, welfare and safety. The Chief of Police shall
determine whether the applicant or persons associated with the
applicant, or any of the individuals described in § 60-5A and F above,
has or have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude,
engaged in previous fraudulent acts or conduct or made false
statements in the application for the license. If the Chief of Police
determines that none of the foregoing has occurred, the Chief shall
approve or deny the issuance of a permit. In the event that the permit is
not issued, the Chief shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating the
reasons for the denial.
§ 60-5 PERKASIE CODE § 60-7
60:64
§ 60-8. Posting of license.
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the
licensee. No device shall be placed, operated or maintained until the license
has been posted.
§ 60-9. License and location nontransferable.
The holder of any license shall not transfer or permit to be transferred the
license to any other party or to any other device to be maintained, operated
or used in the same location in place of the device stated in the license,
except in the case of a breakdown of a device which is replaced. The holder
of any license may not transfer the location of the machines without filing a
new application for permission to do so with the Borough.
§ 60-10. Increase of number of devices; issuance of amended
permit.
If the holder of a license desires to increase the number of devices on
the premises, the licensee shall request an amended permit by letter to
the Chief of Police. The letter shall describe the number and locations of
the machines that the licensee desires to place. As well, the appropriate
license fee shall be enclosed with the request. The Chief of Police shall
make whatever follow-up inspections or requests for additional information
that he or she deems appropriate. If the Chief of Police determines that the
applicant has provided all necessary information and paid the appropriate
fee, he or she shall approve the issuance of an amended permit. In the event
of an application for an additional permit, the existing original permit shall
remain in full force and effect unless and until revoked pursuant to the
terms of § 60-20 below.
§ 60-11. Location of devices.
No device shall be installed in any premises in the Borough for use by the
public unless the following space requirements are met for the protection
of citizens of the Borough in the event of fire or emergency:
B. If any applicant hereunder shall be denied a permit or an amended
permit, said applicant shall have a right to appeal the denial of said
permit to the Borough Council, provided that said appeal shall be filed
with the Borough within 30 days after the denial of the permit. Said
appeal may be lodged in written form or letter so as to apprise the
Borough of the basis for the appeal.
C. If an appeal is not lodged within 30 days after the denial of a permit by
the Chief of Police, the determination of the Chief with respect to said
application shall become final.
A. At least two feet of open space shall be provided along the side of each
device. Where two devices are adjacent to each other, there shall be at
least three feet of open space between them. Upon good cause shown
§ 60-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 60-11
60:65
§ 60-12. Proximity to public schools and playgrounds.
No device shall be licensed or placed, maintained, operated or used in any
location, the entrance of which is within 300 feet of any entrance to any
public school or public playground, to be measured along the street line.
§ 60-13. Licensed business not to be conducted as nuisance.
No business licensed under this chapter shall be so conducted as to amount
to a public nuisance, whereby the health, welfare or safety of the community
would be adversely affected.
§ 60-14. Hours of operation.
No device may be placed in a location that is open prior to 8:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. except in locations holding a valid liquor license.
§ 60-15. Licensee to police premises against unlawful activities.
It shall be the duty of a licensee to properly police the licensed premises
as well as the areas adjacent to the premises to assure against and prevent
any violation of a Borough ordinance, a state law or any other unlawful
activity, including loitering in front of and nearby the licensed premises. The
licensee shall provide on-site supervision of the devices at all times.
§ 60-16. Devices to be in plain view.
All devices shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of any person
or persons who may use or be in the licensed premises or any person
responsible for supervising the devices.
§ 60-17. Prizes and gambling not permitted.
No licensee shall offer any prize or monetary reward to any person playing
any device, nor shall any licensee permit any device to be used for gambling
purposes.
or impractical application, the Chief of Police shall be permitted to vary
the above-stated location standards insofar as they do not conflict with
the provisions of Subsection D of this section.
B. At least three feet of open space shall be provided for the operator
directly in front of each device. Where two devices are opposite each
other, there shall be at least six feet of open space for the operators
directly in front of each device.
C. The rear of each device shall be placed against a continuous wall.
D. The provisions herein stated do not in any manner preempt or
supersede the provisions of relevant zoning, building and BOCA Code
provisions applicable to the applicant's location. In the event of a
conflicting provision, the provisions of said building codes shall prevail.
§ 60-11 PERKASIE CODE § 60-18
60:66
§ 60-18. Licensing for gambling machines prohibited.
No license shall be granted for any device which shall be in the nature of a
gambling device or machine, and no such device or machine shall be placed,
operated, maintained or used in the licensed premises.
§ 60-19. Inspection by Borough.
It shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the licensed
premises to admit to the licensed premises, for the purpose of making any
inspection, any officer or employee of the Borough who is authorized or
directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.
§ 60-20. Licenses revocable.
§ 60-21. Violations and penalties.25
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the absolute power to revoke a license for
any violation of this chapter.
B. Once a license is issued, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to
revoke a license in the event that the Chief of Police shall be made
aware of information that would have permitted the denial of the
application for a license as described in § 60-7A above.
C. The licensee shall have the ability to appeal to Borough Council within
30 days of the issuance of the notice of revocation. If an appeal is
lodged, the Chief of Police shall have absolute discretion to permit the
licensee to continue operation of the devices during the pendency of the
appeal in the Chief's sole opinion and discretion. It is further
understood that the Chief of Police may impose reasonable restrictions
and/or conditions upon the grant of approval of continuing to operate
during the pendency of the appeal. Borough Council shall hear the
appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, during which time the
licensee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and/or
testimony in support of the licensee's opposition to the revocation.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 60-18 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 60-21
60:67
Chapter 65
BRUSH, GRASS , PLANTS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 152.
Trees — See Ch. 175.
§ 65-1. Height limitation.
Notwithstanding the remainder of this section, no person, firm or
corporation owning or occupying any property within the Borough of
Perkasie shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever not
edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose to grow or remain
upon such premises so as to exceed a height of 12 inches or to throw off
any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create
or produce seed. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any
premises in the Borough in violation of any of the provisions of this section
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 65-2. Persons responsible to maintain premises.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by
the owner, and the occupant thereof, in the case of premises occupied by
other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises and violations
of the provisions of § 65-1.
§ 65-3. Prohibited acts.
The growing or maintaining of any bamboo species, including, but not
limited to Bambusa, Phyllostachys, and Pseudosasa including Common
Bamboo, Golden Bamboo and Arrow Bamboo, and other similar invasive
species ("bamboo"), in such a manner that the bamboo spreads, invades,
or grows on an adjoining or neighboring property. Any property owner or
resident who has planted or maintains bamboo ("bamboo property owner")
shall be required to take such measures that are reasonably expected
to prevent such bamboo from invading or growing onto adjoining or
neighboring properties. Such measures shall include, but not be limited to,
installation of sheathing comprised of metal or other material impenetrable
by bamboo at sufficient depth within the property line or lines where
the running bamboo is planted or growing to prevent the growth or
encroachment upon adjoining or neighboring property by the bamboo.
§ 65-4. Notice of violation; correction by Borough.
§ 60-21 PERKASIE CODE § 65-4
60:68
§ 65-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 65-6. Removal of bamboo required.
A. The Borough Council or any officer or employee of the Borough
designated thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give notice,
by personal service or by United States mail, to the property owner,
bamboo property owner, or occupant thereof, as the case may be, of any
brush, grass, plants, weeds, bamboo or other vegetation growing in
violation or remaining in violation of the provisions of this Chapter 65,
directing and requiring such person or entity to remove, trim, and/or
cut such grass, bamboo, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the
requirements of the chapter within five days after issuance of such
notice.
B. In the case of any person, firm, or corporation that shall neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the Borough authorities may direct or engage the appropriate
Borough employees or other persons to remove, trim, cut or destroy
such grass, weeds, bamboo, or vegetation, and the cost thereof,
together with reasonable attorney's fees and an administrative fee of
10% of such expense, which shall constitute a lien upon the property
and may be collected as provided by law for the collection of municipal
lien claims.
A. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
B. Each day's continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense, and
noticed to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an
offense.
A. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo property owner's
property invades or grows on adjoining or neighboring property that is
owned or held on behalf of the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
bamboo property owner that the bamboo that bamboo property owner
had planted or caused to plant and permitted to grow on their property
has invaded Borough property and that the bamboo property owners
are responsible for the removal of such bamboo from the Borough
property. This notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail to the latest address of the bamboo
property owner on file with the Borough and a copy of the notice shall
also be left in a conspicuous location on the bamboo property owner's
property in the Borough.
B. In the event that the bamboo property owner does not remove or
contact for the removal of said bamboo from the Borough property, or
does not make an arrangement with the Borough for removal of such
bamboo within 30 days from the date the Borough first deposited the
notice as provided herein above with the United States Postal Service,
then the Borough, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for the
§ 65-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 65-6
60:69
§ 65-7. Conflicts with other provisions.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other
requirements of the ordinances of the Borough of Perkasie, the most
restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 65-8. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of
the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses,
sentences, parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Perkasie Borough Council that this chapter would have been
adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, sentence,
part or provision had not been included herein.
Chapter 70
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards and service — See Ch. 85.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 92.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 94.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 133.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Property numbering — See Ch. 137.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 142.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
removal of such bamboo from the Borough property. The bamboo
property owner shall be liable and responsible to the Borough for the
Borough's costs in removing the bamboo from the Borough Property.
Such costs may be assessed against the property of the bamboo
property owner as a municipal lien.
C. In the event that the Borough is compelled to remove or contract for the
removal of bamboo, as herein provided above, neither the Borough nor
its employees shall have any liability for damages or other claims to the
bamboo property owner by reason of the removal of such bamboo. In
the event such removal entails or causes damage to the flora or other
property of a person other than the property of the bamboo property
owner, the bamboo property owner in violation of this chapter shall be
responsible for any and all such damages.
§ 65-6 PERKASIE CODE § 70-1
70:70
§ 70-1. Adoption of building and dwelling standards by reference.
[Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 609; 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
73126]
The following documents, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Manager of the Borough of Perkasie, are hereby adopted and/or updated as
the building codes of the Borough of Perkasie for the control of buildings
and structures, with all the regulatory provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter:
§ 70-2. Modifications and amendments to building standards.
[Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 609; 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 731]
The following sections of the BOCA National Building Code, 1993, are
hereby revised as follows:
A. The BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition, 1993, as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.
B. The CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1992 Edition, with
Appendices A, B, C and D, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., the International Conference
of Building Officials and the Southern Building Code Congress
International.
A. In Section 101.1, Title, the name "Borough of Perkasie" shall be
inserted as the name of jurisdiction referred to in this code.
B. Section 101.2, Scope, shall be amended to provide that "this code shall
regulate as specified, except that the CABO One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code, 1992 Edition, shall apply to the construction,
prefabrication, alteration, repair, use, occupancy and maintenance of
detached one- or two-family dwellings not more than three stories in
height."
C. Section 107.5, Construction documents, is amended to add the
following: "For types of buildings or structures requiring the approval
of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or other state,
federal or county agency, plans and specifications submitted with the
building permit application shall bear evidence of approval of such
departments or agencies."
D. Section 109, Temporary Structures, shall be deleted in its entirety.
E. Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, shall be amended to read as follows:
112.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the building
permit fee schedule established and adopted by the Borough of
Perkasie.27
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 70-2
70:71
F. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended to insert the
following wording:
(1) In line 6: "summary offense."
(2) In line 7: "$1,000."
(3) In line 8: "30 days."
G. Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, shall be amended to insert the
following wording:
(1) In line 5: "$500" and "$1,000."
H. Section 118.1.1, Requirements, shall be added and shall read as
follows:
118.1.1 Requirements: A certificate of occupancy is required
whenever there is a change from one use group to a different use
group or a transfer of ownership.
Exception: A certificate of occupancy is not required for transfer of
ownership in one- and two-family dwellings (Use Groups R-3 and R-4).
I. Section 121.1.1, Fees for appeals, shall be added and shall read as
follows:
121.1.1 Fees for appeals: Fees set forth by Borough Council shall
be paid at time of application to the Board of Appeals and are not
refundable.
J. Section 121.2, Membership of board, shall be amended to read as
follows:
121.2 Membership of Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of
a quorum of the Perkasie Borough Council.
K. Section 121.2.1, "Qualifications," shall be deleted in its entirety.
L. Section 121.5, Postponed hearing, shall be amended to read as follows:
121.5 Postponed hearing: When a quorum of Borough Council is
not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
M. Section 121.6, Board decision, shall be amended to read as follows:
121.6 Board decision: The Board shall modify or reverse the
decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of the
members.
27.Editor's Note: Building permit fees are subject to change. Current fees are available and
may be found on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 70-2 PERKASIE CODE § 70-2
70:72
§ 70-3. Modifications and amendments to dwelling standards.
[Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 731]
The following insertions and amendments to the CABO One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code, 1992 Edition, are hereby adopted:
N. Section 421.10, Enclosures for private swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs, shall be deleted in its entirety.
O. In Section 707.5, Continuity of walls, the first sentence shall be
amended to read as follows: "In all buildings or structures, walls shall
be continuous from foundation to 12 inches above the roof surface,
except as provided in Sections 707.5.1 through 707.5.3."
P. Chapter 13, Energy Conservation, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Q. Section 3304.2, Fences, shall be deleted in its entirety.
R. Chapter 34, regarding existing structures, Sections 3401, 3402, 3403,
3404, 3405 and 3406 are hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
Borough of Perkasie for the alteration, repair, addition and change of
occupancy of existing structures. The remaining provisions of Chapter
34 shall be deleted in their entirety. [Amended 10-17-1994 by Ord.
No. 753]
A. Section R-106.3, Penalty, shall be amended to read as follows:
R-106.3 Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this code shall be guilty of a summary offense, and each
such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and
upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000.
B. Section R-107, Right of Appeal, shall be amended to read as follows:
R-107 Right of Appeal
All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building Official's
decision to Borough Council as set forth in Section 121 of the BOCA
National Building Code.
C. Information required by Table No. R-201.2, Climatic and Geographic
Design Criteria, shall be inserted as follows:
(1) Roof live load: "Twenty pounds per square foot."
(2) Roof snow load: "Twenty pounds per square foot."
(3) Wind pressure: "Not applicable (N/A)."
(4) Seismic condition: "Zone 1."
§ 70-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 70-3
70:73
(5) Weathering: "Severe."
(6) Frost line depth: "Yes (thirty-six-inch depth)." "Exception: For
concrete patios and wooden decks less than 30 inches above
finished grade, the depth of footing may be reduced to 24 inches
below finished grade."
(7) Termite: "Moderate to heavy."
(8) Decay: "Slight to moderate."
(9) Winter design temperature for heating facilities: "Ten."
(10) Note to table: "The criteria shown in this table reflects standard
conditions. Unusual or irregular building shapes or conditions shall
require compliance with applicable standards of Chapter 16 of the
BOCA National Building Code/1993, as amended, as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer."
D. Section R-310, Protection Against Termites, shall be deleted in its
entirety and replaced with Section R-308 of the CABO One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code, 1986 Edition.
E. Section R-702.2.1, Cathedral or vaulted ceilings, shall be added and
shall read as follows:
R-702.2.1 Cathedral or vaulted ceilings: Where a continuous tie
between exterior walls is not practical in a cathedral or vaulted
ceiling, an engineered design must be approved to ensure relief from
horizontal thrust to the exterior walls created by the roof load.
F. Section R-901.6, Wall thickness, shall be amended to read as follows:
[Amended 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 753]
R-901.6 Wall thickness: Masonry chimney walls shall be
constructed of solid masonry units with not less than four-inch
nominal thickness.
G. In Section R-904, Factory-Built Fireplaces, R-904.1, Installation, shall
be amended to add the following:
7. Wood framing surrounding prefabricated fireplaces and metal
chimneys shall be protected on the inside with five-eighths-inch
weather-resistive fire-rated drywall, taped and spackled.
H. Chapter 25, Sewers and Private or Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems, shall be deleted in its entirety and substituted with the
following:
Section P-2501 — General
§ 70-3 PERKASIE CODE § 70-3
70:74
§ 70-4. Exceptions to building permit requirements. [Amended
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 609]
The following activities shall not require a building permit except when
such activities are in violation of Chapter 186, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Perkasie:
§ 70-5. (Reserved)28
§ 70-6. Energy conservation. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 609;
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 729]
Every residential building or residential structure which is constructed,
converted, remodeled or otherwise altered, which is either heated or
cooled, and which provides facilities or shelter for human occupancy shall
have properly installed thermal insulation which shall meet or exceed the
insulation values and the conditions hereinafter set forth.
All requirements and standards for private and/or individual sewage
disposal systems shall be as specified and regulated by the Bucks
County Department of Health and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
Private and/or individual sewage disposal systems shall not be
installed, altered or repaired where a connection with a public sewer
is available.
A. Any interior or exterior repair, remodeling or redecorating which does
not require any structural change or any change of use of a building or
portion thereof.
B. Repair or replacement of a roof, deck or floor or banister of an
unenclosed porch or patio attached to the principal residential use,
provided that such work involves no structural change to the principal
use.
C. Repair or replacement in kind of doors, door frames, window sash or
window frames, provided that such work requires no structural change.
A. Table of insulation values:
Part of Building R Value*
Ceiling R-30
Wall R-13
Floor over unheated area R-19
Slab floor (perimeter) R-7
28.Editor's Note: Former § 70-5, Electrical standards; inspections and approval required, as
amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 731, has been moved to Ch. 85, Electrical Standards and
Service, Art. II, Standards; Inspections.
§ 70-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 70-6
70:75
Part of Building R Value*
NOTES:
* "R value" is the measure of resistance to heat flow through material.
In determining the heat resistance values of a building and for the
purpose of this regulation, the R value above shall apply only to that
of the insulation material. In determining the R value of any insulation
material or product, generally, the published specification of the
manufacturer of the material or product shall be used. In the event
that such specification can not be produced or determined, then the
appropriate tables for thermal resistance values and heat transfer
shall be used as appear in Manual J, Load Calculations, published by
the National Environmental Systems Contractors Association.
B. Windows. Double-glazed windows or storm windows shall be installed
at all exterior window openings to heated or cooled areas.
C. Doors. Insulated doors or storm doors shall be installed at all exterior
doors.
D. Unheated areas. Unless furnished with a positive heat supply, a
basement, crawl space and garage shall be classified as unheated
areas, and the insulation between such unheated areas and living areas
shall meet the requirements of the table above.
E. Ventilation. Attic space shall have a minimum of one square foot of
outlet vent for each 300 square feet of ceiling area. Crawl space
(without moisture seal) shall have a minimum of four vents with one
square foot of vent for each 150 square feet of crawl space. Crawl
space, with moisture seal, shall have a minimum of two vents with one
square foot of vent for each 1,500 square feet of crawl space.
F. Foundation and basement floors. In buildings of wood stud
construction, an insulation sill sealer shall be placed between the
masonry foundation wall and the sill plate. For on-grade construction,
rigid insulation of not less than a two-inch thickness shall be applied to
the interior face of all exterior walls and extend below the exterior
grade not less than 12 inches.
G. Heating pipes, ducts and domestic water heaters. All hot-water heating
pipes, warm-air heating ducts and domestic hot-water heaters located
in unheated areas shall be insulated with one inch or equivalent of the
most appropriate industry-standard material.
H. Multifamily dwellings. In multifamily buildings, the insulation in walls
and floors between dwelling units shall be considered as exterior walls
or as floors over unheated areas.
I. Workmanship and inspection. All insulation material shall be installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. All work shall
be conducted and completed in an acceptable manner so as to secure
the results intended by these regulations. Installed insulation shall not
§ 70-6 PERKASIE CODE § 70-6
70:76
§ 70-7. Interpretation of standards; more restrictive provisions to
apply.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, equipment, use,
height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures. Where
the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of
any ordinance, law or regulation of this borough or of the county, state
or federal governments, the provisions of this chapter will be controlling.
Where the provisions of such other ordinances, laws or regulations impose
a greater restriction, the provisions of such ordinances, laws or regulations
shall be controlling.29
Chapter 72
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
be covered without adequate opportunity for the inspection of the
installation by the Building Official or his representative.
29.Editor's Note: Former §§ 70-8 and 70-9, which immediately followed this section, have
been moved, as follows: § 70-8, Designation of historic buildings and structures, added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 767, has been moved to Ch. 102, Historic Structures; and § 70-9,
Dumpsters or trash receptacles in streets; permit required, added 11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
785, has been moved to Ch. 96, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse, Part 3, Dumpsters.
§ 70-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 70-7
70:77

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 72-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Perkasie Borough
Cable Television Ordinance."
§ 72-2. Purpose.
A. The Borough of Perkasie finds that the development of cable television,
communications systems and other multichannel service technologies
have the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people of
Bucks County. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable television, the Borough further finds that the
public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Borough
or such persons as the Borough shall designate. It is the intent of this
chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in
these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the Borough's residents, but can provide a variety of broadband,
interactive communications services to institutions and individuals.
C. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
(1) Multichannel services should be available to all Borough residents.
(2) The system should be capable of accommodating both the present
and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the
Borough and its residents and be upgraded to correspond to
present state of the art.
(3) The system shall be constructed and maintained during the
franchise term so that new components may be integrated to the
maximum extent possible with existing facilities.
(4) The communications system authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community.
§ 72-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-2
70:79

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 72-3. Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular; and the masculine gender
includes the feminine gender.
§ 72-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated:
ACCESS CHANNELS — Public, educational and governmental access
channels as defined herein.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICE OR BASIC CABLE SERVICE
— Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local broadcast
signals, being the lowest cost tier of service provided.
BOROUGH — Perkasie Borough, Pennsylvania, which has a mailing address
of 311 South Ninth Street, P.O. Box 275, Perkasie, Pennsylvania 18944.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, SYSTEM, CATV OR
CABLE TELEVISION — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include:
CABLE SERVICE — Any lawful services provided through electrical or
other signals, including but not limited to the one-way transmission to
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless
such facility or facilities are covered within the terms and regulations
of the Cable Act;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
[other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act] to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers;
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems; or
D.
A facility which provides non-cable services (other than those for
public, educational and governmental use).
E.
§ 72-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-4
70:81
customers of video programming and other programming services, together
with customer interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
programming, or the utilization of any facilities or equipment of the cable
system to provide such services.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
CHANNEL — A video channel shall include both the visual and aural
carriers and corresponding side bands which constitute the picture and
sound of a television program. If, at any time during the term of any
franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, the bandwidth
necessary to deliver a video signal decreases so that a video signal may be
delivered on a band of frequencies of less than six Megahertz (Mhz), the
channel capacity on the cable system shall be increased accordingly if the
Borough finds that such increase in channel capacity will not result in a
loss of signal quality or will meet any FCC signal quality standards that may
apply to such signals, subject to the provisions of § 72-5D or any franchise
agreement. A franchisee may establish additional requirements concerning
voice and data channels consistent with the franchise agreement in order to
ensure technical and operational integrity and compatibility of the system,
including switching, provided that they are consistent with the performance
standards of this chapter and the franchise agreement.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such video, audio,
data and other services provided to institutional users on an individual
application basis. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video,
two-way video, audio or digital signals among institutions and as may be
specified in the franchise to residential subscribers.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT or CABLE ACT — The Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as it may be amended or succeeded,
including the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Perkasie.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel which can only be received by the
person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
premises in accordance with the Cable Act.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
educational access use.
§ 72-4 PERKASIE CODE § 72-4
70:82
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.
FORCE MAJEURE — A strike, act of God, act of public enemy, insurrection,
riot, epidemic, landslide, lightning, earthquake, accident, fire, hurricane,
tornado, volcanic activity, storm, flood, washout, drought, civil disturbance,
explosion, technical failure, sabotage or other event where the franchisee
has exercised due care in the prevention thereof to the extent that such
cause or event is beyond the control of the franchisee.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter
to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along
the public ways within all or a specified area in the Borough. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any
license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on
a business within the Borough as required by other ordinances and laws of
the Borough.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into between the Borough
and any franchisee setting forth the specific terms and provisions of the
grant of a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire Borough, or portions thereof, for which
a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the corporate
limits of the Borough, including all territory thereafter annexed to the
Borough.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the Borough, of the
franchisee's gross annual revenues from all sources payable in exchange for
the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement.
The term "franchise fee" does not include any tax, fee or assessment of
general applicability that may be assessed against a franchisee by the
Borough, including, but not limited to, the business privilege tax.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership (s)
domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s) or
organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by
the Borough, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated
or dedicated for government access use.
GRANTOR — The Borough of Perkasie as represented by the Borough
Council acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Monetary charges of any character whatever, charged
(excluding bad debts) or paid in any manner, received by franchisee, as
herein provided, from the residents of the Borough, directly or indirectly,
for the privilege of receiving any television signal or electronic impulse
which is transmitted through cables or wires or a system of cables or wires
which pass on, over or along the streets, alleys and public ways within the
Borough. Gross receipts shall include monthly service charges; installation
charges; disconnections and reconnections; repairs or modifications of
§ 72-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-4
70:83
installations; charges for inspections, repairs or modifications; charges for
service fees, late or administrative fees; fees, payments or other
consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming on
the system, excluding incentives from programmers which are used by the
franchisee to pay actual costs of promotion incurred by the franchisee;
revenues from converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production
equipment and personnel fees; advertising revenues; barter; revenues from
program guides; and revenues from phone shopping and bank-at-home
channels. Gross receipts shall be the basis of computing franchise fees
under this chapter. Gross receipts shall include the prorated portion of all
compensation derived from leased channels, programs supplied on a perprogram
or per-channel charge basis. They include any and all cash, credits,
property or other consideration of any kind or nature received annually,
directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its affiliates (except for receipts
upon which a franchise fee has already been paid by an affiliate or the
franchisee) or any person in which the franchisee has a financial interest,
or by any other entity that is a cable operator of the system arising from,
attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of the franchisee's
cable system, including the studios and other facilities associated therewith.
Gross receipts shall not include state and federal taxes relating thereto, or
any amounts collected from subscribers as a franchise fee hereunder. To
the extent that any charges, fees or consideration of any kind are collected
or charged on a basis that makes it impossible to determine the amount
collected within the Borough, said amount shall be calculated on a pro
rated basis by dividing the total number of subscribers within the Borough
to the total number of subscribers in the cable system which includes the
franchise area.
INSIDE WIRING — That portion of the wire installation within and about a
premises that is transferrable upon purchase in accordance with the Cable
Act.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the
grantee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act.
NARROWCASTING — The ability to distribute cable programming to a
particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers.
NONCABLE SERVICES — Any services rendered other than cable services.
Except as expressly set forth in the franchise agreement, the Borough has
not granted authority for the provision of noncable services, except public,
educational and governmental uses. The Borough may grant authority for
the provision of noncable services on whatever terms and conditions the
Borough reasonably determines are appropriate in the circumstances, it
being understood and agreed that, at a minimum, in each case, such terms
and conditions may include payment to the Borough of compensation at
rates different from those set forth for franchise fees. The franchisee shall
pay to the Borough an amount equal to the reasonable costs for the use of
§ 72-4 PERKASIE CODE § 72-4
70:84
the Borough's streets to provide noncable services in the franchise area.
Payment of such costs and expenses shall not be deemed to be franchise
fees within the meaning of the Cable Act, and such payments shall not be
deemed to be payments-in-kind or involuntary payments chargeable against
the compensation to be paid to the Borough by the franchisee as franchise
fees or part of the compensation to be paid to the Borough by the franchisee
as franchise fees.
PAY AUDIO/VIDEO — Any type of audio or audio/video service for which a
fee is charged.
PAY PER VIEW — Any channel for which a fee is charged for a single or
multiple viewing of a specific program.
PAY TV CHANNEL — Any channel for which a fee is charged for viewing.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
use by the general public or organizations which is made available for use
without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with the rules
and regulations specified in the franchise agreement.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park,
parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way or
hereafter held by the Borough which shall entitle the Borough and the
grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the
grantee cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise,
to the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guaranty by
the Borough that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for
such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to
gain only such rights to use property in the Borough as the Borough may
have the undisputed right and power to give. The grantee is also authorized
to utilize public rights-of-way and easements within the Borough that have
been dedicated for compatible uses as provided for in Section 621(a)(2) of
the Cable Act, provided that grantee shall have signed a pole attachment
and underground conduit agreement.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Where not elsewhere specified, shall be written
notice addressed to the grantee at its office as the grantee has designated to
the Borough as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which
notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than 10 business days prior
to that day on which the party giving such notice shall commence any action
which requires the giving of notice. In computing said 10 business days,
holidays recognized by the Borough shall be excluded.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Borough as defined by applicable
law.
§ 72-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-4
70:85
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER - A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
SALE — Include any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit education institution including primary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives cable services and/or
noncable services (to the extent the franchisee is authorized to provide
noncable services).
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SYSTEM FACILITIES OR FACILITIES — Cable communications system
equipment used by the franchisee to provide services in the franchise area.
TIER - Any level of service having one or more channels offered as a
program service or group of services. TRANSFER — Any transaction in
which an ownership or other interest in a franchisee, its cable system or
of any person that is a cable operator of the cable system is transferred
from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons
so that control or controlling interest of the franchisee is transferred;
or the rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under a franchise
agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of
persons. Control or controlling interest means actual working control in
whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control
through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as
the case may be, of a system, a franchise or a franchisee. A rebuttable
presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest may arise
from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any persons or
group of persons acting in concert (other than underwriters during the
period in which they are offering securities to the public) of 5% or more of
any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as
"controlling person"). Control or controlling interest as used herein may be
held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons.
TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications,
which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
§ 72-4 PERKASIE CODE § 72-4
70:86
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 72-5. Grant and continuing obligations.
A. No cable communication system shall be allowed to provide
multichannel service to the Borough residents without a franchise. The
Borough reserves the right to build, own and operate such systems as it
deems appropriate.
B. In the event that the Borough shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive
revocable franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable
communications system within the Borough, said franchise shall
constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a
cable communications system as regulated by the provisions of this
chapter and a franchise agreement.
C. The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions
contained herein, consistent with the Borough Code and/or other
applicable statutory requirements.
D. Any franchise granted by the Borough is hereby made subject to the
general ordinances provisions now in effect and hereafter made
effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the
requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the Borough
regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.
E. State of the art continuing obligation.
(1) General reguirement. Throughout the term of any franchise
agreement, the franchisee shall construct, operate, maintain and
upgrade the cable communications system in order to ensure that it
conforms to the state of the art in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the franchise agreement; provided,
however, that "state of the art" shall be presumed to mean such
technology that is being provided to at least 1/4 of all cable
households nationwide.
(2) State of the art report. Except as may be required in the franchise
agreement, a franchisee shall provide to the Borough, in a form
satisfactory to the Borough, at the Borough's request, but no more
often than once every year, a report setting forth the franchisee's
review and assessment of the current state of the art of cable
communications systems and its plans, if any, for upgrading the
system to conform to the state of the art. The report shall address
such matters as technological advances making possible enhanced
signal quality, publicly available equipment for the receipt of
services or greater channel capacity and interactive systems; a list
of each jurisdiction in which new technologies have been or are
being used and a description of the experience those jurisdictions
have had with such new technologies, an assessment of the costs
§ 72-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-5
70:87
associated with implementing such new technologies into the
system; the franchisee's activities to enhance or advance such
technology in connection with the system and any other cable
communications system or systems operated by the franchisee or
any affiliate in the Borough or elsewhere and the franchisee's
compliance with and any modifications with respect thereto; an
assessment of the need to scramble signals distributed over the
system in order to prevent theft of service (such assessment to
investigate alternatives to scrambling of signals and include a cost/
benefit analysis of both scrambling and such alternatives that takes
into account significant costs and benefits both to the franchisee
and subscribers); a discussion of additional technological advances
anticipated during the remainder of the term of the franchise,
along with a projection of the costs and timetable for the franchisee
offering such advances as part of or over the system; a discussion
of what improvements the franchisee anticipates making in its
customer service facilities, equipment, systems and operations
during the remainder of the term of the franchise, along with a
projection of the costs and timetable for the implementation of
such improvements; a description of any technical experimentation
which the franchisee or any affiliate anticipates undertaking during
the remainder of the term of the franchise; an assessment of the
compatibility of the system with subscribers' televisions and video
cassette recorders, the franchisee's compliance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the FCC pursuant to Section 624A
of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 544a) and any experimentation the
franchisee is making to enhance such compatibility; and, generally,
the steps the franchisee or any affiliate is undertaking to
continuously construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system
in accordance with the state of the art. The state of the art report
submitted by a franchisee may be only one resource that the
Borough will consider in evaluating the franchisee's obligation
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the ordinance to
continuously construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system
in accordance with the state of the art, and the Borough may
commission third parties, as necessary, to ascertain the current
state of the art in cable communications systems generally.
(3) Procedures for maintaining state of the art. Upon receiving any
report from a franchisee required pursuant to the franchise
agreement and this section of this chapter, the Borough will
evaluate such report and may assemble any additional data
necessary to ascertain whether the franchisee's system or any
aspect thereof needs to be upgraded so that it meets the state of
the art requirement set forth herein.
(4) System upgrade. As more specifically provided in the franchise
agreement, after a system has been evaluated, the Borough and the
franchisee may meet to determine to what extent the system needs
to be upgraded to incorporate state of the art features. In the event
§ 72-5 PERKASIE CODE § 72-5
70:88
§ 72-6. Use of public rights-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the Borough, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along
the public streets and ways within the Borough such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary
to the operation of the cable communications systems; provided, however,
that the grantee complies with all design, construction, safety and
performance provisions contained in this chapter, the franchise agreement,
pole attachment agreement and other applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, the Federal Technical Performance Standards, National
Electrical Safety Code (current edition) and the pole attachment and
underground conduit agreement.
§ 72-7. Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the Borough or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
that the Borough and the franchisee are unable to agree upon
whether it is economically and technically feasible and viable for
the franchisee to upgrade the system to incorporate state of the
art features, the issue shall be settled by arbitration administered
by the American Arbitration Association in accordance with its
applicable rules, and judgment upon the award rendered by the
arbitrator may be entered in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
(5) "State of the art," as applicable, means that level of technical or
service performance, capacity and capability (including, but not
limited to, plant or other equipment; access channel and other
production equipment or facilities; construction techniques;
customer service; facilities, equipment, systems and operations;
and performance standards) which has been developed and
demonstrated in the cable industry, or any other comparable
industry that provides services to the public under similar
conditions, to be workable and economically and technically
feasible and viable, from time to time, throughout the term of the
franchise.
(6) "Economically and technically feasible and viable" means capable
of being provided: through technology which has been
demonstrated in actual applications (not simply through tests or
experiments) to operate in a workable manner; and in a manner
which has a reasonable likelihood of generating additional
revenues or other financial benefits for a system, when measured
over the term of the franchise.
§ 72-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-8
70:89
§ 72-8. Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise as granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
specified in the franchise agreement in the discretion of the Borough.
§ 72-9. Franchise to be nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The
Borough specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional
franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate, and/
or build, operate and own such cable communications system or systems as
it deems appropriate.
§ 72-10. Transfer of ownership or control.
Except as may be provided in a franchise agreement, any transfer of a
franchise shall conform to the following provisions:
A. Transfer of franchise. No franchise granted hereunder shall be
transferred and no control or controlling interest in any system,
franchise or franchisee shall be transferred without the prior written
consent of the Borough, and then only under such reasonable
conditions as the Borough may establish, and only if in compliance with
Section 617 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 537) and regulations
promulgated by the FCC to implement Section 617.
B. The franchisee shall promptly notify the Borough by written petition of
any proposed transfer. The petition shall fully describe the proposed
action and shall be accompanied by a justification for the action and, if
applicable, an argument as to why such action would not involve a
change in control or controlling interest. The Borough shall notify the
franchisee as soon as all of the information required by the FCC, the
franchise agreement, this and all applicable state and local law has
been received by the Borough and that therefore the petition is
complete, after which the Borough shall take action within 120 days
following the date such notice is provided by the Borough, pursuant to
Section 617(e) of the Cable Act.
C. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer,
the Borough may inquire, with the assistance of the grantee, into the
legal, financial, character, technical, customer service and operations
qualifications of the prospective controlling party and the effect that the
proposed transfer and sale price may have on rates being paid by
subscribers. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by
the Borough as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the
proposed transfer. If the Borough finds the results of this inquiry are
satisfactory, its consent to such transfer shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
D. Assumption of control. Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
§ 72-8 PERKASIE CODE § 72-10
70:90
§ 72-11. Franchise fees.
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to
notify the Borough that it or its designees satisfactory to the Borough
will take control and operate the cable television system. Further, said
financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will
ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations
during the term the financial institution exercises control over the
system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the
system for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the Borough
at its discretion, and during said period of time it shall have the right
to petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. If the
Borough finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial,
character, technical customer service, and operations qualifications of
the applicant are satisfactory and that the proposed transfer and sale
price will not result in a rate increase to subscribers, the Borough will
transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in
the public interest. The consent of the Borough to such transfer shall
not be unreasonably withheld.
E. The consent or approval of the Borough to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Borough in
and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
F. The Borough reserves the right to review the purchase price of any
transfer or assignment of the cable television system. Any negotiated
sale value which the Borough deems unreasonable will not be
considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate
increases, if permitted by applicable law and § 72-18 of this chapter.
G. Any approval by the Borough of transfer of ownership or control shall
be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a
signatory to the franchise agreement.
H. The transfer of any franchise or the transfer of control or controlling
interest in any system, franchise or franchisee without the prior written
consent of the Borough shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
system by the franchisee under § 72-32 of this chapter and shall entitle
the Borough to all of the rights set forth under § 72-32.
A. Because the Borough finds that the streets of the county, state and
Borough to be used by the grantee in the operation of this system within
the boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the county, state and Borough at great
expense to its taxpayers; and the grant to the grantee to said streets is a
valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to
invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and the
administration of this chapter and the franchise imposes upon the
Borough additional regulatory responsibility and expense; and the
§ 72-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-11
70:91
§ 72-12. Revocation and acceleration of expiration date.
Except as may be provided in any franchise agreement, revocation or
acceleration of an expiration date of any franchise shall be subject to the
following provisions:
presence of the grantee and its facilities places additional burdens
upon the Borough police and road departments and the volunteer fire
company serving the area which is supported by the Borough; a grantee
of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the Borough a franchise fee
in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement up to the
maximum amount permitted under applicable federal, state or local
law. The present maximum franchise fee allowable is 5% of gross
annual revenues.
B. The grantee shall reimburse the Borough in an amount equal to the
reasonable costs and expenses which the Borough incurs for the
services of third parties (including, but not limited to, attorneys and
other consultants) in connection with any renegotiation, transfer,
amendment or other modification of this chapter or the franchise
(where such action is specifically initiated by the grantee or an affiliated
person at such time and in such manner as the Borough Manager shall
specify. Payments of such costs and expenses shall not be deemed to be
"franchise fees" within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Act (47
U.S.C. § 542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be paymentsin-
kind or involuntary payments chargeable against any other
compensation to be paid to the Borough by the grantee.
C. In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is
not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement,
the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at a rate of 1.5% per month,
compounded for each month that the franchise fee payment is late.
D. The franchise fee shall be payable as specified in the franchise
agreement and shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise.
The Borough shall be furnished at the time of each payment with a
statement certified by the grantee's certified public accountant or other
appropriate corporate representative reflecting the total amounts of
gross revenues for the period conveyed by the payment.
E. The Borough shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income
records upon 15 days' written notice and the right to audit and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter
for a period of five years from the date of payment. One audit per year
shall be at the expense of the franchisee. Any additional amount due the
Borough as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following
written notice to the grantee by the Borough which notice shall include
a copy of the audit report unless written notice of disagreement is filed
by the grantee with the Borough within such time.
§ 72-11 PERKASIE CODE § 72-12
70:92
A. Grounds for revocation or acceleration of expiration date. The Borough
reserves the right to accelerate the expiration of the franchise term
and/or revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights
and privileges associated with the franchise in the following
circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach
under the ordinance and the franchise agreement:
(1) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this chapter or under such documents,
contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and
between the Borough and the grantee.
(2) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or any
performance bond or security fund as required.
(3) If the grantee shall violate any lawful orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this
chapter or the franchise.
(4) If the grantee practices any fraud upon the Borough or any
subscriber.
(5) If it is determined that the grantee willfully underpaid its franchise
fee by 15% or more for any year.
(6) If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the
schedule contained in the franchise agreement or beyond any
extended date set by the Borough.
(7) If there is an occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to
the foreclosure or other similar judicial or nonjudicial sale of all or
any material part of the system, including, but not limited to, any of
the following events:
(a) Default under any loan or any financing arrangement material
to the system or the obligations of the grantee under the
franchise agreement;
(b) Default under any contract material to the system or the
obligations of the grantee under the franchise agreement; or
(c) Termination of any lease or mortgage covering all or any
material part of the system.
(8) If in regards to any grantee:
(a) A grantee shall suspend or discontinue its business, shall make
an assignment for the benefit of creditors, shall fail to pay its
debts generally as they become due, shall become insolvent
(however such an insolvency may be evidenced), shall be
adjudicated insolvent, shall petition or apply to any tribunal for
or consent to the appointment of or taking possession by a
§ 72-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-12
70:93
receiver, custodian, liquidator or trustee or similar official
pursuant to state or local laws, ordinances or regulations of or
for it or any substantial part of its property or assets, including
all or any part of this system; or
(b) A writ or warrant of attachment, execution, distraint, levy,
possession or any similar process shall be issued by any
tribunal against all or any material part of a grantee's property
or assets; or
(c) Any creditor of a grantee petitions or applies to any tribunal for
the appointment of or taking possession by a trustee, receiver,
custodian, liquidator or similar official for the grantee or of any
substantial parts of the assets of the grantee under the law of
any jurisdiction, whether now or hereinafter in effect, and an
order, judgment or decree is entered appointing any such
trustee, receiver, custodian, liquidator or similar official, or
approving the petition in any such proceedings; or
(d) Any order, judgment or decree is entered in any proceedings
against a grantee decreeing the voluntary or involuntary
dissolution of the grantee.
(9) If there is a failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
total system outage in 40% or more of the system, except when
approval of such interruption is obtained from the Borough or is
excused pursuant to Subsection B.
(10) If the grantee transfers the franchise or transfers control or a
controlling interest in any system, franchise or in the grantee itself
without the prior written consent of the Borough pursuant to the
provisions set forth in § 72-10 of this chapter.
B. Effect of circumstances beyond control of the grantee. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement, a
grantee shall not be liable for delay in performance of or failure to
perform in whole or in part its obligations pursuant to the franchise
agreement or this chapter due to force majeure. In the event that any
such delay in performance or failure to perform affects only part of a
company's capacity to perform, the company shall perform to the
maximum extent that it is able to do so and shall take all steps within its
power to correct such cause or causes. In correcting such cause or
causes, a grantee shall take all reasonable steps to do so in as
expeditious a manner as possible. A grantee shall notify the Borough in
writing of the occurrence of an event covered by this subsection within
five business days of the date upon which the grantee learns of this
occurrence. Shortage or unavailability of equipment from suppliers
shall not be deemed to be beyond the control of the grantee in regards
to any construction delays.
C. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having
jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the
§ 72-12 PERKASIE CODE § 72-12
70:94
performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise
agreement. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because
of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation
pursuant to the provisions of this section. The Borough shall comply
with any related court orders.
D. Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The Borough shall make written demand that the grantee do so
comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule
or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation.
After written demand is made, the Borough may place its request
for revocation of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting
agenda. The Borough shall cause to be served upon such grantee at
least 30 days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written
notice of this intent to request such revocation, and the time and
place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the
Borough once, at least seven days before such meeting, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Borough.
(2) The Council shall hear any persons interested therein and shall
determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
(3) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as determined by the Council, the Council shall direct the
grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such
terms and conditions as are reasonable.
(4) Enforcement is subject to applicable federal and state law. In the
event that the Borough, after such meeting, determines that the
grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the
franchising authority may:
(a) Foreclose on all or part of any security deposit provided under
the franchise, if any, including, without limitation any bonds or
other surety; provided, however, that the foreclosure shall only
be in such manner and in such amount as the Borough
reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default.
(b) Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief.
(c) In the case of a substantial default of material provision of the
franchise, declare the chapter and franchise agreement to be
revoked.
(d) Seek specific performance of any provision.
(e) Seek any other legal or equitable remedies as may be available
to the franchising authority.
§ 72-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-12
70:95
§ 72-13. Receivership and foreclosure.
E. Disposition of facilities. In the event that a franchise expires, is revoked
or otherwise terminated, the Borough may, in its sole discretion, do any
of the following:
(1) Order the removal of the system facilities from the Borough within
a reasonable period of time as determined by the Borough.
(2) Require the grantee to maintain and operate its system for a period
of up to 18 months or such further time as may be mutually agreed
upon. During any time the grantee continues to operate the system,
it shall do so pursuant to the terms of this chapter and its franchise
agreement and shall be entitled to the revenues from the system.
(3) Order that the system be transferred to another cable operator.
A. Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall, at
the option of the Borough, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take
over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or similar action or proceeding, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and the
receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all
defaults under this chapter or the franchise agreement; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise agreement and this chapter.
B. Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any
part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the Borough may
serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder
at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of
the grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after
service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Borough shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in
the manner this chapter provides; and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Borough to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement.
§ 72-12 PERKASIE CODE § 72-14
70:96
§ 72-14. Notices.
All notices from the grantee to the Borough pursuant to this chapter and
the franchise agreement shall be to the Borough Manager or his designee.
The grantee shall maintain with the Borough, throughout the term of the
franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall
also maintain with the Borough, a local office and telephone number for
the conduct of matters related to the franchise during normal business
hours. The grantee shall advise the Borough of such address and toll free
telephone numbers and any changes thereto.
§ 72-14 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-14
70:97

ARTICLE IV
Relation of Franchise
§ 72-15. Regulatory authority.
§ 72-16. Supervision of the franchise.
A. The Borough shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be
vested in the Borough Council and administered through the Borough
Manager or his designee in order to provide day-to-day administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise
granted hereunder, and to carry out the Borough's responsibilities with
regard to cable communications.
B. The Borough reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary
authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the
cable communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should
applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time
permit regulation not presently permitted to the Borough, the Borough
may, without the approval of the grantee, engage in any such additional
regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by
this chapter.
A. The Borough shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
(1) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise agreement.
(2) Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement and other
applicable law.
(3) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
(4) Performance evaluation.
(5) Rate regulation, to the extent authorized and/or elected by the
Borough under law. If the Borough elects to regulate rates, it will
comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members of the
public to participate in rate-making proceedings.
(6) Establishment of customer service standards.
B. The Borough also reserves the right to perform the following functions
and all other functions allowed by law present or future:
(1) Develop objectives or coordinate activities related to the operation
of government channels.
§ 72-15 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-16
70:99
§ 72-17. Cable Television Evaluation and Advisory Committee.
(2) Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the use
of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.
(3) Analyze plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable
services.
(4) Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or regional telecommunications networks.
(5) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy
for the Borough, and determine the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community.
(6) Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.
(7) Periodically inspect and analyze the records related to citizen
complaints. The franchisee shall maintain complaint records which
shall record the date of complaint, name and address of the
affected subscriber, description of the complaint, date of
resolution, description of the resolution and an indication of
whether the resolution was appealed. Such records shall be
maintained continuously throughout the term of this agreement.
(8) Receive applications for rate changes if applicable and provide staff
assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
(9) Monitor the grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(10) Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(11) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed to ensure compliance with this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
(12) Assure continuity in service.
(13) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
(14) Regulate rates on a regional basis in cooperation with other
municipalities.
A. The Borough may, in its discretion, create a citizen's committee entitled
the "Cable Television Advisory Committee." The responsibilities of the
Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Monitor and advise the Borough Council and Borough
Administration on the performance of the grantee under the
§ 72-16 PERKASIE CODE § 72-17
70:100
§ 72-18. Rates and charges.
provisions of the Borough's cable television ordinance, franchise
agreement and related ordinances.
(2) Serve as advisory body with respect to the public, educational and
local government access channels of cable television and any
institutional programming that may be developed. Encourage the
use of the public channels among the widest range of institutions,
groups and individuals within the Borough.
(3) Advise the Borough government of objectives to be obtained in the
Borough's cable communications system based upon its continued
evaluation of the Borough's cable television franchise, cable
technology, performance of the grantee and the future cablerelated
needs and interests of the community.
(4) Prepare an annual report to the Council on the activities of the
Committee and the performance of the grantee.
(5) Cooperate with the Borough and the grantee in fulfilling its
responsibilities herein.
B. The Committee shall be composed of at least three residents of the
Borough who shall be appointed by the Council to terms of two years
and who shall serve without compensation. Members shall not be
employees of nor have any financial interest in a grantee or a parent or
subsidiary corporation of a grantee.
A. The grantee shall file with the Borough schedules which shall describe
all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind and all terms and
conditions relating thereto, on the effective date of the franchise and 45
days prior to any change. Notice of all proposed rate changes must be
filed with the Borough at least 45 days prior to any change, whether the
Borough has the authority to regulate the rate or not so that the
Borough can respond to any public inquiries or complaints. The
Borough will comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members
of the public to participate in rate-making proceedings. No rates or
charges shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed.
The grantee shall notify all subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior
to the implementation of any change in services offered, rates changes
or terms and conditions related thereto. The grantee's written notice
shall include a comparison of old and new rates and charges and shall
be included in the customer's bill.
B. The grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the
same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and
uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering
discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed
on a bulk basis; promotional discounts; senior citizens and economically
§ 72-17 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-18
70:101
disadvantaged individuals. The grantee's charges, rates for all services
and subscriber services shall be itemized and described on each
subscriber's bill.
C. Bills are to state monthly charge in detail, showing all items billed per
month. Bills should be legible, include the date bills are mailed,
penalties applied for late payments, discounts for early payments and
the duration of time to make payments.
D. Policy statements regarding special discount charges for prepayment of
six-month and twelve-month duration or senior citizens, charges for
special equipment for hearing impaired people, and basic service
charges are to be shown on the customer's statement on either the front
or back.
E. Billing cycles for six- or twelve-month periods are to commence at any
time of year. All customers must be made aware of discounts and other
options to reduce monthly cable charges.
F. Once yearly customers are to be made aware of the cost per channel for
basic, broadcast and premium services or any other similar services
initiated at a future time.
G. The Borough and subscribers are to be advised of incorrect billings or
moneys to be refunded within 30 days of discovery of errors or
resolution of question of errors.
H. No customer of the franchisee shall be required to pay for unwanted
services or equipment. Consumers should not be required to pay in
advance, nor penalized for failure to do same.
I. The grantee shall provide the Borough with copies of all responses
provided to complaints filed by any persons with the FCC.
§ 72-18 PERKASIE CODE § 72-18
70:102
ARTICLE V
Bonds, Insurance and Indemnification
§ 72-19. Performance bond and/or letter of credit.
A. Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee
shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise and
any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file
with the Borough a corporate surety bond in such sum as specified in
the franchise agreement to guarantee the faithful performance by the
grantee of all its obligations provided under this chapter and the
franchise agreement. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain such
bond shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this
section.
B. Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
(1) There shall be recoverable by the Borough jointly and severally
from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated
damages due to the Borough, as specified in the franchise
agreement, and any and all damages, losses, costs and expenses
suffered or incurred by the Borough resulting from the failure of
the grantee to faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement; comply with all orders, permits and
directives of any Borough agency or body having jurisdiction over
its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the Borough; pay any claims,
liens or taxes due the Borough which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable
communications system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall
include, but not be limited to, attorney's fees and other associated
expenses.
(2) The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
Borough in the event that the Borough revokes the franchise
pursuant to § 72-12 for the following reasons:
(a) The grantee abandons the cable communications system at any
time during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto;
or
(b) The grantee assigns the franchise without the express written
consent of the Borough, provided that the grantee has been
notified of such noncompliance in writing by the Borough and
has failed to cure same within 30 days.
C. Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the
Borough may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be
reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to
the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or denied upon
application by the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's
§ 72-19 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-19
70:103
subsequent applications or to the Borough's right to require a full bond
at any time thereafter.
D. Letter of credit. If required by the Borough in lieu of the performance
bond required by this section, the grantee shall obtain, maintain and
file with the Borough an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution licensed to do business in the state in an amount specified by
the franchise agreement, naming the Borough as beneficiary. The form
and contents of such letter of credit shall be approved by the Borough
and shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise or upon the
replacement of the letter of credit by a successor grantee. Failure to
obtain the letter of credit within the time specified herein shall
constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this chapter.
E. Use of performance bond or letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the
letter of credit or the performance bond for the purposes described in
this section, the Borough shall notify the grantee in writing specifying
the item for which payment is claimed and the date it was due. The
grantee shall have 10 days from the receipt of such written notice to
make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the
payment, the Borough may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest
and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond.
F. Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit
or performance bond, the Borough shall send to the grantee, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the
amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
G. Replenishment of letter of credit or performance bond. No later than 30
days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of a
withdrawal pursuant to Subsection F above, the grantee shall replenish
the letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to the
amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such
amount to the letter of credit or performance bond shall constitute a
substantial violation of this chapter.
H. Nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation of letter of credit or
performance bond. The performance bond or letter of credit required
herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the Borough and shall require
30 days' written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation to
both the Borough and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any
such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the
Borough, written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or letter
of credit within 30 days following receipt by the Borough or the grantee
of any notice of cancellation.
I. To offset the effects of inflation, the amounts of the bond or letter of
credit provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the
end of every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next
three-year period, upon the determination of the Borough.
§ 72-19 PERKASIE CODE § 72-20
70:104
§ 72-20. Security fund.
§ 72-21. Liability and insurance.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of any franchise agreement
requiring a security fund, the grantee shall deposit with the grantor and
maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, in cash, such
sum as specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the
payment of any fees, liquidated damages or penalties imposed under
this chapter. Said sum shall be placed by the grantor in an interestbearing
account.
B. Within 10 days after notice to the grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to Subsection A
of this section, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the grantor a
sum of money or securities sufficient to restore such security fund to
the original amount as specified in the franchise agreement.
C. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the grantor in the event that this franchise is cancelled by
reason of default of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall be entitled
to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on
deposit with the grantor at the expiration of the term of this franchise,
provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the
grantee.
D. The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security funds are
in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such security funds shall affect any other right the
grantor may have.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement and
thereafter continuously through the duration of the franchise and any
extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the Borough
certificates of insurance, approved by the Borough, for all types of
insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said
certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
B. Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with this
section shall be filed and maintained with the Borough during the term
of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time to reflect
changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. The grantee
shall immediately advise the Borough of any litigation that may develop
that would affect this insurance.
C. Neither the provisions of this section or any damages recovered by the
Borough hereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the
grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
§ 72-20 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-21
70:105
D. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall contain the following, or a comparable,
endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may
not be cancelled by the insurance company nor the intention not to
renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt
by the Borough Manager, by registered mail, of a written notice of such
intention to cancel or not to renew."
E. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall name the Borough as an additional insured.
F. All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement shall be written by companies authorized to do
business in the state, and approved by the State Insurance Commission.
G. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall provide that the Borough as the franchising
authority, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents shall be
shown as named insureds. The names of the elected officials, officers,
employees and agents need not be indicated on the insurance policies
so long as the policy clearly covers all individuals acting in those
capacities.
H. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits,
all of the coverages, limits and amounts of the insurance provided for
herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of every threeyear
period of the franchise, applicable to the next three-year period,
upon the determination of the Borough by resolution.
I. General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability
insurance insuring the grantee for a minimum of $1,000,000 for all
damage, injury, accident or death.
J. Libel and allied torts. The grantee shall maintain a libel and allied torts
insurance policy in an amount specified in the franchise agreement.
K. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the
following: comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and
collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations
hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage and
personal injury.
L. Motor vehicle liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, motor vehicle
liability insurance for owned, nonowned or rented vehicles in the
minimum amount of:
§ 72-21 PERKASIE CODE § 72-21
70:106
§ 72-22. Indemnification.
(1) One million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence;
(2) One million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death to any
one person;
(3) One million dollars for property damage per occurrence.
M. Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term
of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid
in the state, in the minimum amount of:
(1) Statutory limit for worker's compensation.
(2) One hundred thousand dollars for employer's liability.
A. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the grantee shall, at its sole cost
and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its
officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and
employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including
without limitation worker's compensation claims against the Borough
or others), causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or
damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal
fees and disbursements assumed by the Borough in connection
therewith):
(1) To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts
or omissions of the grantee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees.
(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation of
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service
mark or patent, or any other right of any person, firm or
corporation, but excluding claims arising out of or related to
Borough programming or programming for which the grantee is
not legally responsible.
(3) Arising out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, state or local statute, ordinances or regulation
applicable to the grantee in its business hereunder.
(4) Arising out of any action or claim related to obscenity, indecency or
sexually explicit programming deemed to be under the control of
the grantee.
B. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The
Borough shall give the grantee prompt notice of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
§ 72-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-22
70:107
provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent
the Borough from cooperating with the grantee and participating in
the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its own costs and
expenses.
§ 72-22 PERKASIE CODE § 72-22
70:108
ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Provisions
§ 72-23. Authority to construct new cable systems.
§ 72-24. Construction and technical standards.
A. Application. Prior to the commencement of construction of a new cable
system within the Borough, the grantee shall make application to the
Borough and pay such application fees as established by resolution of
the Borough Council from time to time. The form of the application and
the information required shall be as determined by the Borough
Manager or his designee.
B. Authorization to commence construction and other application
procedures. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise
agreement, the grantee shall apply for any needed contracts for pole
use. Pole space and other facilities obtained from the Borough, utilities
and other lawful users of the public way shall be at the cost and expense
of the grantee. Within 30 days after completion of the make-ready
survey identifying the routes of the system facility, the grantee shall
apply for all additional licenses from the state, Borough or other
necessary parties, such as the railroads for crossing under or over their
property. In any event, all necessary applications for permits, licenses,
certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so
that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay
with the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise agreement.
Failure to make such timely application or timely filing shall constitute a
substantial violation of this chapter and the Borough shall have the
right to revoke the franchise agreement or revoke any construction
authorization in its discretion.
C. Power to contract. Upon grant of the franchise and in order to
construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the
Borough, the grantee may enter into contracts with any public utility
companies or other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas
located within or without the Borough, obtain right-of-way permits from
appropriate Borough, state, county and federal officials necessary to
cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their respective
jurisdiction; obtain permission from the Federal Aviation
Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever
other permits a Borough, county, state or federal agency may require.
A. Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee
shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. The system
shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24 hours
per day of continuous operation. The system shall produce, for
reception on subscribers' receivers which are in good working order,
§ 72-23 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-24
70:109
either monochrome or color pictures (provided that the receiver is color
capable).
B. Contractor qualifications. Any contractor, subcontractor or affiliate
proposed for work on construction, installation, operation, maintenance
or repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under the laws
of the state and all Borough codes. The Borough shall be notified in
advance of any subcontractor to be used in the initial construction,
rebuild or upgrade of the system.
C. The grantee's system and associated equipment erected by the grantee
within the Borough shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways
and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said
streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixture
placed in any public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a
manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way.
D. The Borough does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the
horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public
rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by
excavation.
E. The grantee shall at all times comply with the:
(1) National Electrical Safety Code;
(2) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
(3) National Cable Television Association standards;
(4) Applicable utility company standards;
(5) Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; and
(6) Standards as set forth in the franchise agreement.
F. In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety
of persons or property in the franchise area.
G. Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall
comply with construction, marking and lighting of antenna structure
standards as required by federal and state law or regulation.
H. All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during
construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the cable
television system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
I. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby
power as provided in the franchise agreement.
§ 72-24 PERKASIE CODE § 72-25
70:110
§ 72-25. System construction schedule.
The franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 72-26. Use of streets.
A. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the Borough
where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone
or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation,
the grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such
time as both these facilities are required to be placed underground by
the Borough or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise
place its services underground. Where not otherwise required to be
placed underground by this chapter or the franchise agreement, the
grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of a
property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location
shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable
passing under the public way shall be installed in accordance with all
state and local laws and ordinances.
B. Prior to construction or alteration in any public way, however, the
grantee shall in each case file plans with the Borough and obtain all
necessary construction permits and authorizations before proceeding.
C. Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, property or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost
and expense and in a manner approved by the Borough, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, landscaping or surfacing of any property or
public way disturbed in as good a condition as or better than before said
work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in
accordance with standards for such work set by the Borough. Weather
conditions permitting, such restoration shall be undertaken within no
more than 10 business days after the damage is incurred and shall be
completed within 30 business days, unless otherwise authorized by the
Borough.
D. Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the
period of the franchise, the Borough, county or state shall lawfully elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public ways or
make repairs or improvements to any infrastructure, the grantee, upon
reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as
necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other fixtures at its own expense and with all due deliberate speed. In
the event any utility is reimbursed for this same work, the grantee will
be reimbursed on the same terms and conditions.
E. Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Borough,
temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
§ 72-25 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-26
70:111
§ 72-27. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
§ 72-28. Construction reporting requirements.
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee
shall be given reasonable advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.
F. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing Borough ordinances, to trim any trees upon or
overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at
the option of the Borough, such trimming as may be required by the
grantee may be done by the Borough or under its supervision and
direction at the expense of the grantee. The grantee shall notify the
Borough prior to trimming any trees in the right-of-way.
G. Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be arranged for by the grantee. This language shall not be
interpreted to in any way impinge on the grantee's right to utilize public
rights-of-way and easements that have been dedicated for compatible
uses as provided for in Section 621(a)(2) of the Cable Act.
A. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or
rebuild of the cable communications system under this chapter, the
grantee shall first submit to the Borough and other designated parties
for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be
erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required,
together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all
such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole,
underground conduit or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the
cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until
approval therefor has been received from the Borough, such approval
not to be unreasonably withheld.
B. Where poles already existing for use in serving the Borough are
available for use by the grantee, the Borough may require the grantee
to use such poles and structures; in which event the Borough and
grantee shall enter into a pole attachment and underground conduit
agreement acceptable to the Borough.
A. Within 30 days of the grant, the grantee shall provide the Borough with
a written progress report detailing work completed to date on initial
construction or a rebuilding of a cable television system. Such report
shall include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary
agreements, licenses or certifications and any other information the
Borough Manager may deem necessary. The content and format of the
report will be determined by the Borough Manager and may be
modified at his discretion.
§ 72-26 PERKASIE CODE § 72-28
70:112
B. Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the Borough on a
monthly basis throughout the entire initial construction or rebuilding
process. The Borough Manager may require more frequent reporting if
he determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's progress.
C. Prior to the commencement of any initial construction or rebuilding of a
cable television system, the grantee shall produce an informational
document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under
construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place.
The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Manager prior to its distribution.
§ 72-28 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-28
70:113

ARTICLE VII
Service Problems
§ 72-29. Services to subscribers and users.
A. Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in
the Borough, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as
described in the franchise agreement.
(1) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services that may be listed in the franchise agreement. Should the
grantee desire to change the selection of programs or services
offered, it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services
provided over the system. Any such change in programs or services
offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained
in the franchise agreement and shall be reported to the Borough at
least 60 days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee
shall notify all subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to
implementing any change in the selection of programs or services
offered on any tiers or prior to adding or deleting any channels or
changing the channel number for any station. The grantee shall
endeavor to ensure diversity of programming regarding the
community's needs.
(2) The grantee shall provide and maintain on such channels as the
franchise agreement may direct, the following access services.
(a) Government and education access channel, which shall be a
specifically designated channel for governmental and school
use by the Borough and other local governmental and
educational entities at the discretion of the Borough.
(b) Public access channel, which will be a specifically designated
channel available on a nondiscriminatory basis to residents of
the Borough. Notice of availability and method for public to
access public access channel is to be published once yearly in a
newspaper notice and by a once-yearly mailing.
(c) The franchisee shall provide one qualified, trained and
experienced employee to provide, consistent with the
employee's performance of his/her other job, duties and
responsibilities, technical assistance and guidance to qualified
access users who may require help and support in utilizing the
access equipment and facilities.
(3) The grantee shall make available leased access channels to assure
that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made
available to subscribers.
(a) Such channels shall be specially designated for leased access
use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates which are
in accordance with the Cable Act.
§ 72-29 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-29
70:115
§ 72-30. Connections and other grantee services.
(b) The number of such channels shall be determined by the
provisions of the Cable Act or other applicable federal and
state law.
(c) The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any
programming provided over such channels, except that the
grantee may consider such content to the minimum extent
necessary to establish a fair and reasonable price for the use of
such channels.
(4) The grantee shall fully provide the services, facilities and
equipment for public, educational and government access as
indicated in the franchise agreement.
(5) The grantee shall comply with all obscenity and indecency
regulations as adopted by the FCC.
B. Emergency override. The grantee shall, without charge, provide,
service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities on all
channels to the Borough, as described in the franchise agreement.
A. Deposits. For any deposit required by the grantee that earns interest,
such interest shall be returned to the subscriber at such time as the
deposit is returned.
B. Parental control devices. The grantee shall provide to subscribers, as
part of its literature, information concerning the availability of a
parental control device for use by a subscriber. The parental control
device described shall be made available to all subscribers upon
request at cost.
C. Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service, provided that the customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed.
D. Disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable television
service disconnected in accordance with federal law.
E. Billing. The grantee shall not require subscribers to pay for services
more than one month in advance. All bills shall be itemized by level of
service.
F. Delinquent accounts. The grantee shall use its best efforts to collect on
delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide
the customer with at least 10 working days' written notice prior to
disconnection.
G. Prohibited activities. In the conduct of its business franchised
hereunder, neither the grantee nor its officers, employees or agents
shall directly or indirectly sell, lease, repair, install or maintain
television sets or receivers or antennas; provided, however, that
§ 72-29 PERKASIE CODE § 72-30
70:116
§ 72-31. Customer standards, service and procedures.
nothing hereunder shall prohibit the grantee, at the customer's request,
from examining or adjusting the customer's receiving set to determine
whether reception difficulties originate in the set or in the grantee's
system.
A. The grantee shall adopt and abide by any and all customer service
standards for cable operators issued by the FCC, including but not
limited to the standards appearing at 47 CFR Section 76.309, as
amended, which are hereby adopted by the Borough. The standards
issued by the FCC are the minimum standards for customer service
under this ordinance, and additional standards may be set forth in the
franchise agreement or otherwise adopted by the Borough.
B. The grantee shall prepare and file annually or more often upon request
with the Borough copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection
with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee
shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of
the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed.
C. The grantee shall keep full records of service calls in connection with
the system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the
grantee and the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject
matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution
of the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee in
connection with the contact and the date and time thereof and such
other information as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee. These
records shall be made available for periodic inspection by the Borough.
D. Hearing impaired. The grantee shall, upon request of the subscriber,
install equipment designed to enhance reception of programming with
encoded signals for the hearing impaired at such rates as may be
established by federal law.
E. Credit for service interruption. The grantee shall, upon request of the
subscriber, give a credit for 24 hours of free cable service for every
service outage lasting for more than six hours in any twenty-four-hour
period, or 1/30 of the monthly bill. For this purpose, a service outage is
defined as the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels.
F. The Borough shall retain the right to do semi-annual mail surveys to
franchisee customers, including complaint forms or other appropriate
questions. Mailing labels are to be provided to the Borough, and the
franchisee shall be billed for postage.
G. The Borough shall receive results of all surveys conducted by the
franchisee.
§ 72-30 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-31
70:117
§ 72-32. Continuity of service mandatory.
H. A lock-out box is to be made available to any consumer requesting
same. Consumers are to be made aware of this option once annually, by
mail.
I. Customers are to be notified in writing of channel relocation. Charges
for program listings are to be advertised at least once yearly.
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous,
uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other obligations to
the grantee are honored, subject to acts of God and other causes
beyond the control of the grantee.
B. In the event that a grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell its system or
the Borough gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew its
franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the Borough or new grantee
or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for
any period during which it operates the system.
§ 72-31 PERKASIE CODE § 72-32
70:118
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§ 72-33. Records and books available to the Borough; audit.
Throughout the term of this agreement, the franchisee shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business,
ownership and operations of the franchisee with respect to the system,
its operation, any service distributed over the system and each servicerelated
activity, in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting
principles, consistently applied. The franchisee shall make such books and
records or true copies of such books and records available within six
business days of receipt of such request from the Borough, at a location
within the Borough as designated by the Borough Manager.
§ 72-34. Reports required.
Except where a different time or requirement is specified by this chapter
or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall file with the Borough upon
request:
A. Regulatory communications. All correspondence received from the
FCC, as well as all reports submitted to the FCC, including but not
limited to, annual proof of performance tests and results and Equal
Employment opportunity (EEO) reports and all petitions, applications
and communications of all types submitted by the grantee to the FCC,
the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) or any other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any
matter affecting operation of the grantee's system shall be provided
simultaneously to the Borough.
B. Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of
plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be
made available to the Borough.
C. Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the Borough
30 days after the franchise is awarded and monthly thereafter until
construction is completed.
D. Proof of bonds and insurance. The grantee shall submit to the Borough
the required performance bond or a certified copy thereof, and written
evidence of payment of required premium and all policies of insurance
required by this chapter or certificates evidencing same.
E. Financial and ownership reports.
(1) An annual ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time
during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in
the franchise of 1% or more.
(2) An annual financial report for the previous calendar year specific to
operations within the Borough, certified by the grantee's chief
§ 72-33 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-34
70:119
financial officer or appropriate corporate representative attesting
to the truth and accuracy of the information provided, including
year-end balance sheet; income statement for the twelve-month
period ending December 31, showing subscriber revenue,
nonsubscriber revenue, operating expenses, depreciation expense,
interest expense and taxes paid; statement of sources and
application of funds; and depreciation schedule, prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
(3) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including
the cost of construction and of equipment.
(4) An annual list of officers and members of the board of the grantee
specific to operations within the Borough and of any parent
corporation.
F. Operational reports.
(1) An annual report on the system's technical tests and measurements
as set forth herein and in the franchise agreement.
(2) An annual summary of programs and services offered by the
grantee, including public, educational, government and leased
access.
(3) An annual projection of system and service plans.
(4) A semi-annual summary of service calls received and handled, in
addition to any reports required in the franchise agreement.
(5) A quarterly summary of activities including, but not limited to,
subscriber totals for each category of service offered, including the
number of pay units sold and new services offered.
G. Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
Borough at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property as
may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of
any of the regulatory duties of the Borough in connection with this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
§ 72-34 PERKASIE CODE § 72-34
70:120
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 72-35. Franchise renewal
Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter may be considered for
renewal subject to the provisions for renewal set forth in the Cable Act
and the regulations promulgated by the FCC thereunder. Any request for
franchise renewal shall be accompanied by payment of such renewal
application fee as may be set by resolution of the Borough Council of the
Borough from time to time or as may otherwise be provided for in the
franchise agreement.
§ 72-36. Response of grantee to request for action.
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by
or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and
any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always
be sufficient ground for the Borough to invoke an appropriate penalty
including possible revocation of the franchise.
§ 72-37. Disputes.
In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
§ 72-38. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter or the franchise agreement is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal,
state, or local statute or regulation, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 72-39. Repealer.
Chapter A191 of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie,30 and all previous
ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed upon the effective date as defined in § 72-40. Suburban
Cable Television, Inc., the sole franchisee under Chapter A191 of the Code
of the Borough of Perkasie shall, however, be permitted to continue to
operate its cable system within Perkasie Borough pursuant to the provision
of Chapter A191 by resolution of the Borough Council of Perkasie Borough
until such time as that franchisee either executes a new franchise
agreement or its franchise rights are terminated.
30.Editor's Note: Former Ch. A191, Cable Television Franchise, was adopted 4-20-1965 by
Ord. No. 333, as amended.
§ 72-35 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-40
70:121
§ 72-40. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of enactment,
subject to the provisions of § 72-39 herein.
§ 72-40 PERKASIE CODE § 72-40
70:122
ARTICLE X
Specific Grants of Franchise
[Added 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 940]
§ 72-41. Grant of franchise: Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania,
LLC.
In accordance with and in consideration of the full and faithful performance
and observance by Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC, of the terms
and conditions and all provisions of that certain cable franchise agreement
between the Borough of Perkasie and Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania,
LLC, a copy of which is available at the Borough Hall, nonexclusive and
revocable rights and privileges are granted to Comcast of Southeast
Pennsylvania, LLC for a term of 15 years from the December 21, 2009,
effective date set forth in the cable franchise agreement, to construct,
operate, maintain and upgrade a cable system utilizing public rights-ofway
and properties within the Borough’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
providing cable service in accordance with the terms and provisions of the
said cable franchise agreement.
§ 72-42. Grant of franchise: Verizon Pennsylvania Inc.
In accordance with and in consideration of the full and faithful performance
and observance by Verizon Pennsylvania Inc., of the terms and conditions
and all provisions of that certain cable franchise agreement between the
Borough of Perkasie and Verizon Pennsylvania Inc., a copy of which is
available at the Borough Hall, nonexclusive and revocable rights and
privileges are granted to Verizon Pennsylvania Inc. for a term of 12 years
from the March 19, 2007, effective date set forth in the cable franchise
agreement, to own, construct, operate, maintain and upgrade a cable
system utilizing public rights-of-way and properties within the Borough’s
jurisdiction for the purpose of providing cable service in accordance with
the terms and provisions of the said cable franchise agreement.
§ 72-41 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 72-42
70:123
Chapter 75
CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 60.
Animals — See Ch. 80.
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
101.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Disturbances — See Ch. 128.
Sound trucks — See Ch. 156.
§ 75-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 75-2. Conformity required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any carnival or circus
at any place within the Borough of Perkasie except in strict conformity with
all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 75-3. Permit required; fee; extensions.31
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any carnival or
circus at any place in the Borough of Perkasie unless he shall first have
obtained from the Borough Manager a permit therefor and shall have
paid the permit fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, which shall be for the use of the Borough.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to hold or conduct any
carnival or circus after the expiration of any such permit, unless such
permit holder shall first have applied to the Borough Manager for an
extension of such permit and shall have paid such fee as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-42 PERKASIE CODE § 75-4
75:124
§ 75-4. Inspection of premises prior to issuance; insurance
required.
The Borough Manager shall not issue any permit under this chapter unless
and until:
§ 75-5. Revocation or refusal of extension; fee nonrefundable.
§ 75-6. Appeal of revocation or refusal.
Any person who shall be refused a permit under this chapter, or shall be
refused an extension of any such permit or whose permit shall be revoked
by the Mayor may, within five days after such refusal or revocation, as
the case may be, appeal therefrom to the Borough Council, the decision of
which shall be final.
§ 75-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The Mayor shall have caused an inspection to be made of the premises
where such carnival or circus is proposed to be held in order to
determine whether such premises are suitable for the purpose and free
from dangerous or hazardous features, and the Mayor shall have made
any additional inspection and/or inspections that he shall deem
necessary in order to determine whether or not a permit shall be
issued. The Mayor may recommend to the Manager that a permit be
refused on account of any unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous condition
or because he shall have determined that the proposed location is
unsuitable on account of the creation of a traffic hazard, the lack of
accommodations for the number of persons and/or vehicles likely to be
attracted thereto or the creation of an unnecessary annoyance to the
residents or inhabitants of the locality. Such permit may be granted
conditionally, dependent upon the taking of stipulated action by the
holder thereof in order to meet standards of sanitation and safety.
B. The applicant for such permit shall have furnished evidence to the
Borough Manager that a public liability insurance policy in amounts of
not less than $1,000,000 for one person and $2,000,000 for any one
accident shall be in force and effect at the time such carnival or circus
is to be conducted in the Borough. Such policy shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough Solicitor.
A. The Mayor shall have authority to revoke any permit granted under this
chapter or to refuse a requested extension of any such permit in case of
failure to maintain proper standards of safety or sanitation or in case of
the permit holder's permitting any gambling, sale of any obscene
literature or pictures or immoral or lewd act or performance.
B. In case of revocation of any permit as herein provided, no part of the
permit fee shall be refunded to the holder of such permit.
§ 75-4 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS § 75-7
75:125
Chapter 77
CLAIMS, MUNICIPAL
§ 77-1. Legislative authority.
Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7106, the Borough is authorized to establish a schedule
of attorney's fees in the collection of any delinquent account for which a
municipal lien may be filed.
§ 77-2. Procedure for assessing costs.
The procedure for assessing costs shall be as follows:
§ 77-3. Schedule of fees.33
The schedule of fees shall be assessed pursuant to this chapter as follows:
A. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.32
B. Each day on which any violation shall take place shall constitute a
separate violation.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in
connection with the collection of a delinquent account, Perkasie
Borough shall, by United States certified mail, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid, mail to the owner a notice as set out herein below.
B. If within 30 days of mailing the notice, the certified mail is refused or
unclaimed or the return receipt is not received, then at least 10 days
prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in connection with the
collection of a delinquent account, Perkasie Borough shall, by United
States first class mail, mail to the owner a notice as described below.
C. The notice required by this chapter shall be mailed to the owner's last
known post office address by virtue of the knowledge and information
possessed by the Borough and by the county office responsible for
assessment and revisions of taxes.
D. The notice to the owner shall contain the following information:
(1) A statement of the Borough's intent to impose attorney's fees
within 30 days of mailing the notice pursuant to § 77-2A or within
10 days of mailing the notice pursuant to § 77-2B.
(2) The steps the owner must take to avoid assessment of attorney's
fees by payment of the delinquent account.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-7 PERKASIE CODE § 77-3
77:126
§ 77-4. Responsibility for all costs of collection.
Additionally, the owner shall be responsible for all costs of collection in
addition to attorney's fees including, but not limited to, filing fees and court
fees as may be paid by the Borough.
Chapter 78
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical standards and services — See Ch.
85.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 133.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
§ 78-1. Adoption of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, hereby elects to administer
and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act
45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time
to time, and its regulations.
§ 78-2. Adoption of building code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in Title 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code for
Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 78-3. Administration and enforcement provisions.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within Perkasie Borough shall
be undertaken as determined by the Council of the Borough of Perkasie,
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the regulations of the Code.
§ 78-4. Building Code Board of Appeals.
A Building Code Board of Appeals is hereby established in conformity with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of
A. Preparation and filing of municipal liens: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Attorney's fees incurred in the collection of delinquent accounts
including, but not limited to, District Justice and/or Common Pleas
actions: a fee per hour as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 77-3 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 78-4
78:127
1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, Section 501 (c) and Title 34
Pa. Code Section 403.121, as amended from time to time.
§ 78-5. Existing ordinances and/or resolutions.
§ 78-6. Changes to the Code.
A. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by Perkasie Borough on or before July 1, 1999,
and which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue
in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time
to time.
B. The ordinances which continue in full force and effect shall include
Ordinance Nos. 731, 732, 733, 734, and 735, adopted December 20,
1993, and Ordinance No. 753 adopted October 17, 1994, which are
hereby adopted by reference, and any other ordinance(s) and/or
resolution(s) that meet the criteria outlined within this chapter.
C. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by Perkasie Borough that are in effect as of the
effective date of this chapter and whose requirements are less than the
minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended to conform
with the comparable provisions of the Code.
D. All other ordinances, resolutions, regulations and policies of Perkasie
Borough not governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
A. The Code may be changed and/or modified by the governing body of
Perkasie Borough in accordance with the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103,
Section 503.
B. The following provisions of the regulations to the Act are hereby
changed and/or modified:
(1) Regulation 403.43 (g) is amended so that a permit shall be valid for
no more than one year from the date of the commencement of the
authorized construction work.
(2) Regulation 403.62 (c) (1) is amended to delete the exemption
provided in subsection (xvii). A permit shall be required for the
construction, replacement or repairs of an uncovered deck where
the floor of the deck is no more than 30 inches above grade.
(3) Regulation 403.64 (d) is amended to add the following subsections
(5) through (8) so that additional inspections shall be required and
inspection reports shall be filed for:
(5) Wall forms inspection.
(6) Backfilling inspection.
§ 78-4 PERKASIE CODE § 78-6
78:128
§ 78-7. Fee schedule.
A schedule of fees assessable by Perkasie Borough for the administration
and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be
established by the governing body of Perkasie Borough by resolution from
time to time.
Chapter 79
CURFEW FOR MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
§ 79-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 79-2. Definitions.
As used within this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them below:
CURFEW HOURS — The hours between Sunday at 11:00 p.m. and Monday
at 5:00 a.m., Monday at 11:00 p.m. and Tuesday at 5:00 a.m., Tuesday
at 11:00 p.m. and Wednesday at 5:00 a.m., Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. and
Thursday at 5:00 a.m., Thursday at 11:00 p.m. and Friday at 5:00 a.m.,
Saturday at 12:01 a.m. and Saturday at 5:00 a.m., and Sunday at 12:01 a.m.
and Sunday at 5:00 a.m.
EMERGENCY — Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition
resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or
property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters,
automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
(7) Slab inspection.
(8) Insulation inspection.
A. Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the
reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the Borough;
B. Promote the safety and well-being of the Borough's youngest citizens,
persons under the age of 18, whose inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities,
particularly unlawful drug activities and activities causing damage to
public and private property, and to being victimized by older
perpetrators of crime; and
C. Foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children.
§ 78-6 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 79-2
78:129
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business within the
Borough operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but
not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to
such establishment, the term "operator" shall mean any person, and any
firm, association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/
or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that
establishment.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age who has not been emancipated
by court order.
OFFICER — A police or other law enforcement officer charged with the
duty of enforcing the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or
ordinance of the Borough of Perkasie.
PARENT —
PERSON — An individual, not any association, corporation or any other
legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, and/or the common areas of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office areas, transportation facilities and shops. Public
parks are regulated by Chapter 124 and are not considered a public place
under this chapter.
REMAIN — The following actions:
TEMPORARY CARE FACILITY — A nonlocked, nonrestrictive shelter at
which minors may wait, under visual supervision, to be retrieved by a
parent. No minors waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or
secured (by handcuffs or otherwise) to any stationary object.
§ 79-3. Prohibitions.
A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who has
legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared
under a court order or agreement);
A.
A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
B.
C. A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or
A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated
by the authorization of an individual listed in Subsection A, B or C of
this definition) for the person to assume the care or physical custody of
the child, or as indicated by other circumstances.
D.
A. To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by the
owner, operator or other person in control of that place.
B.
§ 79-2 PERKASIE CODE § 79-3
78:130
A. It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or
upon any public place within the Borough, to remain in any motor
vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon
the premises of any establishment within the Borough, unless:
(1) The minor is accompanied by a parent;
(2) The minor is involved in an emergency;
(3) The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or
returning home from such activity without detour or stop;
(4) The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or
she resides with a parent;
(5) The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious,
or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by
another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised
by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an
activity without detour or stop;
(6) The minor is on a errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor
has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent
containing the following information: the name, signature, address
and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand; the
telephone number where the parent may be reached during the
errand; the name of the minor; and a brief description of the
errand; the minor's destination(s); and the hours the minor is
authorized to be engaged in the errand;
(7) The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the Borough; or
(8) The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
B. It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage such minor to violate the above Subsection A.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of the
above Subsection A.
D. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any
person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
subsection that the operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor was present at the
establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave.
§ 79-3 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 79-3
78:131
§ 79-4. Enforcement.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false
name, address or telephone number to any officer investigating a
possible violation of this chapter.
A. minors. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer
shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle,
and/or establishment within the Borough during curfew hours is in
violation of the above § 79-3A. In so doing, the officer may require
positive proof of age by an individual in apparent violation.
(1) If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in
violation of above § 79-3A, or if positive proof of age has not been
furnished, and the officer, using his or her discretion in the absence
of positive proof, determines that the individual appears to be a
minor, then:
(a) If the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any
such violation, then the officer shall issue a verbal warning to
the minor that he or she is in violation of § 79-3A and shall
direct the minor to proceed at once to his or her home or usual
place of abode. The verbal warning to the minor shall be
logged in Borough Police Department records and shall be
followed by a written warning mailed by the Police Department
to the minor and his or her parent(s).
(b) If the minor:
[1] Fails to heed the warning and direction of the officer, or
has previously been issued a warning for any such
violation, then the officer shall charge the minor with a
violation of this chapter and shall issue a summons
requiring the minor to appear in court.
[2] As soon as practicable thereafter, the officer shall:
[a] Release the minor to his or her parent(s);
[b] Place the minor in a temporary care facility for a
period not to exceed the remainder of the curfew
hours, so that his or her parent(s) may retrieve the
minor; or
[c] If a minor refuses to give an officer his or her name
and address, refuses to give the name and address of
his or her parent(s), or if no parent can be located
prior to the end of the applicable curfew hours, or if
located, no parent appears to accept custody of the
minor, the minor may be taken to a nonsecure crisis
center or juvenile shelter and/or may be taken to a
§ 79-3 PERKASIE CODE § 79-4
78:132
§ 79-5. Effectiveness review. [Amended 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 954]
Borough Council may, from time to time, request that the Chief of Police
report to Council concerning the effectiveness of and the continued need
for the chapter. The Police Chief's report shall include the following
information:
Chapter 80
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 124.
judge or intake officer of the juvenile court to be dealt
with in the manner and pursuant to such procedures
as required by law.
B. Others. If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person (other
than a minor) has violated above § 79-3B, C or D, and if the person has
not previously been issued a warning with respect to any such violation,
an officer shall issue a verbal warning to the person, which shall be
followed by a written warning mailed by the Police Department to the
person; however, if any such warning has been previously issued to that
person, then the officer shall charge the person with a violation and
shall issue as summons directing the person to appear in court.
C. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a summary offense, the
conviction of which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $300.
A. The practicality of enforcing the chapter and any problems with
enforcement identified by the Police Department;
B. The impact and cost of the chapter;
C. Other data and information which the Police Department believes to be
relevant in assessing the effectiveness of the Curfew Ordinance; and
D. Information from citizens regarding whether the chapter has been
administered and enforced fairly, including information regarding the
age, gender and race of those charged or detained under the chapter.
§ 79-4 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 79-5
78:133

ARTICLE I
Dogs: Nuisance Behavior
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 80, Art. II, of the 1985 Code]
§ 80-1. Excessive and continuous barking.
Anyone who is the owner, keeper or possessor of a dog shall not permit it to
bark excessively or continually so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the
surrounding neighborhood or to breach the public peace.
§ 80-2. Removal of feces required.
Anyone who is the owner, keeper or possessor of a dog shall not permit it
to defecate on the property of another person without their permission or
on any public street, sidewalk, curb or alley unless the owner, keeper or
possessor removes the feces promptly.
§ 80-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 80-1 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 80-3
78:135

ARTICLE II
Dogs Running at Large
[Adopted 8-20-1990 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 80-4. Title.
This article hereafter shall be known as the "Prohibition of Dogs Running at
Large."
§ 80-5. Prohibitions. [Amended 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 951]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog to permit
the same to run at large. For the purpose of this section, "running at large"
shall be defined to be the presence of a dog at any place except upon the
premises of the owner or within the fenced-in area of the dog park located
in Lenape Park (but not while entering or leaving the fenced-in area). A dog
shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and under
control of a person physically able to control it.
§ 80-6. Impounding of dogs found running at large.
Whenever any police officer or other persons designated by the Chief of
Police shall find any dog running at large as defined in this article, he shall,
if possible, pick up and impound such animal in accordance with the Dog
Law of Pennsylvania.34
§ 80-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
34.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 80-4 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 80-7
78:137
Chapter 85
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS AND SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70. Street and sidewalk standards — See Ch. 160.
§ 80-7 PERKASIE CODE § 80-7
78:138
ARTICLE I
Electrical Service
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 85 of the 1985 Code]
§ 85-1. Service.
§ 85-2. Disconnection of service by Department; violations and
penalties. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
A. "Service" means readiness and ability on the part of Perkasie Borough
Electric Department (hereinafter called the "Department") to maintain
at the point of delivery approximately the frequency, phase and voltage
sufficient to supply the quantity of service that the Department is
obligated to supply, irrespective of the extent of customers' use thereof.
B. All service is subject to the several rules and regulations and rates in
this article, as amended. All customer-owned generation is subject to
the Borough of Perkasie Technical Requirements for Customer Owned
Generation, as amended. An applicant for service may be required to
sign the Department’s application form or contract. The acceptance or
use of service may be deemed an application for such service and a
contract to pay for it under said rules and regulations and applicable
rate. No promises of any employee of the Department shall be binding
unless made in writing over the signature of the duly authorized
representative of the Department. [Amended 8-28-2009 by Ord. No.
936]
C. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipal Lien Law, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.,
the provision of electrical service to premises is subject to a municipal
lien if payment for said service is not received. In the event a tenantoccupied
premises does not pay the account, both the tenant and owner
are ultimately responsible for the bill. So that the owner may be aware
of the status of an electrical account, the owner shall be permitted to
obtain tenant account information from the Borough upon request.
Additionally, upon submission of a written request and the payment of
an annual fee to be established from time to time by resolution, the
Borough shall forward to the owner on a monthly basis all account
information sent to the tenant, including shut-off notices. [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
A. The Department may disconnect service and remove its meter and
other property from the customer's premises upon violation of any of
these rules and regulations or any of the terms of the contract. After
such disconnection, the service will not be reconnected until the
expense of disconnecting and reconnecting is paid, which payment
shall be as established from time to time by resolution. [Amended
4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 762]
B. Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.35
§ 85-1 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-3
78:139
§ 85-3. Failure to use remedy not waiver of future use.
Any failure by the Department to resort to any remedy shall not be deemed
a waiver of such remedy as to any matter arising in the future.
§ 85-4. Service to be used only as stipulated.
Service shall not be used for any purpose or in any place other than that
stipulated at the time of connection. Energy shall not be resold or used
by any party other than the customer, except in the case of service to the
owner or lessor of a single property for the use of tenants occupying such
property and then only where service is supplied through one meter, where
the charge for electric service to the individual tenant is a fixed amount
included in the rent and where the energy is not submetered.
§ 85-5. Use of three-phase service.
Where three-phase service is supplied, the current shall be taken equally
from the three phases as nearly as possible. Wherever the difference
between any two phases is greater than 10% of the lesser, the customer
shall make changes necessary to correct the unsatisfactory condition, or the
bill will be computed on the basis that the current taken from each phase is
equal to the greatest quantity taken from any one phase.
§ 85-6. Voltage fluctuations.
Where the use of customer's equipment causes voltage fluctuations which
interfere with the Department's service to other customers, the customer
shall, upon notice from Department, make changes necessary to overcome
the fluctuations.
§ 85-7. Standard service; new nonstandard service.
Department's standard service is single- or three-phase, sixty-cycle
alternating current. Wherever such service has been established, all other
types of service will be considered as in process of elimination, and no new
nonstandard service will be supplied.
§ 85-8. Point of delivery.
A. "Point of delivery" is the point where the Department's facilities are
connected with customer's wires and apparatus.
B. Department will install and maintain its facilities on its side of the point
of delivery and shall not be required to install or maintain any facilities
except meters and meter accessories beyond that point.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-3 PERKASIE CODE § 85-9
78:140
§ 85-9. Method of connection.
The ordinary method of connection between Department's facilities and
the customer's wires and apparatus is by overhead wires. If the customer
desires to have connection made in any other manner, the customer may
make special arrangements by which the connection will be made and
maintained at the customer's cost.
§ 85-10. Continuity; temporary suspension of service; nonliability
for failure.
§ 85-11. Temporary service connections.36
Temporary service connections will only be installed when, as and if the
Department has available capacity and facilities for the service, and then
only upon payment by the customer, before installation, of the Department's
estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities, but in no case less
than the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. A service connection will be considered as being temporary when,
in the Department's opinion, it will be used for a period of less than 12
months or is installed on a construction site. Temporary services shall be
single-phase services only.
§ 85-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — The actual recipient of service. In the case of residential
service, the customer shall be the head of the household and an actual
occupant of the dwelling unit served. In all cases, the customer must be a
person, copartnership or corporation sui juris and financially responsible.
SERVICE ENTRANCE CONDUCTORS — That portion of the customer's
wiring between the point of connection with Department facilities and the
terminals of the main disconnect device or devices.
§ 85-13. Responsibilities of customer.
A. The Department will use reasonable diligence to preserve as nearly as
possible the continuity of its service, but in the event of failure of
service, the Department shall not be subject to any liability, penalty or
payment for or on account of any such failure, nor shall there be any
reduction in the monthly bill. In no event shall the Department be liable
for consequential damages.
B. For the purpose of making necessary repairs, the Department may
temporarily suspend service, but the customer shall be given at least
three hours' advance notice, except in cases of emergency where such
notice is impracticable.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-9 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-13
78:141
§ 85-14. Right of entry by Department for inspection.
Authorized Department representatives shall, at all reasonable hours, have
the right to enter the customer's premises for any purpose connected with
service.
§ 85-15. Conformity of customer's wires and apparatus; standards.37
§ 85-16. Location of service connection.
A. The customer assumes full responsibility for the energy, wires and
apparatus at and on the customer's side of the point of delivery. The
customer shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the Department
against all claims, demands, costs or expense for loss, damages or
injury to persons or property in any manner directly or indirectly
arising from, connected with or growing out of the transmission or use
of current by the customer at or on the customer's side of the point of
delivery.
B. The customer shall provide, without charge, a right-of-way acceptable
to the Department for such lines across property owned or controlled
by the customer as in the judgment of the Department are necessary for
the supply of service.
C. The customer shall also provide and maintain, without charge, in
convenient locations acceptable to the Department, space for the
accommodation of its meters and other apparatus installed on
customer's premises.
A. The customer's wires and apparatus shall be installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with any governmental requirements and
with the rules and requirements of the current edition of the National
Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association; and all
installations shall be inspected and approved by a Departmentapproved
certified electrical inspector before connection with the
Department's system will be made. All subsequent installations or
changes shall likewise be inspected and approved prior to connection.
B. The Department is willing to advise as to the installation and
maintenance of the customer's wires and apparatus and may examine it
at any time and, whenever it is not in proper operating condition, may
refuse to make connection or may discontinue service.
A. The location of the service connection shall be designated by the
Department. It shall be on the outside of the building at least 14 feet
above ground. The service entrance conductors shall be installed in
continuous rigid metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing or cable
approved by Underwriter's Laboratories or other recognized agency.38
37.Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Art. II, Standards; Inspections, of this chapter.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-13 PERKASIE CODE § 85-16
78:142
§ 85-17. Demand of customer's apparatus; protective equipment.
§ 85-18. Correction of defects; temporary repair of customer's
apparatus.
Assistance will be given in emergencies to correct defects in and make
temporary repairs to the customer's wires and apparatus, but any
assistance given gratuitously shall be accepted without involving
responsibility on the part of the Department.
§ 85-19. Service entrance requirements.
B. The customer shall furnish and install a meter base of a type approved
by the Department ahead of the service switch on the outside of the
building approximately six feet above the ground.
A. The phase, voltage, size and type of the customer's apparatus shall be
subject to the Department's approval. The customer shall, if required by
the Department, install and maintain motor starting devices, automatic
circuit breakers, switches, fuses, overload devices, reverse phase relays
or equivalent devices of a type approved by the Department.
B. The Department's facilities have a definite limited capacity, and the
customer shall notify the Department of any additions to the connected
load so that adequate facilities may be provided. The customer shall be
responsible for any damage resulting from a violation of this rule.
A. Whereas the minimum size service entrance conductors, as required in
accordance with the rules and requirements of the National Electrical
Code have proven to be inadequate to meet the ever increasing loads,
the requirements which will be considered satisfactory by the
Department for new residential service entrances will be as follows:
Number of
Customers
Supplied From
Entrance
Minimum
Capacity of
Service Entrance
(amperes)
Required Size
AWG Insulation
Copper Wire
Insulation
1 100 No. 2 No. 3
2 125 No. 1/0 No. 1
3 or 4 150 No. 2/0 No. 1/0
B. The Department will specify the minimum size of service entrance
conductors when five or more customers are supplied from a common
service entrance.
C. The service protection equipment for each customer in all cases shall
have a capacity of not less than 100 amperes.
§ 85-16 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-20
78:143
§ 85-20. Exceptions to service entrance requirements.
The Public Utility Committee of Borough Council is authorized to hear
and decide special exceptions to the provisions of § 85-19. where, owing
to special condition, a literal enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship and where such exceptions are not adverse to the general purpose
and intent of said provisions.
§ 85-21. Rates apply per meter; combination of meters. [Amended
8-17-1998 by Ord. No. 812]
Each rate applies to service supplied at one point of delivery through one
meter, to one customer for one business enterprise, and the measurements
of two or more meters will not be combined for billing purposes, except
when the customer's separately metered buildings are within 1,000 feet
of one another and the estimated combined monthly billing demand is at
least 500 kilowatts (kw), or temporarily pending completion of necessary
changes in the Department's facilities.
§ 85-22. Point of energy measurement.
The energy shall be measured at the point of delivery or the nearest suitable
point by meters installed and maintained by the Department. Where service
is metered at a point other than the point of delivery or at a voltage other
than the voltage of supply, the readings of the meters shall be corrected to
conform to measurement at the point of delivery and the voltage of supply.
§ 85-23. Placement of multiple meters in one building; marking.
When two or more meters are to be installed in one building, they shall
be grouped at one common location convenient for reading and testing if
practical, otherwise they shall be located as directed by Department. Each
meter shall be marked to show the portion of the building supplied.
§ 85-24. Right to install demand metering equipment.
The Department shall have the right to install demand metering equipment
at its expense for the purpose of determining the demand established by the
customer's use of service.
§ 85-25. Testing of meters.
A. The testing and adjustment of meters, the charges therefore and
adjustments due to inaccuracies shall be made in accordance with
standards acceptable to the Department.
B. A meter will be tested at the request of the customer upon advance
payment of a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, which will be returned to the customer if the meter is found to
be more than 2% in error, plus or minus.39
§ 85-20 PERKASIE CODE § 85-25
78:144
§ 85-26. Tampering with meters; cost of repair.
The customer shall not interfere or tamper with the Department's meters,
connections or other facilities nor permit anyone else to do so. The
Department may disconnect service without notice for any violation of this
rule. The cost of any inspections, changes, replacements or repairs made
necessary by a violation of this rule, together with a proper charge for
current used but not registered, shall be paid by the customer.
§ 85-27. Customer responsible for payment for service until
discontinuance.
The customer shall be responsible for payment for service until it is
discontinued by the Department.
§ 85-28. Charges based on readings; estimated monthly statements.
§ 85-29. Net rate periods.
The Department's rates usually provide for a new rate period of 15 days
from the date of the bill. When the normal billing period is less than one
month, the net rate period shall be three business days. In the case of
bills for service to the United States of America, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any of their departments or institutions, the net rate period
shall be 30 days.
§ 85-30. Payment within net rate period.
C. The Borough will not be liable for inaccuracies if the meter has been
checked within eight years previous to the customer's request for
testing and adjustment.
A. Charges for electric current shall be based upon meter readings which
shall be made at least once every two months.
B. The Department shall have the option of issuing estimated monthly
statements or actual bills every month.
C. If estimated statements are issued, an actual or final bill must be issued
to each customer at least once every two months. All estimated
statements are subject to revision in case the meter record, later
secured, discloses any difference from the estimate.
D. Estimated statements or bills are both due when rendered and shall be
considered as received by the customer when left or mailed to the place
where service is rendered or any other place agreed upon.
A. Payments will be accepted as being tendered within the net rate period
if postmarked before midnight on the last day of such period or if
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-25 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-30
78:145
§ 85-31. Disconnection of service: procedures.
§ 85-32. Deposit to secure payment. [Amended 8-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 677]
delivered on or before the following business day to any representative
of the Department authorized to receive payments.
B. When the last day of the net period falls on Sunday or a legal holiday
the next business day will be considered as the last day of such period.
Delay in the receipt of or failure to receive a bill will not extend the net
rate period.
C. When payment is not received within the net rate period, the
Department may file an action for the collection of said delinquent
account or place a lien upon the property being served. In the event
that said customer has other property within the Borough of Perkasie,
the Department shall be authorized to place a lien on those properties
as well, pursuant to the Commonwealth Municipal Lien Act.40 [Added
4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 762]
A. The Department may disconnect any service of a customer upon 10
days' written notice to the customer that a bill for service is more than
30 days overdue.
B. If the customer receives or has received service at more than one
location, the service at any location may be disconnected for failure to
pay an overdue bill at another location. When so disconnected, service
will be reconnected only upon payment of the gross bill, plus the
expense of disconnecting and reconnecting service, which expense
shall be established from time to time by resolution, and upon making a
deposit to secure future payments of bills. The customer shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the Borough in filing any action or
the placing of any lien, including any filing costs and attorney's fees.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 762]
C. Service may be disconnected to an abandoned property upon written
request by owner insofar as the Department is satisfied in its sole
opinion that said property is abandoned and insofar as said request is
accompanied by a disconnection fee as established from time to time by
resolution. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
A. The Department may require deposits to secure the payments of bills.
The deposits shall be as established from time to time by resolution.
The Borough Manager shall have the discretion to waive all or a portion
of the deposit, if in his or her sole judgment said customer provides
satisfactory proof of credit worthiness, including but not limited to
evidence of a good payment history with a prior electrical utility or like
satisfactory proof. Upon 10 days' notice to the customer, the
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 85-30 PERKASIE CODE § 85-32
78:146
§ 85-33. Auxiliary service.
§ 85-34. Rate Schedule RS: Residential Service. [Amended
11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 755]
Department may apply any deposit then in its possession to an account
once the delinquent amount exceeds the amount of the deposit. The
Department may then require payment of a new deposit as a
requirement of continued service. [Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No.
762]
B. Interest at the average quarterly rate earned by the Borough on its
electric account with Univest Bank, or the bank where the Borough
maintains its electric account, will be adjusted quarterly and allowed
upon all deposits made to secure the payment of bills for service
without deduction for any taxes thereon. Deposits shall cease to bear
interest upon the discontinuance of service at the location covered by
deposit. [Amended 8-17-1992 by Ord. No. 702; 3-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 1010]
A. The Department's rates are not available, without application of this
rule, to customers having another source of electric or mechanical
power which can be substituted for the Department's service in any
part of the customer's operations, except where such other source is
maintained solely for use in case of possible failure of the Department's
service.
B. Where only a portion of the Department's service is within the scope of
the preceding subsection, the customer may, at his option, provide
separate circuits for that portion, and the remainder of the
Department's service will then be metered and billed separately
without applying this rule thereto.
C. Service will be supplied hereunder only where the Department has
available capacity and facilities adequate for the service desired.
D. The Department's service and such other source of electric or
mechanical power shall not be used at the same time for the same
equipment, except upon written agreement setting forth the conditions
of such operation pursuant to any current cogeneration policy in effect,
if applicable.
E. Service hereunder will be supplied under the general service rate.
F. Any auxiliary service installed after April 9, 1984, shall be installed by
the Electric Department at the customer's expense.
A. Application of rate schedule. This rate schedule is for single-phase,
sixty-hertz, residential service when supplied to the customer's wires
and apparatus in accordance with the use provisions as listed below.
[Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 866; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 878;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928;
§ 85-32 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-34
78:147
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982;
12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
B. Monthly rate (effective February 2016 meter reading): [Amended
12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 866; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 878;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928;
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982;
12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) Customer charge: $14 plus:
(a) $0.1524 per kilowatt-hour for the first 200 kilowatt-hours.
(b) $0.1380 per kilowatt-hour for the next 800 kilowatt-hours.
(c) $0.1188 per kilowatt-hours for all additional kilowatt-hours.
(2) The fuel adjustment clause applies to all kilowatt-hours billed.
(3) Minimum charge. The minimum charge per month shall be $14.
C. Use provisions. This rate schedule is for sixty-hertz single-phase,
nominal one-hundred-twenty-/two-hundred-forty-volt service, as
available for:
(1) A single-family dwelling unit and its appurtenances.
(2) A separate dwelling unit in a multiunit building.
(3) A family of persons who unite to establish a common dwelling
place.
(4) A temporary dwelling unit with installed cooking facilities.
(5) A single farm dwelling and general farm uses.
D. This rate schedule does not apply to:
(1) Residential service that includes more than 2,500 watts of
connected load attributable to professional or commercial use,
exclusive of heating and cooling facilities, in common with the
dwelling.
(2) Any service deemed to be professional or commercial in nature by
the Electric Department.
(3) Common use in apartments and condominiums.
(4) Electric water heaters served hereunder must be so connected that
no more than 5,500 watts can be operated at one time.
(5) The use of welding apparatus, electric furnaces or motors larger
than 7 1/2 horsepower is not permitted under this rate schedule.
§ 85-34 PERKASIE CODE § 85-34
78:148
§ 85-35. Rate Schedule GS: General Service. [Amended 11-10-1986
by Ord. No. 582; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 590; 12-15-1988 by Ord. No.
612; 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 667; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 755]
E. Service to a multidwelling unit. Where two or more separate dwelling
units are supplied through one meter, each rate block, including the
customer charge, of the above monthly rate will be multiplied by the
number of dwelling units being served through the meter.
F. Energy conservation. Every heated or cooled building or structure for
human occupancy which is constructed, converted, remodeled or
otherwise altered shall meet the conditions of the Perkasie Borough
Code § 70-6.
G. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 15 days
after billed. All payments made thereafter shall have a late-payment
charge added as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In the event that the Borough takes legal action to collect a
delinquent account, the customer shall be responsible for all costs of
collection, including court costs and the Borough Attorney's fees.
H. Contract period. The contract period shall be not less than one year.
A. Application of rate schedule. This rate schedule is for single- and threephase,
sixty-hertz, electricity for general service supplied to the
customer at 240 volts and higher. Generally, three-phase service is only
available from an existing three-phase distribution line. The Electric
Department provides and maintains all transformers and associated
equipment. [Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 866; 2-2-2004 by
Ord. No. 878; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899; 11-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
B. Monthly rate (effective February 2016 meter reading:
[Amended 8-17-1998 by Ord. No. 812; 12-16-2002 by Ord. No.
866; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 878; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899;
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) Customer charge: $33, plus:
(a) $8.3309 per kilowatt in excess of three kilowatts, plus:
[1] $0.1373 per kilowatt-hour for the first 25,000 kilowatthours.
[2] $0.0996 per kilowatt-hour for all additional kilowatt-hours.
(2) All kilowatt hours supplied under the primary service provision will
be reduced by $0.0047 per kilowatt-hour.
§ 85-34 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-35
78:149
(3) Minimum charge. The minimum charge per month shall be $33,
except that the minimum charge per month under the primary
service rate provision will be $1,500.
C. Billing kilowatts. Measurement of load, when necessary for billing
purposes, shall be determined monthly from the highest registration of
a fifteen-minute-block-interval-type meter. Where a customer has the
capability of moving a deferrable load to an off-peak period, 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday and Sunday, and
desires to do so and has Electric Department approval, the Department
will provide the metering capability to measure demands occurring
during on-peak and off-peak periods. Such deferred load must be in
excess of 300 kilowatts.
D. Off-peak water heating rate. Controlled water heating service may be
provided through a separate meter for an additional monthly minimum
charge of $11.52, with all kilowatts billed at $0.1152 per kilowatt-hour.
Service to the water heater will be energized between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays, and all hours on Saturday and Sunday.
The customer is responsible for providing energizing relay. The
Borough reserves the right to determine the maximum allowable water
heater installed kilowatt-hours. [Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No.
928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982]
E. Use provisions.
(1) This rate schedule is for sixty-hertz single- or three-phase service at
the Electric Department's standard delivery voltages.
(2) This rate schedule is for all other electric service, except
residential service, supplied by the Borough.
(3) All customer installations, original and additions, shall be inspected
and approved by an Electric-Department-approved inspector
before connection to the Borough's electric system.
(4) No more than 20 kilowatts of electric space heating may be
switched at any one time.
F. Primary service provision.
(1) Three-phase service is available from the Borough's twelvethousand-
volt lines for loads in excess of 500 kilowatts and at the
approval of the Electric Department. For such service the customer
provides and maintains all necessary switches, protective
equipment, transformers and other associated equipment.
(2) The Electric Department reserves the right to install the necessary
metering instruments on the secondary side of the customer's
transformers, and when so installed, the billing kilowatts and
kilowatt-hours shall be adjusted so as to reflect the customer's
demand and energy losses of the transforming equipment.
§ 85-35 PERKASIE CODE § 85-35
78:150
§ 85-36. Rate Schedule SL: Security Lighting Service. [Amended
11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 582; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 590; 12-5-1988
by Ord. No. 612; 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 667; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No.
755]
§ 85-37. Rate Schedule BL: Borderline Service. [Amended
11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 582; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 590; 12-5-1988
by Ord. No. 612; 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 667; 2-21-1994 by Ord. No.
739; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 755]
G. Energy conservation. Every heated and cooled building or structure
built for human occupancy which is constructed, converted, remodeled
or otherwise altered shall meet the conditions of the Perkasie Borough
Code, § 70-6.
H. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 15 days
after billed. All payments made thereafter shall have a late-payment
charge added as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In the event that the Borough takes legal action to collect a
delinquent account, the customer shall be responsible for all costs of
collection, including court costs and the Borough Attorney's fees.
I. Contract period. The contract period shall be not less than one year.
A. Application of rate schedule. This rate schedule is for security lighting
service supplied by the Electric Department to a customer-owned pole
or structure. [Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 991]
B. Monthly rate (effective February 2016 meter reading): [Amended
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) Sodium lighting: 9,500 lumens; 100 watts; $12.98 per lamp.
(2) The fuel adjustment clause applies to all kilowatt-hours billed.
(3) The number of kilowatt-hours supplied is based on the estimated
hours of lighting service multiplied by the watts of each lamp.
C. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 15 days
after billed. All payments made thereafter shall have a late-payment
charge added as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In the event that the Borough takes legal action to collect a
delinquent account, the customer shall be responsible for all costs of
collection, including court costs and the Borough Attorney's fees.
D. Contract period. The contract period shall be not less than five years. If
the customer requests removal prior to the five-year period, the
customer is responsible for the remainder of the five-year billing period.
§ 85-35 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-37
78:151
§ 85-38. Commercial space heating Rate D.
A. Application of rate schedule. This rate schedule is for borderline service
to other utilities for the purpose of resale. The Borough will supply to
the utility the monthly meter reading for its billing purposes. Requests
for this service must be made in writing to the Borough. [Amended
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
B. Monthly rate (effective February 2016 meter reading): [Amended
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) $0.1149 per kilowatt-hour, plus 1.5% of the Borough's facilities
necessary to supply the customer's electric needs.
(2) The fuel adjustment clause applies to all kilowatt-hours billed.
C. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 15 days
after billed. All payments made thereafter shall have a late-payment
charge added as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In the event that the Borough takes legal action to collect a
delinquent account, the customer shall be responsible for all costs of
collection, including court costs and the Borough Attorney's fees.
D. Contract period. The contract period shall be not less than five years.
A. The commercial space heating Rate D is applicable to all commercial
and industrial customers, supplied at secondary voltage, where
electricity supplied through one meter is the sole source of the
customer's energy requirements or where space heating requirements
are provided solely by electric energy supplied through a separate
meter, all in accord with the conditions of application contained herein.
[Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No.
969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
B. Net monthly rate (effective February 2016 meter reading): [Amended
11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 582; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 590;
12-5-1988 by Ord. No. 612; 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 667;
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982;12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) Separately metered service. There shall be a customer charge of
$30 per month, and in addition, there shall be a charge of $0.1265
per kilowatt-hour.
(2) Single-meter service.
(a) There shall be a customer charge of $30 per month, and there
shall be a charge of $9.1958 per kilowatt of the billing
kilowatts.
(b) In addition to the preceding, the following rates shall apply:
§ 85-37 PERKASIE CODE § 85-38
78:152
Usage
Rate
(per kwh)
First 2,500 kwh $0.1220
Next 100 kwh, per kw of
billing kw
$0.1077
All additional kwh $0.0934
(c) The billing kilowatts shall be the average kilowatts supplied
during the fifteen-minute period of maximum use during the
current billing period. For billing purposes, the billing
kilowatts shall be taken to the nearest kilowatt.
C. The separately metered service rate shall apply to separately metered
service for the uses set forth below where the customer also received
power and lighting service under another general service rate and
where all metering is at the same point of delivery and at the same
voltage. Subject to these conditions, the rate may be applied to the
following uses where electric space heating is at least 50% of the
customer's total energy requirement under the service:
(1) Space heating where electricity is the sole source of energy
throughout the building or additions thereto.
(2) Air-conditioning equipment, but excluding ventilating and exhaust
fans.
(3) Commercial cooking equipment.
D. The single meter service rate shall apply to all general service
requirements of a customer supplied through one meter at one voltage
where:
(1) Electricity is the sole source of the customer's energy
requirements, except as hereafter provided.
(2) Electric space heating requirements are equal to or exceed all
energy requirements from the service, exclusive of air
conditioning.
(3) Another source of energy may be used only in instances where, in
the opinion of the Department, it is not physically feasible to
accomplish a purpose or process with electric energy.
E. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 15 days
after billed. All payments made thereafter shall have a late-payment
charge added as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In the event that the Borough takes legal action to collect a
delinquent account, the customer shall be responsible for all costs of
collection, including court costs and the Borough Attorney's fees.
[Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 85-38 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-38
78:153
§ 85-38.1. (Reserved)41
§ 85-39. Fuel adjustment.42 [Added 1-21-1991 by Ord. No. 659]
For each kilowatt-hour of electric energy delivered to a customer, there
shall be added a fuel adjustment to the applicable rate schedule. The
fuel adjustment charge shall be computed by adding the fuel adjustment
charge paid by the Borough on wholesale power purchases for the two
monthly billing periods immediately prior to the retail billing month and
dividing the sum by the total kilowatt-hours delivered to retail customers
for the two-month period immediately preceding the retail billing date.
For all energy delivered on or after January 31, 1991, the fuel adjustment
charge as calculated herein shall be increased by $0.00173 per kilowatthour;
provided, further, that from time to time the Borough Council may
reconsider the fuel adjustment charge and change the same by resolution
adopted by a majority vote of Borough Council. Said change in the fuel
adjustment charge shall be effective on all energy delivered after the date
upon which the resolution is passed.
§ 85-40. Dates rates applicable. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No.
755; 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 866; 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 878;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 928;
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 969; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 982;
12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 991]
The electric rates stated in this article shall apply with the February 2016
meter readings.
§ 85-41. Attachments to Department equipment.
F. This rate schedule shall continue to be available only to existing
consumers at existing locations supplied continuously hereunder, and
no new customer will be accepted under this provision.
G. The fuel adjustment formula set forth in § 85-39 of this article shall
apply to each kilowatt-hour sold under this rate schedule.
A. It is hereby ordained by Borough Council that it shall be unlawful to
attach signs, posters, placards or notices to any Department
equipment, including wooden poles or lighting standards. No materials
of any nature may be affixed to Department equipment without written
Department permission.
B. The Perkasie Police Department may attach traffic and parking signs to
Department equipment in any emergency or temporary situation in
which alternate means of posting are unavailable.
41.Editor's Note: Former § 85-38.1, Large commercial and industrial service Rate E, added
5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 667, was repealed 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 755.
42.Editor's Note: Former § 85-39, Fuel adjustment, as amended, was repealed 12-5-1988 by
Ord. No. 612.
§ 85-38 PERKASIE CODE § 85-41
78:154
§ 85-42. Underground electric service.
C. The Perkasie Public Works Department may attach traffic or parking
signs to Department equipment with permission from the Borough
Manager.
D. Any person who violates § 85-41 of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CUSTOMER — The owner of any real property served by underground
electric power from the distribution facilities of the Department for the
purposes of this section.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Perkasie Electric Department.
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision or land development for residential
and/or commercial uses which provide for the opening of new streets or
ways, whether public or private.
B. Wherever these rules or regulations provide for the customer to furnish
materials or services, such materials, equipment, supply or
construction methods shall be in accord with the standards of the
Department and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Department.
C. Before any underground service is installed, the customer and
Department shall enter into a written agreement, setting forth the
arrangements, conditions and costs of type of service to be installed.
D. Generally, whether in public rights-of-way or on private land, all
primary and secondary underground facilities, including distribution
transformers, shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the
Department.
E. Any charges made by the Borough to the customer under these
regulations shall be paid in advance.
F. The Department shall not be liable for any injury or damage occasioned
by the willful or negligent excavation, breakage or other interference
with its underground facilities or equipment by other than the
Department's employees or agents.
G. In any development or subdivision where a lot or lots may be sold, the
customer shall include in the deed transferring any such lot the
following provisions:
(1) Electric service to that lot shall be supplied only from the
underground distribution system.
§ 85-41 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-42
78:155
(2) Any damage caused to the said lot or structures thereon by reason
of Department work in the replacement or repair of faulted cable or
equipment shall be the responsibility of the owner to repair.
H. Underground service from overhead primary distribution.
(1) Subsection H shall apply to single- or three-phase service from
existing primary overhead facilities of the Department to a padmounted
transformer on the customer's property.
(2) The customer shall furnish the following materials and services:
(a) Transformer pad specified by the Department.
(b) Trench and backfill for specified conduit from pole to
transformer pad and from transformer pad to meter location.
(c) Install specified conduit from pole (at weather head) to
transformer pad and from transformer pad to meter base.
(d) Install secondary cable.
(3) The Department will furnish the following materials and services:
(a) Ground level transformer.
(b) Install primary cable.
(c) Connections to distribution line and transformer.
(d) Connectors and connections to load side of transformer.
I. Underground service from overhead secondary distribution.
(1) Subsection I shall apply to single- or three-phase service from
existing secondary overhead facilities of the Department.
(2) The customer shall furnish the following materials and services:
(a) Trench and backfill for specified conduit and cable.
(b) Required conduit from the point of connection with the
Department's secondary line (at weatherhead on pole).
(c) Any necessary ground level or below ground junction boxes.
(d) Secondary cable.
(3) The Department will furnish the following materials and services:
(a) Connections to secondary distribution line.
J. Underground service to new residential development: single-family
detached and semidetached dwellings.
§ 85-42 PERKASIE CODE § 85-42
78:156
(1) Subsection J shall be applied to all developments containing five or
more dwellings, consisting of single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and single-family multiplex dwellings and requiring
the installation of primary and/or secondary facilities.
(2) The standard method of service under this rule shall be
underground distribution, single phase, with ground level lowprofile
transformers.
(3) The customer shall furnish the following materials and services:
(a) Provide the Department with an accurate development plan
and the proposed kilowatt load.
(b) Provide, at no cost to the Department, all easements necessary
for Department occupancy by distribution, service and
streetlighting lines and related facilities.
(c) Clear the ground along all easement and grade within six
inches of final grade.
(d) Trench and backfill for all conduit or cable required to
complete the system installation, such trenching and
backfilling to be according to Department specifications and
with Department approval.
(e) Protect all installed Department facilities from damage and
pay actual cost for repair for any facility damage.
(f) Pay to the Department, in advance, such fees as the Borough
Council of Perkasie may adopt by resolution from time to time.
[Amended 1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 586]
(4) The Department will furnish the following materials and services.
(a) Transformers and transformer pads.
(b) Furnish and install all wire cable and conduit.
(c) Streetlight pole, pole foundation and luminaire.
(5) Department facilities may be installed with equipment of other
utilities by mutual agreement between the Department and the
utilities. Any charges made by other utilities shall be between the
customer and those utilities.
(6) The Department will limit the installation of facilities to a
development or that part of a development for which service will be
required within one year or less.
K. Underground service to residential developments: apartments,
townhouses and related commercial uses.
§ 85-42 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-42
78:157
§ 85-43. Appeal procedure. [Added 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 752]
(1) Subsection K shall be applied to all development of apartments,
garden apartments and multiplex apartments.
(2) The conditions and charges for underground service shall be
established by agreement between the customer and Department.
The customer shall furnish complete development plans upon
which the underground facilities are designed and easements
established. The Department charges to the customer shall be the
total estimated cost of underground facilities.
L. In the event an existing underground service is replaced because of the
customer's load growth or service relocation, such replacement shall be
at the cost of the customer.
A. Any customer shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Borough
Electrical Department to the Borough Manager upon a form to be
provided by the Borough. The decision of the Manager shall be
rendered within three days after he or she has received the written
appeal.
B. The decision of the Borough Manager may be appealed directly to the
Borough Council upon a form to be provided by the Borough. The
President of Borough Council shall act as the presiding officer at the
hearing as hereinafter provided. A majority of the Borough Council
shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting a hearing.
C. The Borough Council shall conduct a hearing at its next regularly
scheduled meeting; provided, however, that in the event that an
emergency exists, in the sole discretion of the President of Borough
Council, he or she may establish an earlier hearing date, provided that
at least three days' notice is given to the appealing party.
D. All hearings shall be open to the public. The appellant and a
representative of the Department shall both be given an opportunity to
present whatever evidence or testimony they desire. Hearings shall not
be conducted in strict conformance with rules of evidence.
E. The decision of the Council shall be conveyed to the appellant and the
Department in writing within seven days of the hearing.
§ 85-42 PERKASIE CODE § 85-43
78:158
ARTICLE II
Standards; Inspections
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as § 70-5 of the 1985 Code; amended
12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 731]
§ 85-44. Borough not to perform inspections.
The Borough of Perkasie will not perform any inspection of electric
installation, facilities or equipment which is completed as a part of a
building permit issued under the requirements of Chapter 70, Building
Construction.
§ 85-45. Standards; inspection by certified service.
All electric conductors and equipment shall conform to the requirements
of the National Electric Code, 1993 Edition, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association; all installations, alterations or extensions of
electric wiring or apparatus for light, heat or power shall be subject to
the inspection and approval of a certified inspection service. It shall be
the responsibility of the permittee and/or the electrician to arrange for
an electric inspection and to notify the Building Official of the inspection
results.
§ 85-46. Effect on certificate of use and occupancy.
The permittee shall provide the Building Official with the written approval
before the issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy.
§ 85-47. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this inspection requirement shall be considered violations of
the Building Code.43
43.Editor's Note: See § 70-2F of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 85-44 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 85-47
78:159
Chapter 88
EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 92. Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 90.
§ 88-1. License and compliance required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in blasting operations or in any other activity
in which explosives are used within the Borough of Perkasie without first
having secured a license therefor and operating in full compliance with the
provisions set forth herein.
§ 88-2. License application; fee.
Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the Borough
Manager and delivered personally or by registered or certified mail.
A. Each application shall set forth the following:
(1) The name of the company or organization engaged in the blasting
operation or other use of explosives.
(2) The name of the individual who is specifically in charge of the
blasting operation or other activity involving explosives.
(3) The addresses of both the company or organization and individual
involved in the blasting operation or activity using such explosives.
(4) The location at which such blasting operation or other use
involving explosives shall occur.
(5) The time of occurrence of the blasting operation or other use of
explosives.
(6) The extent of the blasting operation or other activity involving such
explosives.
(7) A detailed statement setting forth the traffic controls and such
other measures being taken to protect the public at large while
such blasting operation or other activity involving explosives are
being conducted.
(8) A detailed statement describing a proposed means of
transportation and storage of the explosives within the Borough.
Explosives may only be transported on vehicles clearly labeled as
"Explosive" or "Dangerous" or some similar nomination. Explosives
must be stored in a magazine complying with the construction
specifications issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
§ 85-47 PERKASIE CODE § 88-2
88:160
§ 88-3. Notification of adjacent property owners.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant, prior to applying
for such license, to notify all adjacent property owners personally or by
certified or registered mail of his intent to obtain such license and to advise
such adjacent property owners of the time, place and extent of the intending
blasting operation or such other activity involving the use of explosives.
§ 88-4. Liability insurance.45
Prior to the issuance of any blasting license, an applicant shall furnish
evidence to the Borough Manager that there is and will continue in full
force and effect a public liability insurance policy during the entire blasting
period covering property damage claims in the amount of at least
$1,000,000 for all property damaged as a result of any one accident and
public liability insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for all personal
injuries and deaths resulting from any one accident.
§ 88-5. Blasting limitations.
It shall be unlawful to set off or discharge more than 750 pounds of sixtypercent
dynamite, or any charge containing or releasing a disruptive force
greater than 750 pounds of sixty-percent dynamite in any one blasting
operation. Secondary shots may be fired in accordance with good practice,
provided that adequate protection is taken to prevent flying debris. No
adobe or mudcapped shots shall be used.
Industry and at such places as comply with the American Table of
Distances issued by the Institute of Makers of Explosives.
(9) A sworn statement advising the Borough that all of the adjacent
property owners have been notified in writing, either personally or
by certified or registered mail.
(10) A preblast survey and report prepared by a licensed engineer or
geologist containing recommendations for blasting and protection
of structures from the blast area.
B. The Borough Manager shall forward copies of such application to the
Chief of Police for Perkasie Borough and the Chief of any and all fire
companies operating within Perkasie Borough at such time as the
license is issued to engage in blasting operations or such other activity
involving explosives.
C. The fee for such license shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.44
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-2 EXPLOSIVES § 88-6
88:161
§ 88-6. Monitoring.
The individual conducting the blasting operation is hereby required to
have each shot monitored by an individual qualified to use seismograph
equipment, and the result of this seismograph testing shall be delivered
directly to the Borough Manager at the conclusion of the blasting program.
§ 88-7. Securing of site.
After completing the blasting operation, it shall be the responsibility of the
individual in charge of said operation to ensure that all wires are removed
and that the area is policed daily until the site is absolutely safe and secure.
§ 88-8. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or such other person
designated by the Borough Council to enforce the provisions in this chapter.
§ 88-9. Violations and penalties.46
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 92
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 58.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical service — See Ch. 85.
Explosives — See Ch. 88.
Fire loss insurance claims — See Ch. 103, Art.
I.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 137.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-6 PERKASIE CODE § 88-9
88:162
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
Adopted 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 92-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 12-20-1993
by Ord. No. 733]
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary of the Borough of Perkasie, being marked and designated as the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Ninth Edition 1993," as published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Perkasie, Bucks
County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1993 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 92-3 of this article.
§ 92-2. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed, except Ordinance No. 596, An Ordinance Regulating Blasting
and Other Activities in Which Explosives Are Used Within the Borough of
Perkasie, dated September 21, 1987,47 which shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 92-3. Modification of standards. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 733]
The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1993 is amended and changed in
the following respects:
A. Section F-101.1 (page 1, second line): insert "the Borough of Perkasie".
B. Section F-112.3, Penalty for violations, shall be amended to read as
follows:
F-112.3 Violations and penalties: Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or fail to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment, as provided in the appropriate
court for each offense. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Section F-113.2, Membership of board, shall be amended to read as
follows:
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Explosives.
§ 92-1 EXPLOSIVES § 92-3
88:163
§ 92-4. Establishment of limits for storage of explosives,
ammunition and blasting agents. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
733]
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code in which the storage of explosives, ammunition and
blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as set out in Ordinance
No. 596, dated September 21, 1987.48
§ 92-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 92-2 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
F-113.2 Membership of Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of a
quorum of the Perkasie Borough Council.
D. Section F-113.2.1, Qualifications, shall be deleted in its entirety.
E. Section F-113.5, Postponed hearing, shall be amended to read as
follows:
F-113.5 Postponed hearing: When a quorum of Borough Council is
not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Explosives.
§ 92-3 PERKASIE CODE § 92-5
88:164
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Fires and Burning
[Adopted 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 903]
§ 92-6. Prohibited acts.
Except as specifically authorized under this article or permitted by the
Borough Manager in writing, no person shall set or maintain any outdoor
fire on a public or private street, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way or on public
or private property within the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 92-7. Exceptions; conditions.
A. Outdoor burning as set forth in this section shall be permitted as
exceptions to § 92-6 and subject to the requirements of Subsection B:
(1) Fires used for cooking purposes only and built in a fireplace, grill or
barbeque pit.
(2) Fires for the burning of wood or other suitable materials in a
chiminea or screened fire container.
(3) Fires for the burning of paper and cardboard in a noncombustible
container covered with a mesh screen of 1/2 inch or smaller
(provided, however, that no paper or cardboard that is collected for
recycling by the Borough of Perkasie may be burned).
(4) Special event bonfires or campfires with the written approval of the
Borough Manager and subject to any requirements imposed by the
Manager as a condition of approval.
(5) Outdoor burning in connection with fire department training
exercises, with the written approval of the Fire Chief.
(6) Outdoor burning by the Borough.
B. Outdoor burning permitted by Subsection A(1) through (4) shall be
subject to all of the following conditions:
(1) The fire shall be in a noncombustible container.
(2) The fire shall be located no closer than 15 feet from any building
and 15 feet from any property line, except that a permitted fire for
the burning of paper or cardboard pursuant to Subsection A(3) of
this section shall be located no closer than 30 feet from any
property line.
(3) The fire shall be attended at all times until it is completely
extinguished by a responsible person and a water hose attached to
an operable water faucet or equipment capable of covering the fire
with earth must be in immediate readiness for use in extinguishing
the fire. A water hose, if used, must be of sufficient length to extend
at least 15 feet beyond the site of the burning.
§ 92-6 EXPLOSIVES § 92-7
88:165
§ 92-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) Burning shall not be permitted during periods of high winds,
drought or weather inversion (i.e., hazardous air quality
conditions) or during or in any other situation deemed hazardous
by the Borough Manager or his/her duly authorized representative.
(5) The fire shall not cause smoke to interfere to any degree with
normal visibility at any point outside of the property upon which
the burning is being conducted and shall not in any respect cause
damage to the property of others or interfere with the welfare and
comfort of other persons in the community and their right to enjoy
their property free and clear from smoke nuisance, noxious fumes,
gas, soot or cinders.
(6) The fire shall not violate in any respect the provisions of the
International Fire Code as adopted by the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 92-7 PERKASIE CODE § 92-8
88:166
ARTICLE III
Knox-Boxes®
[Adopted 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 990]
§ 92-9. Purpose.
§ 92-10. Knox-Boxes.®
A. The purpose of this article is to protect and promote health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Borough and particularly commercial
businesses.
B. An ordinance is necessary to require certain commercial buildings to
install Knox-Boxes®.
C. The benefits of installing Knox-Boxes® include providing immediate
emergency access to firefighters leading to increasing Fire Department
efficiency; preventing costly forced entry damage and allowing
undamaged doors to be resecured after the Fire Department's
emergency response; and protecting private property, inventory,
equipment, supplies and preventing possible injury to firefighters and
emergency responders from forced entry into property.
A. Knox-Box® Required for new commercial buildings. All new
commercial buildings shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of an
Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) type and size approved by the Borough
Fire Marshal, in a location specified by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, prior to the issuance of the permit to occupy.
B. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings with
improvements. All existing commercial buildings constructing
improvements that require any land use or zoning approval shall have
installed a Knox-Box®, of an Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) type and
size approved by the Borough Fire Marshal, in a location specified by
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, prior to the issuance of a
construction permit and/or certification of occupancy.
C. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings. All existing
commercial buildings equipped with automatic fire-detection and/or
suppression systems shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of a UL type and
size approved by the Borough Fire Marshal, in a location specified by
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, within six months of the
effective date of this article.
D. Knox-Box® contents. All Knox-Boxes® shall contain labeled keys, easily
identifiable in the field, to provide access into the property and/or
building and to any locked areas within the said building as the
Borough Fire Marshal may direct.
E. Locked gates or driveways. Any locked gates or driveways which allow
access to a commercial business are required to place a Fire
§ 92-9 EXPLOSIVES § 92-10
88:167
§ 92-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Department access lock on the access point to allow immediate
emergency access to the commercial property. All locks are to be
approved by the Borough Fire Marshal.
§ 92-10 PERKASIE CODE § 92-11
88:168
Chapter 94
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
Water — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
§ 92-11 EXPLOSIVES § 92-11
88:169

ARTICLE I
Authorization
§ 94-0. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council does hereby further enact and
ordain as follows.
§ 94-0 EXPLOSIVES § 94-0
88:171

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 94-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 94-2. Applicability.
§ 94-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 94-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 94-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within identified floodplain areas within the
Borough unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
§ 94-1 EXPLOSIVES § 94-5
88:173
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 94-5 PERKASIE CODE § 94-5
88:174
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 94-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 94-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any identified floodplain area of the Borough.
§ 94-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may: (a) fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, (b) delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or (c) enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);49 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 94-6 EXPLOSIVES § 94-8
88:175
§ 94-9. Application procedures and requirements.
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof,
as well as the Borough's current construction code.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 94-8 PERKASIE CODE § 94-9
88:176
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 94-9 EXPLOSIVES § 94-9
88:177
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 94-17A) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 94-23F, Storage, and § 94-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 94-23F and 94-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 94-24
during a base flood.
§ 94-9 PERKASIE CODE § 94-9
88:178
§ 94-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Conservation District, Planning
Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 94-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 94-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance, and shall be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 94-13. Start of construction and completion of work.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the responsible contractor and approved
by the Floodplain Administrator.
A. Start of construction or development shall begin within 180 days after
the date of issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be
completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or
the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by
the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development permit does
not refer to the zoning approval.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
§ 94-9 EXPLOSIVES § 94-13
88:179
§ 94-14. Enforcement.
§ 94-15. Appeals.
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary violation and upon conviction shall pay a
fine to Perkasie Borough of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 94-13 PERKASIE CODE § 94-15
88:180
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 94-15 EXPLOSIVES § 94-15
88:181

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 94-16. Identification.
§ 94-17. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Perkasie Borough,
classified as Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated March 16, 2015 and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Perkasie Borough and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those Special Flood Hazard Areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
§ 94-16 EXPLOSIVES § 94-17
88:183
§ 94-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the Special Flood Hazard Area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the Special Flood Hazard Area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 94-21B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 94-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough and any party aggrieved
by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE at any
point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
(1) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
§ 94-17 PERKASIE CODE § 94-20
88:184
§ 94-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 94-20 EXPLOSIVES § 94-20
88:185

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 94-21. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
(1) any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or (2) any development occurring in Zones A1-30
and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or (3) alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 94-21 EXPLOSIVES § 94-22
88:187
§ 94-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 94-17C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and,
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 94-17C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
§ 94-22 PERKASIE CODE § 94-22
88:188
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from requirements will be the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
§ 94-22 EXPLOSIVES § 94-22
88:189
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) Municipally owned stormwater structures are permitted so long as
all necessary state and federal approvals and permits have been
obtained and all applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, rules, and
regulations have been met.
(9) Playgrounds/playsets are permitted so long as not enclosed and is
properly anchored to the grounds in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(10) Fences are permitted so long as not more than 50% is solid and it is
properly anchored to the ground in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(11) Patios are permitted so long as no portion of the patio is more than
six inches above ground level.
(12) Vehicles and equipment. All vehicles, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, RVs, buses, trailers, boats, snow
machines, ATVs, and construction equipment, are prohibited from
being stored within the identified floodplain area. This prohibition
does not apply to boats and other watercraft docked or moored
within a waterway or body of water.
(13)Walls: prohibited.
(14) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
§ 94-22 PERKASIE CODE § 94-22
88:190
§ 94-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
§ 94-22 EXPLOSIVES § 94-23
88:191
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 94-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
§ 94-23 PERKASIE CODE § 94-23
88:192
§ 94-24. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply: (§ 94-24B, C, and D).
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and sub-sections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
§ 94-23 EXPLOSIVES § 94-24
88:193
improved structure which (1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or (2) will
be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or (3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
§ 94-24 PERKASIE CODE § 94-24
88:194
§ 94-25. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 10
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 94-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 94-21, 94-22, and 94-23.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 94-21, 94-22,
and 94-23, including:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
B. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 60 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
§ 94-24 EXPLOSIVES § 94-26
88:195
§ 94-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated
to the regulatory flood elevation.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa. Code
Chapter 401 through 405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 94-26.
§ 94-26 PERKASIE CODE § 94-27
88:196
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 94-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Borough:
§ 94-29. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
§ 94-28 EXPLOSIVES § 94-29
88:197
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
§ 94-29 PERKASIE CODE § 94-29
88:198
§ 94-30. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article III:
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development;"
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall notify
the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is
deficient.
C. If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
§ 94-29 EXPLOSIVES § 94-30
88:199
§ 94-31. Special technical requirements.
D. If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the
Department of Community and Economic Development, by registered
or certified mail, within five working days after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by the Borough.
F. If the Borough does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough and the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the
Borough shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
§ 94-30 PERKASIE CODE § 94-31
88:200
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
§ 94-31 EXPLOSIVES § 94-31
88:201

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 94-32. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when any activity
meeting the definition of "development" is proposed to any existing
structure, the provisions of § 94-33 shall apply.
§ 94-33. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District or identified floodplain area that
would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 94-17C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (See § 94-17C), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without Floodway (See § 94-17B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 94-32 EXPLOSIVES § 94-33
88:203

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 94-34. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
§ 94-35. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 94-15 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 94-17C.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit or prohibited activities (Article VI) or to
development which may endanger human life (§ 94-24).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
§ 94-34 EXPLOSIVES § 94-35
88:205
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 94-35 PERKASIE CODE § 94-35
88:206
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 94-36. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 94-37. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 94-36 EXPLOSIVES § 94-37
88:207
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 94-37 PERKASIE CODE § 94-37
88:208
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
Special Flood Hazard Area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 94-16 and 17 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 16, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after March 1,
1977, and before March 16, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 94-37 EXPLOSIVES § 94-37
88:209
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 1,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
March 1, 1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 94-37 PERKASIE CODE § 94-37
88:210
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss" regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 94-37 EXPLOSIVES § 94-37
88:211
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 94-37 PERKASIE CODE § 94-37
88:212
Chapter 96
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Animal feces — See Ch. 80.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Streets — See Ch. 160.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
§ 94-37 EXPLOSIVES § 94-37
88:213

Part 1
[ASdotoprtaegde 1, 0C-o5l-l1e9ct8i7o nB Ay nOdr dD. iNspoo. s5a9l8]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 96-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Perkasie Borough
Refuse Storage, Collection and Disposal Ordinance of 1970," as amended.
§ 96-2. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the authorization granted by Act 581 of the General Assembly,
approved February 1, 1966, § 1202 (the Borough Code), as amended,50 the
purpose of this Part 1 is to promote, protect and facilitate the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare by:
A. Instituting a mandatory recycling program in accordance with
recommendations of the State Assembly whereby the Borough shall be
the sole agent regulating collection of solid waste and requiring
residents to purchase Borough disposal bags for the disposal of rubbish
and garbage.
B. Regulating the collection, accumulation and storage of solid wastes so
as to:
(1) Retard the propagation and the harboring of rats, mice,
mosquitoes, flies and other vermin.
(2) Eliminate filth and filthy deposits.
(3) Reduce the opportunity for growth of pollen-bearing grasses and
weeds.
(4) Eliminate attractive nuisances which may endanger the safety of
children.
(5) Reduce the potential pollution of land, air or water and the diseaseproducing
potential of decaying organic matter.
(6) Reduce the potential of spontaneous combustion and fire.
(7) Generally promote harmonious, peaceful and comfortable
neighborhood life by the elimination of nuisances.
(8) Provide for the preservation of valuable natural resources through
the elimination of recyclable materials from collection and landfills.
C. Providing for the safe, orderly and economic collection and removal of
accumulated waste.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202.
§ 96-1 EXPLOSIVES § 96-2
88:215
§ 96-3. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Part 1, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Part 1, except in those instances where the context
indicates otherwise:
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible material. This definition excludes ashes resulting from
industrial process.
AUTHORIZED COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR — A person, firm or corporation
licensed to collect, convey and dispose refuse in accord with the provisions
of this Part 1.
BIMETAL CONTAINER — An empty food or beverage container consisting
of ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Perkasie.
BUILDING or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or other structure
constructed, existing and used in conformity with the zoning, building
and fire prevention ordinances, codes and regulations of the Borough of
Perkasie.
BULKY WASTE — Items that due to their size or shape cannot be disposed
of in a Borough disposal bag, including but not limited to large household
appliances that do not contain freon, such as stoves, televisions sets and
washing machines, or the equivalent in size in furniture and furnishings,
plumbing fixtures, large crates, tools, machinery or parts thereof, play,
garden and exercise equipment and similar items.[Amended 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 874]
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY — Events sponsored in whole or in part by a
municipality, or conducted within a municipality and sponsored privately,
which include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and
organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.[Added 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 920A]
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing, material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, plaster and brick, conduit, pipe, wire,
insulation and similar material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
COUNTY — The County of Bucks and its regulatory agencies.
DISPOSAL BAG or BOROUGH DISPOSAL BAG — Any plastic bag
distributed by the Borough, or its authorized distributors, which shall bear
D. Provide for the disposal of solid waste in safe and sanitary methods and
in compliance with applicable state and local rules and regulations.
E. Comply with the purpose and intent of Act No. 241, the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act.51
51.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 96-2 PERKASIE CODE § 96-3
88:216
an identification mark established by the Borough. Other than a Boroughprovided
wheeled cart, this shall be the only permitted method of disposal
for residents' rubbish and garbage.[Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 997]
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Clean bottles and jars made of clear, green or
brown glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass and porcelain and
ceramic products.
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Paper (except newspaper), wood, excelsior,
plastics, rags and cloth, leather, rubber, metals, tin cans, metal foils,
ceramics, crockery and similar items normally produced by or originating
from private residential occupancy; provided, however, that the items set
forth herein need not be produced by or originate from a residence to
be classed as "household rubbish" so long as such waste is similar to the
waste produced by or originating in a residence as to size, weight and
material. "Household rubbish" specifically excludes materials designated as
recyclable.
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTE — Any material or substance
which is a waste by-product of the industrial or commercial process and
shall include packaging materials and equipment used in the delivery or
shipment of goods to or from the industrial or commercial site.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.[Added 8-20-2007
by Ord. No. 920A]
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed intervals. Expressly
excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A property which contains 10 or more residential
units, including, without limitation, apartment complexes, condominium
complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks.[Added 8-20-2007
by Ord. No. 920A]
MUNICIPAL COLLECTION SERVICE — A collection service established and
operated by the Borough of Perkasie or a private collection service under
contract with the Borough.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded, however, are newspapers which have been soiled.
NONCOLLECTIBLE WASTE — Includes poisons, acids, caustics, explosives
and other hazardous material that may cause damage or injury to collection
equipment or personnel; human or animal excreta; and dead animals.
§ 96-3 EXPLOSIVES § 96-3
88:217
PERSON — Includes any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS/RECYCLABLES — Those materials specified by
the Borough for collection in accordance with recycling regulations. Such
material may include, but not be limited to, aluminum products, clean glass
containers, bimetal containers, newspapers, magazine and periodicals,
plastic containers and yard wastes. What constitutes "recyclable material"
may change depending upon what the Borough is able to dispose of through
municipal recycling efforts.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, processing, recovery and sale
or reuse of metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of as solid waste.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body wastes, and shall include, but not
be limited to, ashes, rubbish, garbage, industrial and commercial wastes
and junk, except that "refuse" shall specifically exclude hazardous waste.
RUBBISH — Solid waste exclusive of garbage (e.g., nonrecyclable glass,
metal, paper or plastic and plant material, wood or nonputrescible solid
waste).
SCAVENGING — Uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of recyclable
materials/recyclables from the Borough Recycling Center or from curbside
after being placed there for collection by the Borough.[Added 6-20-1988
by Ord. No. 602]
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its regulatory agencies.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WHEELED CART — A light, two-wheeled, trash toter container provided by
the Borough to the customer, and of a size approved by the Borough Council
for use by the customers who elect the service and pay a quarterly fee in
advance of the service being provided. The cart will have the compatibility
to be lifted by the Borough's trash trucks. A fee for wheeled cart disposal
shall be established from time to time by the Borough Council in the
Borough Fee Schedule,52 to be paid quarterly in advance of service. Other
than a Borough disposal bag, this shall be the only permitted method of
disposal for residents' rubbish and garbage.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
997]
52.Editor's Note: The Borough Fee Schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 96-3 PERKASIE CODE § 96-3
88:218
ARTICLE II
Refuse Disposal Sites
§ 96-4. Disposal restricted to approved sites.
It shall be unlawful to dump, destroy or otherwise dispose of refuse within
the jurisdictional limits of the Borough except at a state- or county-approved
disposal site.
§ 96-5. Disposal to be at designated sites.
All refuse shall be deposited and disposed of at a site designated by the
County of Bucks as a county landfill or other state-approved disposal site.
§ 96-6. Exception.
An exception to the above requirement to deposit or dispose of refuse at a
state-approved site shall be for scrap or salvageable material which may be
delivered or sold to a process for reclamation and salvaging.
§ 96-4 EXPLOSIVES § 96-6
88:219

ARTICLE III
Accumulation and Storage
§ 96-7. Compliance required.
No person shall accumulate or store or permit to be accumulated or stored
on any property within the Borough of Perkasie any refuse in a method
or in quantities not authorized by this Part 1 and as hereinafter specified;
provided, however, that these regulations shall not apply to any refuse
accumulated or stored within a building or accessory structure constructed
and maintained in accordance with duly established health, zoning and
building laws, codes and regulations, nor to the storage of clean material
designated as a recyclable by the Borough.
§ 96-7.1. Compliance required of multifamily unit owners. [Added
8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 920A]
§ 96-8. Method of storage and accumulation; composting.
A. Each multifamily unit owner shall provide proper collection and
disposal of regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials by utilizing a permitted collector to deliver such waste and
recycling to an approved facility.
B. Each multifamily unit owner shall:
(1) Provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source separation of designated recyclable materials; and
(2) Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each
multifamily unit to ensure that all designated recyclable materials
are source separated; and
(3) Provide collection and delivery to a facility of source-separateddesignated
recyclable materials at a frequency of not less than
once per week; and
(4) Provide to the Borough annually by February 1st a written report
on what materials were recycled and their weights.
A. Garbage shall be drained of liquid, wrapped securely in paper, plastic
bags or similar material and placed with other household rubbish in an
approved container, as provided in § 96-9. Garbage shall not be stored
for a period exceeding seven days. An exception to the above
accumulation and storage methods for restaurants, institutions and
commercial food-handling and processing uses may be granted by the
Borough through written agreement setting forth the specific
conditions and regulations to be applied.
B. Material being composted shall be stored in such a manner as not to
create a nuisance or to endanger the public safety. Given this condition,
material being composted may be stored for more than seven days.
§ 96-7 EXPLOSIVES § 96-9
88:221
§ 96-9. Household rubbish.
A. Authorized containers and packaging. Household rubbish and garbage
shall be collected, stored and/or prepared for collection only in the
following containers and methods:
(1) The municipal collection service shall be the sole collecting service
for residential rubbish and garbage.
(2) For disposal of rubbish and garbage, Borough residents will be
required to purchase either Borough disposal bags, and/or pay for a
wheeled cart, at the respective fees set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, and to place all household
rubbish and garbage for collection in those bags and/or a wheeled
cart. The Borough will only collect household rubbish and garbage
contained in either the Borough disposal bags and/or wheeled cart.
Borough disposal bags shall not be filled to a weight greater than
40 pounds and shall be securely tied or sealed at the time of
collection. Wheeled carts shall not be filled in any manner that does
not allow the lid to rest in the fully closed position and in no event
shall be filled to weigh more than 150 pounds. [Amended
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835; 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 997]
(3) Tree trimmings, shrubbery clippings and similar material shall be
cut in lengths not to exceed four feet and securely tied with string
or twine in bundles not more than two feet in diameter. Collection
shall be arranged on a individual basis with the Borough.
Trimmings not prepared as prescribed will not be collected. The
Borough Manager or his designee may determine an amount of
trimmings to be excessive and refuse collection. Material denied
for collection under this provision may be collected by a private
hauler.
B. Household rubbish and garbage shall not be stored in a manner that
creates offensive or obnoxious odors.
C. General storage methods.
(1) Generally, household rubbish must be stored in Borough disposal
bags as authorized by § 96-9A. Where metal or rigid plastic
containers are used for the temporary storage of material, the
bottoms and sides of such shall be kept free of residual liquids and
solids by periodic cleaning.
(2) All rubbish shall be drained of liquids before depositing in
temporary storage containers, wheeled carts, and/or Borough
disposal bags. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 997]
(3) Household rubbish may be temporarily stored in wheeled carts as
authorized by § 96-9A. Wheeled carts shall be kept free of residual
liquids and solids by periodic cleaning. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 997]
§ 96-9 PERKASIE CODE § 96-10
88:222
§ 96-10. Ashes.
It is mandatory that ashes be thoroughly extinguished before placement for
collection. Collection shall be accomplished by obtaining a Borough disposal
bag and securing the bag to a metal container. The municipal collection
service shall collect the ashes if they are extinguished, along with an empty
disposal bag. Total net weight of ash shall not exceed 40 pounds per empty
bag provided by resident.
§ 96-11. Recyclables. [Amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 920A]
A. Recyclables as defined and determined by the Borough shall be
collected in accordance with Borough regulation. Collection may
include dropoff by residents at a central location and/or curbside
collection. Collection of recyclables by individuals or organizations as
authorized by the Borough shall be permitted.
B. Separation of recyclables. All designated recyclables and leaf waste
shall be kept separate from municipal waste, for the purpose of
recycling and composting respectively, to the extent required by the
following provisions:
(1) Owners and occupants of all residential properties shall keep
separate those materials designated in the Borough's rules and
regulations for the purpose of curbside recycling and leaf waste for
the purpose of composting.
(2) Owners and occupants of all commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and properties and sponsors or
organizers of community activities shall keep separate the
following recyclables: aluminum cans, corrugated paper, office
paper and any other materials as designated in the Borough's rules
and regulations. Leaf waste shall also be kept separate for the
purpose of composting. Commercial, municipal or institutional
solid waste generators must submit an annual report showing
materials that were recycled and the total number of tons recycled
to the Borough's Recycling Coordinator no later than February 1st
of each year.
(3) Recyclables shall be prepared and stored and set at the curb in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the Borough's rules and
regulations.
(4) All source-separated-designated recyclable materials collected in
the Borough's recycling program must be marketed for recycling.
C. Municipal waste haulers.
(1) Municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for the marketing
of recyclable materials collected within the Borough. Recyclable
materials may not be mixed with waste or disposed of without
§ 96-10 EXPLOSIVES § 96-11
88:223
§ 96-11.1. Refuse removal fee. [Added 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 941;
amended 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 944; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 971]
written permission from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) Municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for delivering
source-separated leaf waste collected in the Borough to a
Department of Environmental Protection approved composting
facility. Source-separated leaf waste may not be disposed of or
mixed with municipal waste without written permission from the
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Annual refuse removal fee imposed. An annual refuse removal fee, as
established by Council from time to time by resolution and set forth in
the Consolidated Fee Schedule 53, is hereby imposed upon and shall be
charged against the occupant/resident of record of any residential
property for each residential dwelling unit for which trash, or bulky
waste removal services are provided by the Borough. The annual refuse
fee shall apply no matter what method of refuse, trash, or rubbish
removal is used, without exception. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
997]
(1) Multifamily units.
(a) Multifamily units with 10 or more residential units, including
apartment complexes, condominium complexes, retirement
homes and mobile home parks, which are required to provide
proper collection and disposal of regulated municipal waste
and designated recyclable materials by utilizing a permitted
private collector to deliver such waste and recycling to an
approved facility, shall be exempt from the refuse and
recycling removal fee; and
(b) Multifamily units with four to nine residential units may be
exempt from the refuse and recycling removal fee upon the
presentation to the Borough of a certified statement and a valid
contract(s) demonstrating that all required trash and recycling
services (including trash, commingled recycling, newspaper/
cardboard, bulky waste, yard waste and Christmas trees) are
provided to the property by one or more private permitted
collector which delivers the units' waste and recycling to an
approved facility.
(2) Any fees paid for exempt multifamily units prior to the adoption of
this provision shall be refunded by the Borough.
B. Billing and payment of refuse removal fee. The refuse removal fee
billing will be mailed for calendar year for each residential unit after
53.Editor's Note: The Consolidated Fee Schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 96-11 PERKASIE CODE § 96-11.1
88:224
§ 96-12. Industrial and commercial waste.
Industrial and commercial waste stored outside of buildings shall be stored
in containers of suitable size, shape and material so as to prohibit the
waste from being scattered by wind or rain and shall prohibit accessibility
of such waste to rodents and other vermin. An exception to the container
requirement shall be for an inorganic industrial by-product waste of such
quantity that container storage is impractical. In such latter instance,
storage shall be by a means which will prohibit the waste material from
becoming a practical nuisance to the neighborhood. In all instances,
patriciate wastes shall not be stored for periods exceeding seven days, and
all other wastes shall not be stored for periods exceeding 30 days.
§ 96-13. Construction and demolition waste.
Construction and demolition waste may be stored upon the land where
actual construction or demolition is in progress; provided, however, that
such waste shall not be stored for a period exceeding 90 days and shall not
be stored in a way which will allow it to be scattered by wind or rain.
§ 96-14. Bulky waste. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 608]
Bulky waste shall not be stored outside of a building or accessory building
on any land in the Borough, except for a period not exceeding 14 days
pending collection and disposal. However, brush, tree trimmings, yard
clippings, leaves, glass or other waste from live plantings may be stored
the adoption of the fee. Thereafter, the refuse removal fee billing will be
mailed each calendar year. In the event a tenant-occupied unit does not
pay the refuse removal fee, the owner shall be responsible for payment.
So that the owner may be aware of the status of payment of the refuse
removal fee, the owner shall be permitted to obtain tenant account
payment information from the Borough upon request. Properties with
multiple units will be charged and billed for each unit. Payment shall be
due within 30 days from the date of the bill.
C. Nonpayment of refuse removal fee. If the bill for any unit is not paid
within 30 days after the date of the bill, a five-percent penalty shall be
added thereto; if the payment, plus penalty, is not paid within 60 days
after the date of the bill, the aggregate amount thereof shall bear
interest from the penalty date at a rate of 9% per annum, or the
maximum rate permitted by law. Any unpaid bill (together with
penalties and interest thereon, to the extent permitted by law) and all
delinquent costs shall be a lien on the property served, which may be
collected by any available legal action, including by way of a lien filed in
the nature of a municipal claim. Costs and/or reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the Borough shall be added to the unpaid bill along with
penalties and interest and the aggregate of the same shall be entered as
a lien on the property served and collected in the manner provided by
the Municipal Claims Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 96-11.1 EXPLOSIVES § 96-14
88:225
for longer periods of time if necessary until the next scheduled collection
day for such items or for composting as future mulch material. Commercial
and industrial properties shall not place bulky items for collection by the
municipal collection service. It shall be a violation of this Part 1 for any
individual to place bulky waste for collection by municipal collection if that
waste is not generated at or directly associated with the residence. Bulky
waste shall be collected monthly from residential customers and shall be
limited to one item per month per household. Council may from time to
time, by resolution, establish certain bulky waste items as fee-for-collection
items and establish regulations for and charges and collection of those
items.
§ 96-14 PERKASIE CODE § 96-14
88:226
ARTICLE IV
Collection Rules and Regulations
§ 96-15. Residential collection. [Amended 6-20-1988 by Ord. No.
602; 2-18-1991 by Ord. No. 662]
The collection of all ashes, garbage, household rubbish, recyclables and
bulky waste from residences in the Borough shall be by the municipal
collection service, except as herein provided, in accordance with the
following:
A. All refuse shall be prepared for collection in strict conformity with
Article III of this Part 1 and deposited for collection in accordance with
collection standards as adopted by the Borough from time to time.
B. It shall be unlawful to place any material for the municipal collection
service in unauthorized or defective wheeled carts or damaged
Borough disposal bags, torn bags, or bundles not securely tied.
Collection personnel may refuse to collect improperly prepared
material and may give notice of such by affixing a tag to the container
or material citing the violation. Failure to comply after first notice may
result in prosecution under § 96-19. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
997]
C. Except when specifically authorized by the Borough wheeled carts and/
or Borough disposal bags shall be placed for collection at ground level
on the property, not within the right-of-way of a street or alley, and
readily accessible to and not more than 10 feet from the side of the
street or alley from which the collection is made. A wheeled cart must
be placed so that the arrow on the lid is pointed toward the street.
[Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 997]
D. Routes of collection will be along streets, alleys and rights-of-way as
from time to time established by the Borough. Routes and pickup points
will be determined on the basis of the most efficient routing of
collection equipment.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit for collection any refuse or
bulky trash item not produced at the address from which collection is
made or to bring any refuse or bulky trash into the Borough or from one
address to another in the Borough for the purpose of taking advantage
of the collection service. It shall also be unlawful for any resident to
deposit refuse or bulky items for residential collection service, which
refuse was produced by any professional or business enterprise
engaged in by the resident.
F. It shall be unlawful to store or place for residential collection with
household rubbish any of the materials defined as noncollectible waste.
G. Refuse shall not be placed at collection points earlier than 6:00 p.m. on
the day prior to scheduled collection. Empty refuse containers or
recycling containers shall be removed from the collection points prior
§ 96-15 EXPLOSIVES § 96-15
88:227
to 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection. In no event shall Borough disposal
bags or recycling containers remain at curbside for more than 24 hours.
H. Any person found scavenging shall be in violation of this Part 1 and
subject to its fines and penalties as set forth herein. [Added 6-20-1988
by Ord. No. 602]
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring rubbish, refuse, recyclables
and other waste materials into the Borough for deposit at any
designated collection location or curbside collection area, which
materials have not been generated at or from a residence within the
Borough. It shall be unlawful for any nonresident of the Borough to
bring any rubbish, refuse, recyclables and waste materials whatsoever
into the Borough for deposit at any designated collection location or
curbside collection area. Each central recycling collection location
within the Borough shall post a notice advising persons, including
nonresidents of Perkasie Borough, that such deposits may subject them
to fines, costs and penalties in accordance with Article V of this Part 1.
J. In addition to the preceding requirements of this Part 1, the following
shall apply to all households using wheeled carts: [Added 8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 997]
(1) The only wheeled cart permitted for use is that provided by the
Borough;
(2) The Borough retains ownership of the wheeled cart, and it shall be
returned to the Borough prior to the sale of a resident's home or
the resident opting to return to the Borough disposal bag method of
refuse collection;
(3) Residents are responsible for the cost of replacement of a wheeled
cart damaged by wear and tear and/or by the customer;
(4) The Borough has the right to stop service immediately and collect
the wheeled cart from the resident in the event of nonpayment of
quarterly fees;
(5) Notice of nonpayment shall be provided, in writing, by the
Borough, and termination of service and collection of the wheeled
cart may occur five days after mailing of the notice of nonpayment;
(6) Residents may get multiple wheeled carts at one address and will
be billed quarterly for the number of wheeled carts at the address,
regardless of how many carts are placed at the curb in any given
week;
(7) Wheeled carts shall be placed a minimum of two feet from any
parked car and/or vehicle;
(8) In the event a resident has more trash than can fit in a wheeled
cart, the resident must purchase Borough disposal bags to dispose
of the additional trash;
§ 96-15 PERKASIE CODE § 96-15
88:228
§ 96-16. Industrial and commercial properties.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of all commercial
and industrial properties to dispose of all refuse produced by an industrial
or commercial process by contracting for the collection, conveyance and
disposal with an authorized commercial collector or collecting, conveying
and disposing of such refuse with his own vehicles or contracting for the
collection, conveyance and disposal with the municipal collection service,
if available; provided, however, that all such collections must be in accord
with the other conditions of this Part 1. For purposes of this Part 1, all
buildings with four or more dwelling units shall be treated as commercial
properties.
§ 96-16.1. Handling and collection from industrial and commercial
properties prohibited during certain hours. [Added 2-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 901]
The handling of refuse cans, containers or similar objects in which refuse
from industrial and commercial properties is stored, including refuse
collection and/or compaction, is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. when the sound associated with such handling creates a noise
disturbance across a property line.
§ 96-17. Service fee for industrial and commercial facilities.
Every owner of a commercial or an industrial property producing refuse
and having such refuse collected and removed by the municipal collection
service shall pay for Borough disposal bags in accord with the terms and
conditions provided for residential customers.
§ 96-18. Construction and demolition waste.
All waste material resulting from building or structure alteration, repair,
construction or demolition shall be removed by and at the expense of the
owner of the premises upon which such waste was produced.
(9) Residents shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the wheeled
cart and shall periodically clean the wheeled cart with soap and
water as necessary;
(10) Residents may not alter the exterior appearance of a wheeled cart
in any manner except to affix temporary stick-on numbers to reflect
the resident's street number address only, which shall be removed
by the resident upon returning the wheeled cart to the Borough;
(11) Residents shall not make any holes in or any other alteration to the
wheeled cart;
(12) No refunds shall be issued for partial periods of service; and
(13) All other pertinent sections of Chapter 96 shall apply.
§ 96-15 EXPLOSIVES § 96-18
88:229

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 96-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Violations of this Part 1 shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 96-20. Enforcement provisions. [Added 2-18-1991 by Ord. No.
662]
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized from time to time to designate
any officer or employee of the Borough to monitor collection sites, receive
complaints of violations of this Part 1 and to report such violations to the
Perkasie Borough Police Department. Reports of violations shall include
such information as the date, time and location of the violation, together
with a description of the person and/or vehicle identified in connection
with the violation, and all such reports shall be filed with the Borough
Manager. The Borough Manager and/or his designee shall transmit the
report of violation to the Perkasie Borough Police Department which shall,
upon reasonable belief that a violation has occurred, then issue a citation
upon the person charged to be in such violation.
§ 96-19 EXPLOSIVES § 96-20
88:231

Part 2
[AdopCtoeldle1c1ti-o1n9 -A2n0d0 7TrBaynsOprodr.t Natoio. n92354]
ARTICLE VI
Regulations, Licensing and Reporting
§ 96-21. Short title.
This Part 2 shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Waste
Collection and Transportation Ordinance of Perkasie Borough."
§ 96-22. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this Part 2 shall have the
meaning ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
ACT 90 — The Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of 2002
(P.L. 596, No. 90, June 29, 2002). 55
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980). 56
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988). 57
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable
materials.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
COUNTY — The County of Bucks, Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the
solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of this
Commonwealth. Disposal facilities include, but are not limited to,
municipal waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as
defined by Act 101, Act 97 and/or PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa.
Code Chapters 75 and 271).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to,
54.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 2, Waste Haulers, Adopted
12-16-1991 By Ord. No. 687, As Amended.
55.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 96-21 EXPLOSIVES § 96-22
88:233
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines, and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings, and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — A person
who has written authorization from the PADEP under Act 90 to collect,
haul, transport and dispose of municipal waste.
MUNICIPALITY — Any of the 54 minor civil divisions in Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility. The term does not include any
source-separated recyclable materials.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency, or any other
legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this Part 2 prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty or
any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used
to convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, recycling
facilities, composting facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which
would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials
other than a fuel for the generation of energy.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a
processing or disposal facility.
§ 96-22 PERKASIE CODE § 96-22
88:234
§ 96-23. Prohibited activities.
§ 96-24. Standards for collection and transportation.
All collectors or waste haulers operating within the Perkasie Borough must
comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials,
including leaf waste, that are separated from municipal waste at the
point of origin or generation for the purpose of recycling.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at
any time after generation.
B. For the purpose of this Part 2, the singular shall include the plural and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal
waste from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment within Perkasie Borough without first
securing written authorization from the PADEP in accordance with the
provisions of Act 90.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect and/or transport
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any
sources within Perkasie Borough in a manner not in accordance with
the provisions of this Part 2, any applicable municipal ordinance, the
Revised County Plan, Act 90, Act 101, the minimum standards and
requirements established in Chapter 285 of the PADEP Municipal Waste
Management Regulations, any applicable Bucks County Department of
Health regulations, and/or any other federal, state, or local regulations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are
stored or placed for subsequent collection within Perkasie Borough
without prior approval from the municipality.
A. All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of
municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials must
comply with the applicable requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, and
PADEP regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, including
the Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 285, Subchapter B, regulations for the
collection and transportation of municipal waste.
B. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall be operated and maintained in a
manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a hazard to public
health, safety and welfare.
C. All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall be
watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering,
attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other nuisances.
§ 96-22 EXPLOSIVES § 96-24
88:235
§ 96-25. Licensing and registration requirements.
D. All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste and/or
source-separated recyclable materials shall be capable of being
enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
E. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall bear signs identifying the name
and business address of the person or municipality which owns the
vehicle and the specific type of material transported by the vehicle. All
such signs shall have lettering which is at least six inches in height as
required by Act 101.
F. All collection vehicles and equipment used by collectors or waste
haulers shall be subject to inspection by the Perkasie Borough or its
authorized agents at any reasonable hour without prior notification.
A. No person shall collect or remove any municipal waste from within
Perkasie Borough without first obtaining written authorization from
PADEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 90 and providing a copy
of such written authorization to Perkasie Borough. This section shall not
apply to private individuals (e.g. homeowners) who wish to transport
their own household waste to PADEP approved facilities or recyclables
to appropriate recycling centers, nor to farmers, landscapers or
nurserymen who collect, remove, haul or otherwise transport
agricultural or other organic waste associated with their respective
business activities.
B. For a collector or waste hauler to collect and transport municipal waste
within Perkasie Borough a collector or waste hauler shall submit a
registration form to Perkasie Borough which shall include a copy of
their state issued written authorization, and a copy of their municipal
and residual waste transporter authorization application (DEP form
2500-PM-BWM0015) along with any of the following information that
may be deemed appropriate by the municipality:
(1) A list of collection vehicles covered under the written
authorization, including, as a minimum, the following information
for each vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such as
vehicle license number, vehicle registration number, or company
identification number); date and location of most recent vehicle
inspection; and hauling capacity of the vehicle.
(2) The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.
(3) Certificate(s) of insurance evidencing that the waste hauler or
collector has valid liability, automobile and workmens'
compensation insurance in the minimum amounts established and
required by separate resolution of the governing body of the
municipality.
§ 96-24 PERKASIE CODE § 96-25
88:236
§ 96-26. Reporting requirements.
§ 96-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 2, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part 2 continues
or each section of this Part 2 which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this Section, the doing
(4) If they are hauling or collecting source-separated recyclable
materials in the municipality, identify the materials being hauled or
collected and provide the following information for each vehicle:
identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license
number, vehicle registration number, or company identification
number); date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and
hauling capacity of the vehicle.
C. Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and
requirements of this Part 2 or is in violation of the provisions of this Part
2 may not lawfully collect municipal waste or source-separated material
in Perkasie Borough.
D. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall meet the
requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal
Waste Management Plan, and all PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa.
Code Chapter 285).
A. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers and collectors and
haulers of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials operating within
Perkasie Borough shall participate in the Bucks County Municipal
Recycling Documentation Program. The program will provide a system
for documenting the origin of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable material by municipality and the ultimate disposal point of
said waste and recyclables. Each licensed collector and licensed waste
hauler and collectors and haulers of source-separated recyclable
materials operating in Perkasie Borough shall prepare and submit an
annual report to the municipality on the official collectors and haulers
recyclables documentation reporting form. The report shall be
submitted by the PADEP licensed collector or licensed waste hauler and
collectors and haulers of source-separated recyclable materials to the
Perkasie Borough by January 31 of each year and include all of the
required information pertaining to the preceding calendar year.
B. All annual reports submitted to the municipality from licensed
collectors and licensed waste haulers and collectors and haulers of
source-separated recyclable materials shall be combined into a single
report and submitted by the municipality on the official municipal
recyclables documentation reporting form to the County by February
28 of the year following the reporting period.
§ 96-25 EXPLOSIVES § 96-27
88:237
of any act or thing prohibited by any provision of this Part 2, or the failure
to do any act or thing as to which any provision of this Part 2 creates
any affirmative duty, shall constitute a violation of this Part 2 punishable
as herein stated. Licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers who shall
violate any provision of this Part 2 may be reported to the PADEP by
the Perkasie Borough and may be subject to the revocation of the state
authorization to transport municipal waste, as described in Act 90.
§ 96-28. Injunctions.
The Perkasie Borough may petition the Bucks County Court of Common
Pleas for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce
any of the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 96-29. (Reserved)
§ 96-27 PERKASIE CODE § 96-29
88:238
Part 3
[Adopted 11-18D-u1m99p6stBeyrsOrd. No. 78558]
ARTICLE VII
Placement in Streets
§ 96-30. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to cause a dumpster or similar trash
receptacle to be placed in the streets or right-of-way within the Borough
until an appropriate permit is obtained from the Borough. The cost of the
permit shall be as established from time to time by Borough resolution.
Once an appropriate permit has been obtained, the dumpster or similar
trash receptacle may remain in the street or right-of-way of the Borough for
a period of two weeks.
§ 96-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Failure to obtain an appropriate permit shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 96-32. Safety measures.
Each dumpster shall be equipped with reflective tape or similar material to
make it visible at night. Each dumpster or similar trash receptacle shall be
placed as far as possible from the travel portion of the road.
58.Editor's Note: This Part Was Originally Designated As § 70-9 Of The Code.
§ 96-30 EXPLOSIVES § 96-32
88:239
Chapter 101
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses, carnivals and exhibitions — See Ch.
75.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
Use of streets — See Ch. 160, Art. III.
§ 96-32 PERKASIE CODE § 96-32
101:240
ARTICLE I
Soliciting
§ 101-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation or any agent thereof shall solicit for any
advertising, other than advertising to be inserted in a newspaper of general
circulation, or for any contribution, financial or otherwise, other than a
contribution sought from within the membership of the organization by or
on behalf of which such solicitation is made, within the Borough limits of
the Borough of Perkasie unless a permit shall first have been obtained from
the Borough Manager.
§ 101-2. Issuance of permit.
§ 101-3. Time limitations.60
Soliciting activities shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and dusk or 7:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
§ 101-4. Violations and penalties.61
Any of the following acts shall constitute a violation of this article,
punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties:
A. Such permits shall be issued upon registration at the Borough offices of
the name of the person, firm or corporation or any agent thereof and
such other reasonable information as may be required for
identification.
B. A fee for a background check may be required, which fee shall be as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.59
A. Any person, firm, or corporation or any agent thereof who shall make
any solicitation as outlined in § 101-1 of this article without first having
obtained a permit from the Borough Manager shall be guilty of a
violation.
B. The solicitation of any one person, firm or corporation or agent thereof,
as hereinbefore designated, shall constitute a separate and single
violation of the terms of this article.
C. Solicitation during hours other than those designated in § 101-3 shall
constitute a violation.
59.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 101-1 HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 101-4
101:241

ARTICLE II
Transient Retail Businesses
§ 101-5. Definitions and word usage.
§ 101-6. License required; fees.
A. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership or
corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following:
Engaging in canvassing, soliciting or taking orders, either by
sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or from house to house
within the Borough of Perkasie.
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise from a fixed location within the Borough on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or
celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for or in advance of specific
yearly holidays.
(2)
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
Borough of Perkasie without first having obtained from the Borough
Manager a license, for which a fee, as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, which shall be for the use of the
Borough, shall be charged depending on the term of the license, as
follows:
(1) One day.
(2) One calendar week or fraction thereof.
(3) One calendar month or fraction thereof.
(4) One calendar year or fraction thereof.
B. No license fee shall be charged under this section:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce.
(2) For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds thereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
§ 101-5 HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 101-6
101:243
§ 101-7. Application for license.
Every person desiring a license under the provisions of this article shall first
make application to the Borough Manager for such license. If such person
shall also be required to obtain a license from any state or county officer,
he shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid state or county
license. In such application, such person shall give his name and address;
his previous criminal record, if any; the name of the person by whom he is
employed; the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with
in such transient retail business; the length of time for which such license
is to be issued; and the type and license number of any vehicle to be used
by him in the conduct of such business in the Borough.
§ 101-8. Issuance, carrying, display or exhibit of license.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Borough
Manager, if he shall find such application in order, shall issue the license
required under this article. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given on the application therefor. Every license holder shall
carry such license upon his person, if engaged in a transient retail business
from house to house or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground,
or shall display such license at the location where he shall engage in
such business, if doing so from a fixed location. He shall exhibit such
license, upon request, to all police officers, Borough officials and citizens or
residents of the Borough.
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of milk or milk
products, bread and bakery products or meat and meat products,
but all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license
fee shall be required to register with the Borough Manager and
obtain a license without fee.
C. Any person dealing in one or more of the above-mentioned exempted
categories and dealing with other goods, wares or merchandise not so
exempted shall be subject to the payment of the license fee fixed by this
section for his activities in connection with selling, canvassing,
soliciting or taking orders for goods, wares and merchandise not in
such exempted categories.
D. The Borough Manager, pursuant to standards and policies established
from time to time by the Borough Council, may similarly exempt from
payment of the license fee, but not from registering with him, persons
working without compensation and selling or taking orders for goods,
wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation.
E. Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued
on an individual basis to persons engaging in such business; every
individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name; and
the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such
individual license.
§ 101-6 PERKASIE CODE § 101-9
101:244
§ 101-9. Regulations.
No person engaging in any transient retail business in the Borough of
Perkasie shall:
§ 101-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license issued
under this article when he shall deem such suspension or revocation to be in
the interest of the public health, safety or morals or for the violation of any
provision of this article, or for giving false information upon any application
for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or revocation may
be made to the Borough Council at any time within 10 days after such
suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any
person whose license shall have been suspended or revoked.
§ 101-11. Violations and penalties.63
Each day's violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a
separate violation, punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
article II, Violations and Penalties.64
A. Engage in any business activity prohibited in the Borough of Perkasie
by general or special law applicable thereto.
B. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any
street or alley in the Borough for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing or working in the vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough for the purpose
of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or of disposing of any carton or wrapping material or of
any stock or wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
E. When working from house to house, engage in such business at any
time on Sunday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or after dusk or 7:00
p.m., whichever is earlier, on any day of the week other than Sunday.62
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Former article III, Penalties, consisting of former § 101-10, Violations and
penalties, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now §§ 101-4 and 101-11.
§ 101-9 HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS § 101-11
101:245
Chapter 102
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70. Zoning — See Ch. 186.
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HISTORICAL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — Any building or structure
which is:
§ 102-2. Petition for designation as historic.
Any owner of a building or structure located within the Borough may
petition Borough Council on a form to be provided by the Borough to
have his/her building or structure designated as an "historical building or
structure."
§ 102-3. Action on petition.
Chapter 103
Importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events,
or with the architectural, cultural, economic or social history of the
Borough of Perkasie, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
or the United States of America; or
A.
Historically or architecturally important by reason of period, style,
method of building construction or association with a particular
architect or builder, either by itself or in the context of a group of
buildings or structures; or
B.
Listed on the National Register of Historic Places or State Register of
Historic Places.
C.
A. Upon receipt of a petition, Borough Council shall place said petition on
its agenda for consideration for approval.
B. Prior to a vote on said petition, Borough Council shall schedule and
advertise a public hearing where interested persons may comment on
the petition. The petitioner shall also be given an opportunity to present
relevant information and testimony to Borough Council.
C. Action on the petition must be taken within 90 days of receipt of the
petition by the Borough.
§ 101-11 PERKASIE CODE § 102-3
102:246
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70. Fire prevention — See Ch. 92.
§ 102-3 INSURANCE § 102-3
103:247

ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 809]
§ 103-1. Administration of certifications and funds.
The Secretary of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby designated to perform
all duties assigned by 40 P.S. § 638 in connection with the issuance of fire
loss certifications and collection of funds paid by insurers in settlement of
outstanding municipal taxes and claims against fire damaged buildings or
structures located within Perkasie Borough for the collection of funds paid
by insurers as security against the total cost incurred by the Borough for the
removing, repairing or securing of fire-damaged buildings and structures
located within the Borough of Perkasie; for the establishment and
administration of a separate account for deposit of such security funds; and
for the distribution of such security funds.
§ 103-2. Certification and receipt of funds.
A. The Perkasie Borough Secretary is hereby authorized to certify the
amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges that
are outstanding against a building or other structure located in
Perkasie Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all insurance policies exceeds $7,500 and to receive
such funds from insurers in payment for such delinquent taxes and
municipal claims in accordance with the procedure established by
Subsection B.
B. Written certification. Upon written request of the named insured
specifying the tax description of the property; the name and address of
the insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter
"insurance company") and the date agreed upon between the named
insured and the insurance company, as the date of the receipt of the loss
report of the claim; the Borough Secretary shall furnish the insurance
company either of the following within 14 days:
(1) A certificate or, at the discretion of the Borough Secretary, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed, in writing, by the insurer to
the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
the property and that, as of the date of the Borough Secretary's
certificate or verbal notification, no Borough department has
certified any amount as total costs incurred by Perkasie Borough
for the removal, repair or security of a building or other structure
on the property; or
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of
the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the
date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the
§ 103-1 INSURANCE § 103-2
103:249
§ 103-3. Transfer of funds to Borough.
When the loss agreed to by the named insured and the company equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering
the building or other structure, the insurance company shall transfer from
the insurance proceeds to the Borough Secretary in the aggregate $2,000
for each $15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim. If at the
time of a loss report the named insured has submitted a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, in an amount less than the amount calculated under the
foregoing transfer formula, the insurance company shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. The named
insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure after the transfer. The
Borough Secretary shall then return the amount of the fund in excess of
the estimate to the named insured if the Borough has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
§ 103-4. Security account; return of funds; intent; copy on file;
construal of provisions.
Borough Secretary's certificate, the amount of the total costs, if
any, certified by any Borough department to the Borough Secretary
for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure
on the property.
A. Receipt of funds. When transferring the funds as required by § 103-3,
supra, an insurance company shall provide the Borough with the name
and address of the named insured. The Borough Secretary shall place
the funds in a separate account to be used solely as security against the
total cost of removing, repairing or securing incurred by the Borough.
The Borough shall:
(1) Place all funds in a separate account to be used solely as security
against the total cost of removing, repairing or securing incurred
by the Borough;
(2) Contact the named insured as to the procedures under this section;
(3) Certify to the named insured and the insurance company that the
funds have been received.
B. Return of funds. The funds shall be returned to the named insured as
follows:
(1) If the Borough has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing
of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund. Any excess funds shall be returned to the named insured.
(2) If the Borough has not incurred any costs, the funds shall be
returned to the named insured when repairs, removal or securing
§ 103-2 PERKASIE CODE § 103-4
103:250
have been completed and the required proof received by the
Borough.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Borough and
the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other disposition of the
property has been negotiated. Such an agreement must be approved by
resolution adopted by Borough Council.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to make an insurance
company liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable under its
insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this section
or to make a municipality or public official an insured under a policy of
insurance or to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or
unpaid removal liens or expenses other than as provided in this section.
E. An insurance company making payments of policy proceeds under this
section for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens or removal
expenses incurred by a municipality shall have a full benefit of such
payment, including all rights of subrogation and assignment.
F. An exact copy of this article shall be filed with the Department of
Community Affairs and Economic Development together with the name,
position and phone number of the municipal official responsible for
compliance with this section.
G. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and
deterioration.
§ 103-4 INSURANCE § 103-4
103:251
Chapter 106
LIGHT FIXTURES
§ 103-4 PERKASIE CODE § 103-4
106:252
ARTICLE I
Placement on Private Property
[Adopted 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 705]
§ 106-1. Authorization.65
The Borough Electric Department is authorized to place light fixtures on
private property at its sole option and discretion.
§ 106-2. Placement agreement required.
Before any such fixture is placed, the property owner shall execute with
the Borough a placement agreement prepared by the Borough providing for
reimbursement to the Borough for its installation and maintenance costs,
a monthly charge for electrical use, as amended from time to time, and
a release of the Borough from any and all liability associated with the
placement and maintenance of the fixture.
§ 106-3. Department to retain ownership; removal.66
The Borough Electric Department shall retain ownership of the light fixture
and may, at any time, remove said light fixture at its sole option and
discretion.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-1 LIGHT FIXTURES § 106-3
106:253
Chapter 108
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 152.
Streets — See Ch. 160.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
§ 108-1. Unlawful deposit of refuse.
§ 108-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the deposit of material under permit
authorized by ordinance or regulation of the Borough or to goods, wares,
merchandise or materials deposited upon any public way or other public
place temporarily in the necessary course of trade and removed therefrom
within two hours after being so deposited or to articles or things deposited
or conducted into the sewer systems in accordance with the regulations or
permits relating thereto.
§ 108-3. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit
in any manner in or upon any public way, sidewalk, waterway, storm
sewer, sanitary sewer or land within the jurisdiction of the Borough any
kind of dirt, refuse, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance
whatsoever, whether liquid or solid; nor shall any person cast, throw,
sweep, sift or deposit any of the aforementioned items anywhere within
the jurisdiction of the Borough in such manner that it may be carried or
deposited, in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or
snow into any of the aforementioned places.
B. This prohibition shall include any material, solid or liquid, which falls or
runs from or is carried by the wheels of any vehicle.
A. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.67
B. After notice, each day's neglect to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a separate offense and be subject in all
respects to the same penalty as the first offense, and separate penalties
shall be imposed for each day's offense after the first conviction.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-3 PERKASIE CODE § 108-3
108:254
Chapter 115
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 75.
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 101.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
Use of streets — See Ch. 160, Art. III.
§ 115-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 115-2. Conformity required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any parade upon or along any
street in the Borough, except in strict conformity with all provisions of this
chapter and with the terms of any permit issued for such parade.
§ 115-3. Permit required; issuance; conditions.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties.69
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
A. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
A. No person shall conduct any parade upon or along any street in the
Borough of Perkasie without first having obtained a permit for such
parade from the Mayor. A fee, as as set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council, may be required prior to issuance of such
permit. The application for such permit shall be made to the Mayor, in
writing, at least 30 days in advance of the date of such parade.68
B. The permit may include conditions upon which such parade may be
held, such conditions to include but not be limited to the exact route to
be followed by such parade upon and along the Borough streets and the
date and time when such parade shall be held.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-3 PARADES § 115-4
115:255
Chapter 124
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses, carnivals and exhibitions — See Ch.
75.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128.
Skateboards — See Ch. 150.
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
§ 115-4 PERKASIE CODE § 115-4
115:256
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 124, Art. I, of the 1985 Code]
§ 124-1. Establishment; purpose.
The following rules and regulations are established for the purpose of
supervision, regulation and maintenance of public parks, playgrounds and
recreational areas which are now or may hereafter be established in the
Borough of Perkasie.
§ 124-2. Applicable areas defined. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
834]
§ 124-3. Authority vested in Borough Council.
The authority and powers for the operation, maintenance and supervision
of all parks, playgrounds and recreational areas in the Borough of Perkasie
are hereby vested in the Borough Council.
§ 124-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any of the parks, playgrounds or recreational areas referred to in
this article.
A. The term municipal park as used herein shall mean the areas commonly
known as "Menlo Park" (not including the swimming pool), "Frank R.
Kulp Memorial Playground" and its adjacent parking lot, "Lenape Park,"
"Spruce Street Playground," the bike paths and any other park,
playground or recreation area or areas which may from time to tine be
designated as municipal parks by the Borough Council. The Frank R.
Kulp Memorial Playground and adjoining parking area lot is the publicly
owned area generally bounded by Second Street, Market Street, the
East Branch Perkiomen Creek and the Covered Bridge Apartments and
an automobile service shop. Menlo Park is defined as the publicly
owned area generally bounded by Lenape Park, South Fourth Street,
Arthur Avenue and West Park Avenue. Lenape Park is the publicly
owned area generally bounded by West Walnut Street, Constitution
Avenue, Sellersville Borough line, South Third Street and Menlo Park.
The Spruce Street Playground is described as the publicly owned area
generally bounded by East Spruce Street and the Pleasant Spring
Creek. The bike paths are defined as the publicly owned linear parks
throughout the Borough, generally along the East Branch Perkiomen
and the Pleasant Spring Creeks, that have been established by the
Borough for recreational use by pedestrians, bicyclists and others.
B. The term swimming pool as used herein shall mean the municipal
swimming pool located in Menlo Park.
§ 124-1 PARADES § 124-5
115:257
§ 124-5. Hours of operation. [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 785;
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834; 10-18-2004 by Ord. No. 885]
The municipal parks shall be open daily from sunrise until sunset. At dusk
all activities in the parks and on the bike paths, except as noted below, shall
cease and all persons in the park, other than authorized employees of the
Borough of Perkasie, shall leave as soon as possible thereafter; provided,
however, that persons utilizing areas of the park equipped with lights for
evening use (i.e., basketball , tennis courts) may utilize those areas when
the areas are lit for the activities for which the areas are designated. At no
time shall any persons utilize any areas of the park after 10:00 p.m. unless
the Borough Council establishes otherwise where it deems such action
necessary for adequate use or regulation, and further providing that any
segment of a bike path immediately adjacent to a public street and serving
in lieu of a sidewalk is not subject to limited hours of use.
§ 124-6. Tampering with Borough and park property.70
§ 124-7. Objectionable conduct. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
834]
No person shall use profane language within the park or conduct himself/
herself in any lewd, immoral or commonly objectionable manner within the
park or conduct himself/herself so as to annoy any other person using the
park for recreational purposes.
§ 124-8. Public gatherings. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 993]
A. No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees,
plants, shrubs, turf, buildings, structures or fixtures therein or any
other property of the Borough located within the park.
B. No person shall remove any bench, seat or table from the park or
change the location thereof without permission from the designated
park management.
A. No person shall hold any meeting or gathering assembled through
advertisement or public notice or any gathering otherwise assembled
and composed of 25 or more persons within the limits of the park
without having first made application for a permit and received
approval of the same from the park management. All gatherings of 50
or more persons shall require the approval of Borough Council.
B. The form of such permit and procedures relating thereto shall be
designated by the Borough Council. The application for such permit
shall be in the name of a person who shall be responsible for the
conduct of the gathering.
70.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 128, Peace and Good Order, Art. I, Tampering With Public
Property.
§ 124-5 PERKASIE CODE § 124-9
115:258
§ 124-9. Sale stands; commercial services.71 [Amended 2-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 962]
§ 124-10. Waste disposal. 72 [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in the park except in
receptacles or municipal trash bags designated for the respective purposes.
All persons using the park shall dispose of all waste and garbage left by
them in such proper receptacles or municipal trash bags or shall make
arrangements to have such waste and garbage removed from the parks. It
shall be unlawful to discard, deposit, place or cast any garbage or rubbish
upon the ground or in any waters of the park.
§ 124-11. Swimming in undesignated waters.
No person shall swim or bathe in any of the lakes or streams or other waters
of the park except those facilities especially created and designated for
swimming and bathing.
§ 124-12. Gasoline powered boats.
No person shall place or operate any boat or contrivance operated by means
of a gasoline engine on any of the lakes or streams within the park.
§ 124-13. Fires; stoves and grills.
No person shall set or maintain any fire in the park except in stoves
and fireplaces maintained for the purpose and located by authority of the
Borough Council; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to
charcoal grills. Charcoal grills shall not be operated within any building or
under any roof.
§ 124-14. Illegal drugs; alcoholic beverages. [Amended 7-17-2000
by Ord. No. 834]
No person shall bring into the municipal parks or consume:
A. No person shall set up any booth, table or stand, mobile or otherwise,
for the sale of any article whatsoever within the limits of the park
without the express consent of the Borough Council, which shall have
the authority to refuse such consent in any instance.
B. No person shall offer commercial services of any kind for any purpose
within the limits of the park without the express consent of the Borough
Council, which shall have the authority to refuse consent in any
instance.
A. Any illegal drug or narcotic of any kind or otherwise be under the
influence of illegal drugs or narcotics; and
71.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Hawkers, Peddlers and Solicitors.
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 96, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse; and Ch. 108, Littering.
§ 124-9 PARADES § 124-14
115:259
§ 124-15. Parking of motor vehicles.73
No person shall park any motor vehicles within the bounds of the park
except in areas designated for such parking.
§ 124-16. Gambling. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
No person shall engage in any kind of gambling or gaming whatsoever, at
which money or other valuable thing may or shall be played for or staked
or betted upon, except for charitable purposes with the approval of the
Borough.
§ 124-17. Games; athletic or sports activities. [Amended 2-19-2013
by Ord. No. 962]
§ 124-18. Posted notices, rules and regulations. [Amended
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rule or regulation
posted any place within the park by authority of the Borough Council. Nor
shall any person, at any place within the park, post any notice or placard
other than by the authority of the Borough Council.
§ 124-19. Use of vehicles; vehicular speed limits; horses and horsedrawn
vehicles. 74 [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
B. Any malt or alcoholic liquor or beverage, either for his/her own use or
the use of any other person or otherwise be under the influence of malt
or alcohol liquor or beverage.
A. All games and athletic or sports activities, including authorized group
exercise classes and/or authorized group sports activities for which
specific facilities or areas have been provided, shall be confined to such
facilities or areas. The Borough Council, in its sole discretion, may
revise and regulate such activities as necessary at any time.
B. All games and athletic or sports activities, including authorized group
exercise classes and/or authorized sports activities, for which no
specific facilities or areas have been provided and which are not
contrary to any other rules or laws may be conducted or participated in
within the park; provided, however, that such conduct does not annoy,
disturb, inconvenience or endanger any other person using the park.
The Borough Council, in its sole discretion, may revise and regulate
such activities as necessary at any time.
A. No person shall place or operate any motorized vehicle on any part of
the bike paths, except for authorized service vehicles and mobility
equipment for use by handicapped individuals.
73.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 180, Vehicles and Traffic.
74.Editor's Note: See also § 180-8B of Ch. 180, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 124-14 PERKASIE CODE § 124-19
115:260
§ 124-20. Ice skating.
Ice skating on any of the lakes or streams of the parks shall be at the risk of
the skater.
§ 124-21. Dogs.75 [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834; 7-18-2011
by Ord. No. 951]
All dogs shall be on a leash and under control at all times, except that dogs
may be off leash within the fenced-in area of the dog park located in Lenape
Park (but not while entering or leaving the fenced-in area). It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to remove solid animal waste and dispose of
it properly. No person shall bring a dog into or allow a dog to run in any
area of a park where such prohibition is posted pursuant to the direction of
Borough Council.
§ 124-22. Admission rules and regulations. 76 [Amended 7-17-2000
by Ord. No. 834]
B. The speed limit for vehicular traffic utilizing service roads within any
park is hereby established at 15 miles per hour, unless otherwise
posted. Traffic direction and vehicular parking shall be in accord with
posted regulations.
C. No person shall ride horses on the bike paths, nor shall any horsedrawn
vehicles be allowed on any bike paths.
A. The Borough Council from time to time may, by resolution, establish
such rules as it deems necessary to regulate admissions to the park
grounds under its supervision. Along with such rules, the Council may
establish such fees or charges for admission to the park grounds as it
deems necessary; provided, however, that provision shall be made to
exempt property owners and residents of the Borough of Perkasie from
payment of any such park ground admission fees or charges so
established.
B. The Borough Manager may establish temporary park rules for special
events when required for the safety or convenience of park users.
C. Additionally, the following rules are established for the Borough parks:
(1) No person shall feed waterfowl.
(2) No person shall discharge any firearms or hunting equipment.
(3) No golfing or throwing discus, shot put, or javelin shall be
permitted in any park areas.
(4) No glass containers allowed in any park areas.
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 80, Dogs and Other Animals.
76.Editor's Note: For the admission rules and regulations, see Art. II of this chapter.
§ 124-19 PARADES § 124-22
115:261
§ 124-23. Activities in Frank R. Kulp Memorial Playground
grandstand area. [Added 10-18-2004 by Ord. No. 88577]
No person shall remain or congregate within the Frank R. Kulp Memorial
Playground grandstand area unless he or she is a spectator for an
authorized athletic or sporting event at the playground and such event is in
progress at the time.
§ 124-23.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 834; 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
(5) No person shall abandon domesticated geese, ducks or other
animals in any park areas.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 124-23,
Violations and penalties, as § 124-23.1.
§ 124-22 PERKASIE CODE § 124-23.1
115:262
ARTICLE II
Admission to Parks and Swimming Pool
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 124, Art. II, of the 1985 Code]
§ 124-24. Definitions. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL PARKS — The areas commonly known as "Menlo Park" (not
including the swimming pool), "Frank R.. Kulp Memorial Playground" and
its adjacent parking lot, "Lenape Park," "Spruce Street Playground," the
bike paths and any other park, playground or recreation area or areas
which may from time to time be designated as municipal parks by the
Borough Council. The Frank R. Kulp Memorial Playground and adjoining
parking area lot isthe publicly owned area generally bounded by Second
Street, Market Street, the East Branch Perkiomen Creek and the Covered
Bridge Apartments and an automobile service shop. Menlo Park is defined
as the publicly owned area generally bounded by Lenape Park, South Fourth
Street, Arthur Avenue and West Park Avenue. Lenape Park is the publicly
owned area generally bounded by West Walnut Street, Constitution Avenue,
Sellersville Borough line, South Third Street and Menlo Park. The Spruce
Street Playground is described as the publicly owned area generally
bounded by East Spruce Street and the Pleasant Spring Creek. The bike
paths are defined as the publicly owned linear parks throughout the
Borough, generally along the East Branch Perkiomen and the Pleasant
Spring Creeks, that have been established by the Borough for recreational
use by pedestrians, bicyclists and others.[Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 835]
SWIMMING POOL — The municipal swimming pool located in Menlo Park.
§ 124-25. Compliance with rules.
Any person, whether a resident of the Borough of Perkasie or a nonresident
of the Borough of Perkasie, shall not be prohibited from entering or
otherwise using the facility of any municipal park; provided, however, that
any such person entering or otherwise using such facilities shall at all
times observe and obey the rules and regulations of the municipal park or,
otherwise, be subject to the penalties as set forth in the ordinances of the
Borough of Perkasie for failure to observe said rules and regulations.
§ 124-26. Persons entitled to use swimming pool. [Amended
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 834]
No person, except the following, shall enter or otherwise use any of the
facilities of the municipal swimming pool:
A. The holder of a current season membership.
B. The purchaser of a daily admission ticket.
§ 124-24 PARADES § 124-27
115:263
§ 124-27. Rates; transferability of membership. [Amended 6-9-1986
by Ord. No. 576]
§ 124-28. Evidence of identity.
Park employees and the Borough police are authorized to require
presentation of evidence of identity for any person in a municipal park or
the municipal swimming pool at any time and are further authorized to
expel any person who shall be unable to establish his identity or his right to
admission under the terms of this article.
§ 124-29. Applicability of other provisions.
Admission to and conduct in municipal parks and the municipal swimming
pool shall be subject to the provisions of all other ordinances, rules and
regulations pertaining thereto.
§ 124-30. Violations and penalties.
A. Family membership rates shall be fixed as determined by resolution of
the Borough Council for residents of Perkasie Borough and
nonresidents of Perkasie Borough. Family membership shall entitle two
parents and all dependent children less than 18 years of age living in
the same household to unrestricted use of the swimming pool during
established hours for recreational swimming for the current season.
B. Individual season membership rates shall be fixed by resolution as the
Borough Council shall determine for residents of Perkasie Borough and
nonresidents of Perkasie Borough. An individual membership shall
entitle the purchaser to unrestricted use of the swimming pool during
established hours for recreational swimming for the current season.
C. Activity fees.
(1) Season members only, as defined in Subsections A and B, shall be
eligible to participate in special pool programs and activities upon
the payment of seasonal fee or fees per person as the Borough
Council shall, from time to time, determine by resolution.
(2) Any person meeting the established prerequisites for age, physical
condition and swimming proficiency shall be eligible to participate
in junior or senior life saving courses upon the payment of such fee
as the Borough Council shall determine, from time to time, by
resolution.
D. Daily admission rates shall be fixed by the Borough Council, from time
to time, as it shall determine by resolution.
E. Season memberships are not transferable and are subject to
confiscation if used by any person not entitled to use the same.
§ 124-27 PERKASIE CODE § 124-30
115:264
A. Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties. [Amended
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
B. Each day's violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 124-30 PARADES § 124-30
115:265

ARTICLE III
Parks and Recreation Board
[Adopted 3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 664; amended in its entirety
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 758]
§ 124-31. Creation; membership; voting. [Amended 2-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 803]
§ 124-32. Organization.
The Board shall annually elect from one of its number a Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson and Secretary. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings
and forwarded to Borough Council. A member must maintain an annual
attendance record of at least 75% of all Board meetings to retain the
appointment. The Board shall meet at such times as it may determine.
§ 124-33. Duties.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall have the following duties:
A. The Borough Park and Recreation Board created by the Borough
(hereinafter referred to as the "Board") shall consist of nine Borough
residents appointed by Borough Council for staggered three-year
terms. In addition, one youth delegate may be selected after receiving
applications from any high school student from Perkasie Borough age
15 or over, who may fully participate in all Board meetings but shall
have no voting rights. [Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1004]
B. Any Board member who is under the age of 18 years will be appointed
as a member ex officio, with full participation but without voting rights.
C. In all cases where, by reason of tie or split vote, the Park and Recreation
Board shall be unable to pass upon any motion, or take action upon any
matter lawfully before it, the Borough Council liaison to the Park and
Recreation Board, if in attendance at the meeting, may at his or her
option cast the deciding vote.
A. To define the goals and objectives for Borough recreation services and
make plans and recommendations to Perkasie Borough Council
(hereinafter referred to as the "Council") harmonizing with them.
B. To assist Council in maintaining the highest quality and standard of
recreation services and parklands.
C. To interpret the importance and need of recreation services to the
general public. The Board will keep Council aware of the progress
being made in achieving its objectives and of the problems that confront
the Borough in regards to park and recreation operations.
D. To advise Council of the scope of the programs being provided, as well
as those needed, and the current and long-range problems that
confront the delivery of quality recreation services.
§ 124-31 PARADES § 124-33
115:267
E. To assist in the implementation of recommendations found within the
Perkasie Borough Recreation Study of May 1981 and any plans
approved by Borough Council thereafter. The Board shall coordinate
with Council and the Borough Planning Commission in the development
of a comprehensive recreation and park plan in order to provide a
quality system of recreation areas and facilities.
F. To recommend to Council, for Council's approval, the development and
implementation of recreation programs on a pilot basis for a limited
period of time. The Board shall report the success of and participation
in such pilot programs. Such programs will require Council's approval
before being offered regularly. Programs will be coordinated through
the Borough Manager or his designee and may make use of volunteers
and or paid program coordinators. All programs should be designed to
be self-sustaining with cost borne by participants.
G. To develop an annual budget recommendation to achieve recreational
goals.
H. To facilitate and recommend additions to the park system and
recreation programs that provide for recreation opportunities available
to all residents, including parks, park systems, playgrounds and fields,
bike and walking paths, nature areas, sporting activities and crafts. All
rules and regulations for recreation activities and facilities will require
Council approval.
I. To facilitate intergovernmental cooperation to improve facilities
available to Borough residents.
J. To evaluate the services of Borough recreation programs in relation to
its objectives and to report to Borough Council on an annual basis the
results of such evaluations along with recommended changes.
§ 124-33 PERKASIE CODE § 124-33
115:268
Chapter 128
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 60.
Circuses, carnivals and exhibitions — See Ch.
75.
Animals — See Ch. 80.
Explosives — See Ch. 88.
Waste disposal — See Ch. 96.
Hawker, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
101.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parades — See Ch. 115.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
§ 124-33 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 124-33
128:269

ARTICLE I
Tampering With Public Property
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 128, Art. I, of the 1985 Code]
§ 128-1. Prohibited acts.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure, in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough of Perkasie or any
grass, shrub, tree, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight, fire
hydrant or water or gas stop box on any of the streets, alleys, parks or other
public grounds in the Borough.
§ 128-2. Monuments and stakes.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location corner or angle in the
Borough of Perkasie made, placed or set or hereafter made, placed or set or
caused to be done by the authorities of said Borough in any survey of or in
any street, alley or public ground in the Borough to evidence the elevation,
line, grade, location, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk,
curb gutter, sewer or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 128-3. Warning lamps, signs and barricades.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or deface or
obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the
authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or corporation doing work
by permission of the authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or bridges in the Borough as a warning of danger.
§ 128-4. Removal of materials from public places.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough.
§ 128-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon nor to
incidental results of work thereon or therein upon permit from or by
authority of the Borough.
§ 128-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.78
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-6
128:271
B. The fact that a violator has been penalized, after hearing, as herein
provided, shall not preclude the Borough or other injured party from
taking proper legal action to recover damages resulting from such
violation.
§ 128-6 PERKASIE CODE § 128-6
128:272
ARTICLE II
Disturbances
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 128, Art. II, of the 1985 Code]
§ 128-7. Disorderly conduct.
§ 128-8. Disturbance of peace.
§ 128-9. Violations and penalties.79
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
A. Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Perkasie.
B. Any person who shall willfully make or cause to be made any loud,
boisterous and unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the
peaceable residents nearby or near to any public street or alley or
public ground within the Borough, whereby the public peace is broken
or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed, shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct.
A. Disturbance of the peace is hereby prohibited within the Borough of
Perkasie.
B. Any person who shall be guilty of any willful act causing or tending to
cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the Borough or
causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to
inhabitants of the Borough or to users of the public streets or alleys in
the Borough or who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or
quarrel or who shall publicly make use of obscene or indecent language
or who shall loaf, loiter or congregate upon any of the public streets,
alleys or public grounds in the Borough, to the annoyance of peaceable
residents nearby or traveling upon any street or alley or being lawfully
upon any of the public grounds in the Borough, whereby the public
peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed or who
shall congregate or loiter on private property when neither a business
invitee or a guest in such a manner as to inconvenience other persons
who are business invitees or guests shall be guilty of disturbance of the
peace.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-9
128:273

ARTICLE III
Ballplaying and Snowballs in Public Ways
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 128, Art. III, of the 1985 Code]
§ 128-10. Restricted activities.
Ballplaying, including the throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball,
snowballing and the throwing of any stone or other missile upon or onto
any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough of Perkasie is
hereby prohibited.
§ 128-11. Violations and penalties.80
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-11
128:275
Chapter 132
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Mechanical Code — See Ch. 133.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
§ 132-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
735]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Manager of the Borough of Perkasie, being marked and designated as
the "BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition 1993," with Appendices
A and B, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Borough
of Perkasie for the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of
plumbing; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition
1993, with Appendices A and B, are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes prescribed in § 132-2 of this chapter.
§ 132-2. Modifications and amendments. [Amended 12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 735]
The following sections of the BOCA National Plumbing Code/1993, are
hereby revised as follows:
A. Section P-101.1, Title (page 1, column 1, line 2): insert "the Borough of
Perkasie."
B. Section P-113.2, Fee schedule, shall be amended to read as follows:
P-113.2 Fee schedule: The fees for each plan examination, plumbing
permits and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the building
permit fee schedule established and adopted by the Borough of
Perkasie.
C. Section 116.4, Violation penalties (page 5, column 2, line 7): insert
"summary offense."
D. Section 116.4 (page 5, column 2, line 8): insert "$1,000" and "30 days."
E. Section P-117.2, Unlawful continuance (page 5, column 2, line 5): insert
"$500."
F. Section P-117.2 (page 5, column 2, line 6): insert "$1,000."
§ 128-11 PERKASIE CODE § 132-2
132:276
§ 132-3. Interpretation of provisions; more restrictive regulations
to apply.
The provisions of the Plumbing Code shall be held to be minimum
requirements for the promotion of the above purposes. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
other ordinance, law or regulation of this Borough, this county or this
commonwealth, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where
the provisions of such other ordinances, laws or regulations impose a
greater restriction than this chapter, the provisions of such ordinances, laws
or regulations shall be controlling.
G. Section P-121.2, Membership of board, shall be amended to read as
follows:
P-121.2 Membership of Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of a
quorum of the Perkasie Borough Council.
H. Section P-121.2.1, Qualifications, shall be deleted in its entirety.
I. Section P-121.5, Postponed hearing, shall be amended to read as
follows:
P-121.5 Postponed hearing: When a quorum of Borough Council is not
present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
J. Section P-304.3, Public systems available (page 13, Column 2, line 3):
insert "150."
K. Section P-309.4, Freezing (page 14, column 1, line 2): insert "three feet,
zero inches."
L. Section P-309.5, Sewer depth (page 14, column 2, line 2): insert "36
inches."
M. Section P-309.5 (page 14, column 2, line 4): insert "36 inches."
N. Section P-1505.9, Maximum flow and water consumption, shall be
deleted in its entirety. (See Perkasie Borough Ordinance No. 700 for
flow rates81.)
O. Table P-1505.9 shall be deleted in its entirety. (See Perkasie Borough
Ordinance No. 70082.)
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Water, Art. I, Conservation.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Water, Art. I, Conservation.
§ 132-2 PLUMBING § 132-3
132:277
Chapter 133
MECHANICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical standards and service — See Ch. 85.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 92.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
§ 133-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary of the Borough of Perkasie, being marked and designated as the
"BOCA National Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition 1993," with Appendices
A and B, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the
Borough of Perkasie, Bucks County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
said BOCA National Mechanical Code/1993, with Appendices A and B, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 133-2 of this chapter.
§ 133-2. Modifications and amendments.
The BOCA National Mechanical Code/1993 is amended and revised in the
following respects:
A. Section M-101.1 (page 1, column 1, second line): insert "the Borough of
Perkasie."
B. Section M-113.3, Fee schedule, shall be amended to read as follows:
M-113.3 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, permit and
inspections shall be in accordance with the building permit fee
schedule adopted by the Borough of Perkasie.
C. Section M-116.4, Violation penalties (page 5, column 2, seventh, eighth
and ninth lines): insert "summary," "$1,000" and "30 days."
D. Section M-117.2, Unlawful continuance (page 5, column 2, fifth and
sixth lines): insert "$500" and "$1,000."
E. Section M-121.2, Membership of board, shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 132-3 PERKASIE CODE § 133-2
133:278
§ 133-3. Interpretation of provisions; more restrictive regulations
to apply.
The provisions of the Mechanical Code shall be held to be minimum
requirements for the promotion of the above purposes. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
other ordinance, law or regulation of this Borough, this county or this
commonwealth, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where
the provisions of such other ordinances, laws or regulations impose a
greater restriction than this chapter, the provisions of such ordinances, laws
or regulations shall be controlling.
Chapter 135
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical service — See Ch. 85.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 152.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Trees — See Ch. 175.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
§ 135-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 12-20-1993
by Ord. No. 732]
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough
of Perkasie, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code, Fourth Edition 1993," as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the Existing Structures Code of the Borough of Perkasie in the
M-121.2 Membership of Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of
a quorum of the Perkasie Borough Council.
F. Section M-121.2.1, Qualifications, shall be deleted in its entirety.
G. Section M-121.5, Postponed hearing, shall be amended to read as
follows:
M-121.5 Postponed hearing: When a quorum of Borough Council is
not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
§ 133-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 135-1
135:279
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code/1993 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 135-3 of this chapter.
§ 135-2. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough of Perkasie in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 135-3. Modification of standards. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 732]
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1993 is amended and
revised in the following respects:
§ 135-4. Construal of provisions. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
732]
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
A. Section PM-101.1 (page 1, column 1, second line): insert "the Borough
of Perkasie."
B. Section PM-106.2 (page 3, column 1, line 3): insert "$100" and
"$1,000."
C. Section PM-106.2 (page 3, column 1, line 4): insert "30."
D. Section PM-111.2, Membership of the board, shall be amended to read
as follows:
PM-111.2 Membership of the Board: The Board of Appeals shall
consist of a quorum of the Perkasie Borough Council.
E. Section PM-111.2.1, Qualifications, shall be deleted in its entirety.
F. Section PM-111.5, Postponed hearing, shall be amended to read as
follows:
Section PM-111.5 Postponed hearing: When a quorum of Borough
Council is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant's representative shall have the right to request a
postponement of the hearing.
G. In Section PM-303.4, the height limitation shall be amended to read "12
inches."83
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-1 PERKASIE CODE § 135-4
135:280
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 135-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 137
PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 58.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 92.
Streets — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
§ 137-1. Responsibilities of owners.
Every owner of a dwelling house or other building fronting on a public
street, avenue or highway within the limits of the Borough shall number the
same at his or her own expense in such manner and within such time as is
hereinafter described.
§ 137-2. Numbering system: odd and even sides.
The system for determining the numbers of houses shall be as follows:
Market Street shall be the line of beginning for the numbering of all streets,
avenues or highways crossing or extending east and west therefrom, the
odd numbers to be on the north side of said streets, avenues or highways
and the even numbers on the south side of the same, and provided that the
Perkiomen Creek along the northeast branch of the Perkiomen shall be the
line of beginning for the numbering of streets, avenues or highways and the
even numbers on the west side of the same.
§ 137-3. Numbering by blocks; squares; two numbers per lot.
The numbering shall be by blocks or squares, and the basis shall be two
numbers to each lot.
§ 137-4. Measurements.
All measurements necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this
chapter shall be under the direction and control of the person recommended
to do this work.
§ 137-5. Violations and penalties.84
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-4 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 137-5
137:281
Chapter 142
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 170.
§ 142-1. Registry established; administration.
There be and hereby is established a real estate registry for the Borough
of Perkasie, County of Bucks and State of Pennsylvania, and the Secretary
of the said Borough shall, under the direction of the Council, cause to be
made all necessary books, maps and plans as will show the situation and
dimensions of each property thereon, which books, maps or plans shall be
so prepared as to show the location and the name of the owner or owners
thereof with blank spaces for the name of the owner of each lot and with
provision for the names of future owners and the dates of future transfers
of title.
§ 142-2. Access by Secretary to necessary records.
For the purpose of establishing such registry, the Secretary shall have
access, without charge, to any public records wherein the necessary
information may be obtainable and may also cause a search to be made in
other places for any muniments or evidences of title not reported to him
as herein provided and requisite for the completion of such books, maps or
plans.
§ 142-3. Records to be preserved and kept current.
Said books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved and shall be so kept
by additions from time to time as to show the ownership of every lot, piece
of real estate or subdivision thereof within the limits of said Borough, with
the succeeding transmissions of title from time of the commencement of
such plans, but nothing contained therein shall, at any time, invalidate any
municipal or tax claim by reason of the fact that the same is not assessed or
levied against the registered owner.
§ 142-4. Duties of owners and agents to register deeds and
conveyances of property; fee. [Amended 1-19-2009 by Ord. No. 932]
A. It shall be the duty of all owners of real estate within the limits of the
Borough of Perkasie whose deeds to such property have not been
previously registered with the Borough, within 30 days from the date of
the approval of this section, and of every subsequent purchaser, devisee
or owner of real estate within the limits of the Borough, within two
business days of after recording the deed or conveyance with the
§ 137-5 PERKASIE CODE § 142-4
137:282
§ 142-5. (Reserved)85
§ 142-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 147
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Animals — See Ch. 80.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Street and sidewalk specifications — See Ch.
160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
county, to register the deed or conveyance with the Borough of Perkasie
in one of the following manners:
(1) By hand delivering to the Borough office a copy of the deed or
conveyance as submitted to the county for recording;
(2) By sending to the Borough a copy of the deed or conveyance as
submitted to the county for recording via registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Borough Secretary
at the Borough office;
(3) By electronically sending to the Borough an image of the deed as
submitted to the county for recording to the Borough at the
electronic mail address provided on the Borough's official website
for deed registrations.
B. The fee for the registration of each deed or conveyance shall be $10.
The fee shall be paid at the time of registration, except if registration is
accomplished electronically, in which case the fee shall be hand
delivered or mailed, first class, prepaid, to the municipality within
seven days after the deed is transmitted to the Borough electronically.
A. Any person neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of
§ 142-4 for a period of 30 days after notice shall be guilty of a violation.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of § 142-4 shall be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
85.Editor's Note: Former § 142-5, Property sold at judicial sales; recording unstamped deeds,
was repealed 1-19-2009 by Ord. No. 932.
§ 142-4 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 142-6
137:283

ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 147, Art. I, of the 1985 Code]
§ 147-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
Borough.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Perkasie Regional Authority,86 a Pennsylvania municipal
authority.
BOROUGH — Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
86.Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950. All references to "Borough Authority" have been
changed to "Regional Authority" in this article.
§ 147-1 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-2
137:285
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 147-3. Authority empowered.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Borough the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 147-4. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 147-5. Conformity of rules and regulations to other legislation.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this article, all other ordinances of the
Borough and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 147-6. Setting rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 147-7. Direction of collection of sewage; disposal.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 147-8. Duties of property owners.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 147-9. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 147-8 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Borough, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or anyone acting under the direction of the
Authority to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 147-2 PERKASIE CODE § 147-9
137:286
municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 147-10. Performance bond; indemnification of Borough.
The Borough shall have the power to require any owner or any person
installing, using and maintaining holding tanks, pursuant to the provisions
of this article and the rules and regulations and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of
administrative agencies thereof, to provide a good and sufficient
performance bond, with adequate surety, conditions for the proper
installation, use and maintenance of the said holding tanks, as required by
law, and agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the Borough from any and
all losses which might accrue to or be incurred by the Borough by reason of
the failure of any person or any owner to comply with the provisions of this
article, the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and
regulations of any of the administrative agencies of the commonwealth.
§ 147-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 147-8 shall be punishable
as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 147-9 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-11
137:287

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 147, Art. II, of the 1985 Code]
§ 147-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Perkasie, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm- or surface water.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of
"floatable oil" if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes,
trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
mg/l — Milligram per liter.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in
grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value
§ 147-12 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-12
137:289
of seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 to the negative seven
(10-7).
PRA — The Perkasie Regional Authority87 or its authorized agents or
representatives.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
PWTA — The Pennridge Wastewater Treatment Authority or its
authorized agents or representatives.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground-, storm-, and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer
for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or surface water
from any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to
as "nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than
the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation
of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities
provided.
87.Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950. All references to "PBA" have been changed to "PRA"
in this article.
§ 147-12 PERKASIE CODE § 147-12
137:290
§ 147-13. Insanitary waste disposal; wastewater discharge to
natural outlet.
§ 147-14. Connection required.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
Borough and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way, in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the Borough, is hereby required at the owner's (owners') expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the notice to do
so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the
property line.
§ 147-15. Permit required for connection.
No authorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from PRA.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid- and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices
and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge;
sometimes used as synonymous with the terms "waste treatment plant"
or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
B. As used in this article, "may" is permissive, and "shall" is mandatory.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any insanitary manner on public or private property within
the Borough of Perkasie or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Borough any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable
waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Borough of Perkasie or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Borough any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this article.
§ 147-12 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-16
137:291
§ 147-16. Building sewer permits.
§ 147-17. Costs of building sewer installation borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Borough, PRA and PWTA from any loss or damage that may, directly or
indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 147-18. Independent building sewer for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
§ 147-19. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by PRA, to meet all
requirements of this article.
§ 147-20. Building sewer installation specifications.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the PRA. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of PRA.
C. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to PRA at the time the
application is filed, such fee to be in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by PRA from time to time.
D. All building sewer permit applications, under Subsection A(2) above,
shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the PWTA prior to permit
issuance.
A. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Codes88 or other applicable rules and
regulations of the Borough and the PRA.
B. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials shall apply. [Amended
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Building Construction, and Ch. 132, Plumbing.
§ 147-16 PERKASIE CODE § 147-21
137:292
§ 147-21. Building sewer elevation at building; low building drains.
§ 147-22. Connection of surface drainage and runoff.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by
the PRA for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 147-23. Specifications to connect building sewer to public sewer.
§ 147-24. Excavations for building sewers.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Borough.
§ 147-25. Performance bond for excavations.
A. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor.
B. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
A. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes89 or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Borough or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for
Testing and Materials. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the PRA
before installation. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
B. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the PRA when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision
of the PRA.
A. No excavation, construction or connection work shall be commenced
within the PWTA right-of-way until the owner, his agents and/or
independent contractor shall have first filed a bond in double the
amount of the cost of the work to be performed to be determined by the
PWTA, agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the PWTA against any
and all loss, damages, costs and expenses which the PWTA may
89.Editor's Note: For the Building and Plumbing Codes respectively, see Ch. 70, Building
Construction, and Ch. 132, Plumbing.
§ 147-21 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-25
137:293
§ 147-26. Owners responsible for maintenance.
§ 147-27. through § 147-38. (Reserved)90
§ 147-39. Authorities to enter easements.
The PRA and other duly authorized employees of the Borough and/or PWTA
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the Borough holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
thereafter suffer, incur, be put to or pay by reason of the failure to
complete properly any of the aforesaid excavation, construction or
connection work.
B. The term "owner," as used herein, shall be deemed to include the owner
or owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises, occupiers of the
premises and all other parties having a beneficial use or interest in the
premises and occupying the same with the consent and permission of
the owner of the fee title.
A. The owner or owners of all properties where a building sewer is located
shall be responsible to maintain such building sewer in a watertight
condition and be in compliance with the Building and Plumbing Codes
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Borough, the Perkasie
Regional Authority and all the requirements of the Article.
B. Whenever the Perkasie Regional Authority, the Borough or any of their
authorized agents determine that there is a leak in a building sewer or a
building sewer is otherwise in need of repair, it shall be the obligation of
the property owner where said building sewer is located to make the
necessary repair at the sole cost and expense of the property owner.
C. The problem determined to be existing in the building sewer and the
method of repair necessary to correct the problem shall be set forth in a
written notice to the property owner, together with the period of time
during which the repairs must be made to satisfactorily correct the
problem and come within compliance with this article.
D. All of the work and materials for the required repairs to the building
sewer shall meet the standards and specifications set by the Perkasie
Regional Authority and shall conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the Borough and the Perkasie Regional Authority. All of the corrective
work is subject to inspection by the Perkasie Regional Authority, its
authorized agents and/or authorized employees of the Borough and
must receive such inspection prior to backfilling and closing the trench.
90.Editor's Note: Former §§ 147-27 through 147-38, regulating discharges, were deleted
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835, as superseded by Art. III, Sewer Use, of this Ch. 147.
§ 147-25 PERKASIE CODE § 147-39
137:294
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
§ 147-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Discharge violations of this article shall be identified and corrected
pursuant to Article III, Sewer Use, of this Chapter 147.
§ 147-39 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-40
137:295

ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
[Adopted 4-18-1994 by Ord. No. 743]
§ 147-41. Objectives; implementation.
A. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Perkasie Regional
Authority (PRA) wastewater collection system that will interfere
with its operation, contaminate the biosolids generated at the
PWTA wastewater treatment plant or will otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the PRA's wastewater
collection system that will be inadequately treated and thus will
pass through the system into the receiving waters or the
atmosphere.
(3) To protect the environment, the general public, PRA and PWTA
personnel against the hazards associated with discharges of toxic
or otherwise incompatible pollutants into the sewer system.
(4) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim industrial
wastewaters and biosolids from the wastewater treatment system.
(5) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost for the
development and implementation of the PWTA's industrial
pretreatment program and other improvements to the wastewater
collection system.
(6) To help assure the PWTA's compliance with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, biosolids use and
disposal requirements, the Clean Water Act, the General
Pretreatment Regulations and any other state or federal laws with
which the PRA or PWTA must comply.
B. The provisions of this article will be implemented and enforced by the
Borough of Perkasie through the PRA and the PWTA Manager through
issuance of wastewater contribution permits to those industrial/
commercial users meeting the EPA's definition of a significant industrial
user (SIU); through monitoring, reporting and enforcement of the
Article with these significant industrial users and all other users. This
article also assumes that the capacity of the sewer system allocated to
existing customers will not be preempted and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from development
and implementation of the program established herein.
C. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article shall
be administered, implemented and enforced by the PWTA Manager and
will be coordinated through the PRA.
§ 147-41 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-42
137:297
§ 147-42. Definitions; abbreviations.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A SIGNIFICANT USER —
[Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b) and § 147-43 of this article. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage
from raw materials storage.[Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
consumed in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under the
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the user is a corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
(2)
A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
operations and performance, if the user is a federal, state or local
governmental facility;
(3)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations; and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures;
(4)
A duly authorized representative of the individual identified in
Subsections (1) through (4) above, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
indirect discharge originates and a written request for designation
of an alternate representative is approved by the PWTA.
(5)
§ 147-42 PERKASIE CODE § 147-42
137:298
standard five-day laboratory procedure, at 20º C., expressed in terms of
weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limitations promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b)
and (c) of the Act and appearing in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 401-471.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — A pollutant for which the PWTA
wastewater treatment plant was specifically designed to treat and
remove such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended
solids (TSS), ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N), total phosphorus (P) and to a
lesser degree oil and grease.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the PWTA Wastewater Treatment
Plant Manager, since the PWTA has an approved pretreatment program
under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or,
where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP) — A plan developed by the
PRA which details the responses that will be taken by the PWTA for
various violations of these rules and regulations, a categorical
pretreatment standard or any other pretreatment requirement. The
ERP is a supplement to this article and is available through the PRA or
PWTA Manager.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Water Management Division
Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — Any source of wastewater
into the PRA's sewer system which has the following typical wastewater
characteristics:
Type Amount
Flow 275 gpd
Ammonia nitrogen, as N (NH3-N) 25 mg/l
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) 250 mg/l
Phosphorous, as P 10 mg/l
Total suspended solids (TSS) 250 mg/l
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) 40 mg/l
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge to the Perkasie Regional
Authority ("PRA") wastewater collection system, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical standards, which will be applicable to such source
§ 147-42 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-42
137:299
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section
307 of the Act.[Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes,
with no regard to the flow in the waste stream. To fulfill the EPA's
General Pretreatment Regulations, all grab samples taken pursuant to
this article shall consist of a minimum of four samples taken individually
and flow composited in the laboratory or analyzed separately and
averaged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants into the collection system, including holding tank waste
discharged into the system as outlined in 40 CFR 403.31(g) and
Sections 307(b), (c) and (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nondomestic source of indirect discharge to
the PRA's sewer system.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
wastewater collection system treatment processes, operations or its
biosolids processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the PWTA NPDES permit. The term
includes prevention of biosolids use, processing and disposal by the
receiving treatment facility in accordance with Section 405 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria, including
those contained in any state biosolids management plan prepared
pursuant to Title IV of SWDA and applicable to the method of disposal
or use employed by the receiving treatment facility.
MANAGER — The person designated by the PWTA to supervise the
operation of the treatment system and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this article or his duly authorized
representative.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (or
NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants to the PRA
wastewater collection system, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section
provided that:[Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
§ 147-42 PERKASIE CODE § 147-42
137:300
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling purposes
which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge that exits the PWTA treatment plant
into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the PWTA
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, biosolids, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into the PRA's sewer system.
PRA — The Perkasie Regional Authority91 which owns and operates the
wastewater collection system which this article governs.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the quantity of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature
of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of, discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the PRA's wastewater
collection system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes or by process changes or by
other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, including those promulgated by
the EPA under the Act and those established by the PWTA.
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaced the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
(3)
91.Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950. All references to "PBA" have been changed to "PRA"
in this article.
§ 147-42 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-42
137:301
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Pretreatment standards shall mean
any prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards or local limits.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nondomestic user of the
PRA's wastewater collection system who:
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT — A permit issued by the
PWTA to an industrial/commercial user in accordance with § 147-43 of
this article.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user or user is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the
specific criteria set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii). For purposes of this
definition, a user is in significant noncompliance if its violations meet
one or more of the following criteria:[Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 956]
(1) Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day process
wastewater to the PRA's collection system;
(2)
Contributes a process waste stream that makes up 5% or more
of the average daily weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
PWTA treatment plant;
(3)
Is designated as such by the PRA on the basis that the user has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the
treatment plant, the quality of the biosolids generated at the PWTA
WWTP or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(4)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
multiplied by the applicable criterion (1.4 for BOD, CBOD, TSS,
fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the PWTA
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of municipal personnel or the general public);
(3)
§ 147-42 PERKASIE CODE § 147-42
137:302
SLUG DISCHARGE/SLUG LOAD — Any pollutant released in a
discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause a violation
of the specific discharge prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5(b) or § 147-43 of
this article and/or any discharge of nonroutine nature, episodic nature,
including but not limited to accidental spills or noncustomary batch
discharges, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference
or pass through, or in any other way violate the PWTA's prohibited
discharge standards, local limits, NPDES permit conditions or any other
condition of its rules and regulations.[Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 956]
SLUG CONTROL PLAN — All significant industrial users are required
to submit to the PWTA a slug control plan that meets the criteria set
forth in § 147-48 of this article.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
1972.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting exclusively therefrom.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface or is suspended in water, wastewater or other
liquids and which is measured by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent
endangerment to the public health and welfare or to the
environment, or has resulted in the PWTA's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater contribution permit
or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s), which may include violation of best
management practices, which the PWTA determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(8)
§ 147-42 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-42
137:303
§ 147-43. Certain contributions prohibited.
under the Clean Water Act or other acts promulgated by the federal or
state governments.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the PRA's collection system.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the collection system.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
PRA — Perkasie Regional Authority
PWTA — Pennridge Wastewater Treatment Authority
BOD5 — biochemical oxygen demand
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations
COD — Chemical Oxygen Demand
CWA — Clean Water Act
DEP — Department of Environmental Protection
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency
mg/l — milligrams per liter
NH3-N — ammonia nitrogen, as N
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M — operation and maintenance
SIC — standard industrial classification
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TKN — total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TSS — total suspended solids
USC — United States Code
A. No user or significant industrial user may contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that will
cause a pass-through or interference in the PRA's wastewater collection
system, will create a hazard to the environment, the general public,
PWTA or PRA personnel or will cause the PWTA to violate any General
§ 147-42 PERKASIE CODE § 147-43
137:304
Pretreatment Regulation, NPDES permit or biosolids requirement.
These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a wastewater
collection system, whether or not the user is subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user or significant
industrial user may not contribute the following substances to the
wastewater collection system:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases that by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the wastewater collection system or will disrupt the
operation of the wastewater collection system. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more
than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL). Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, hydrides, sulfides, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates and carbates and any other
substance that presents a fire hazard or other hazard to the sewer
system, including any material or waste stream exhibiting a closedcup
flashpoint of less than 140º F. (i.e., waste streams whose vapors
ignite or burn at temperatures below 140º F.).
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides,
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, mud, glass grinding, polishing
wastes, petroleum oil and nonbiodegradable cutting oil or mineral
oil products that will interfere or cause pass-through at the PWTA
treatment plant.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 9.0
standard units or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/
or personnel of the wastewater collection system.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either alone or in conjunction with other pollutants, that will cause
a pass-through or interference in the PRA's wastewater collection
system, will create a hazard to the environment, the general public
or Perkasie personnel or will cause the PWTA to violate any General
Pretreatment Regulation, NPDES permit or biosolids requirement.
These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a wastewater
collection system, whether or not the user is subject to national
§ 147-43 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-43
137:305
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. A toxic pollutant
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, vapors, solids or fumes
that either alone or in conjunction with other wastes are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, cause health and
safety problems or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance that may cause the wastewater treatment plant
effluent or any other product of the wastewater collection system,
such as residues, biosolids or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or which will interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the wastewater
collection system cause the PRA's to be in noncompliance with its
biosolids use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under Section 405 of the Act or developed pursuant to
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substance Control Act or state criteria applicable to the biosolids
management method being used.
(7) Any substance that will cause the PWTA to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving stream water quality standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature that will inhibit biological
activity in the wastewater collection system treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a
temperature at the introduction into the wastewater collection
system that will result in a wastewater treatment plant influent
flow exhibiting a temperature which exceeds 40º C. (104º F.).
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD,
etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentrations that
cause interference to the wastewater collection system. In no case
shall wastewater be discharged at a flow rate or containing
concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time
period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal
operation.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the PWTA Manager in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
§ 147-43 PERKASIE CODE § 147-43
137:306
§ 147-44. Federal categorical pretreatment standards; notification
of changes.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this article. Each user or significant industrial user shall be responsible to
notify the PRA and the PWTA of changes to his status under the federal,
state or local regulations. The categorical pretreatment standards found
in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Part 405-471, are also hereby
incorporated into this article.
(12) Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(13) Stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or
cooling water.
(14) Trucked or hauled wastes except at a point of discharge indicated
by the wastewater treatment plant Manager or his duly authorized
agent.
(15)Wastewater having an oil and grease concentration greater than
100 mg/1. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
B. When the PRA or the PWTA determines that a user or significant
industrial user is contributing to the wastewater collection system any
of the above-prohibited substances to the system, the PWTA Manager
may advise the user of the impact of such contributions on the
wastewater collection system and develop effluent limitations and
compliance schedules which the user must meet to correct the
violation.
C. The PWTA or the PRA may take enforcement action(s) against the
noncomplying user or significant industrial user regardless of whether
the user or significant industrial user was given prior notification of the
violation by the PWTA.
A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the PWTA
Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
B. When process wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard,
the PWTA Manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
C. A user may obtain a variance from EPA from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to his
§ 147-43 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-44
137:307
§ 147-45. Modification of federal categorical pretreatment
standards.
Where the PWTA wastewater treatment plant achieves consistent removal
of pollutants limited by federal categorical pretreatment standards, the
PWTA may apply to the approval authority for modifications of specific
limits in the federal categorical pretreatment standards. "Consistent
removal" shall mean the reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration
of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater collection system to a less
toxic or harmless state in the effluent, which is achieved by the system in
95% of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set
forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources
of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to the Act. The PWTA may then modify
the pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the
requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval
from the approval authority is obtained.
§ 147-46. Specific pollutant limitations.
facilities discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment
standard.
D. A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
A. All wastewater entering the sanitary sewer system shall be pretreated
to typical domestic levels unless otherwise stated in writing by the
PWTA by way of the significant industrial user permit. Typical domestic
levels and specific pollutant limitations may require periodic change
because of changing NPDES requirements, required reevaluations of
the local limits analysis, or other reasons. At the time when such change
becomes necessary, modified local limits will be established and
formally adopted by the PWTA after modifications have been approved
by the approval authority (USEPA). Upon recommendation and
approval by the PWTA, industrial pretreatment limitations shall be
established and revised by Perkasie Borough by amendment of the
Sewer Use Ordinance. All existing limitations shall apply, even after
recommendation and approval of modifications by the PWTA, until such
time that the amendment of the Sewer Use Ordinance is lawfully
adopted and effective. [Amended 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 810;
8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 847]
B. Typical domestic levels for compatible pollutants shall be: [Amended
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
§ 147-44 PERKASIE CODE § 147-46
137:308
Pollutant
Maximum Concentration
(mg/l)
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD5
2501
Total suspended solids (TSS) 2501
Phosphorus (total as P) 101
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) 40 as N1
NOTES:
1Users may exceed the maximum concentrations listed for these
parameters, but will be surcharged according to the PWTA High-
Strength Surcharge Formula. Copies of this formula can be obtained
from the PWTA Manager.
C. No user shall contribute toxic pollutants to the PRA sewer collection
system in excess of the local limits identified in the PWTA's most recent
USEPA-approved local limits evaluation. The approved local limits
evaluation is available for public inspection at the offices of the
Authority, 180 Maple Avenue, Sellersville, Pennsylvania, during the
regular business hours of the PWTA. At its discretion, the PWTA may
establish alternate mass limits for specific toxic pollutants in individual
wastewater contribution permits, but only in accordance with
regulatory requirements. At no time shall the total loading allocated to
the users in their permits for a specific pollutant be greater than the
allowable wastewater treatment plant industrial loading as determined
in the PWTA's most recent USEPA-approved local limits evaluation. The
local limits, if more stringent than the National Categorical Standards,
shall supersede the National Categorical Standards. [Amended
8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 847; 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
D. The PWTA, in consultation with PRA, may develop best management
practices (BMPs) to comply with 40 CFR 403.5(c)(1). Such BMPs shall
be considered local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes
of 40 CFR 403 and Section 307(d) of the Clean Water Act. The PWTA, in
consultation with PRA, may allow a user to implement BMPs to meet the
prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) and § 147-43 of this
article. BMPs may also be implemented in addition to an approved limit
or prohibition. If BMPs are allowed, they will be implemented through
industrial user permits issued in accordance with §§ 147-53 through
147-55 of this article. Authorization of BMPs, in place of or in addition
to approved limits or prohibitions, does not relieve the user of
responsibility to comply with approved limits or prohibitions. [Added
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
§ 147-46 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-47
137:309
§ 147-47. Dilution of discharge.
No user or significant industrial user shall ever increase the use of process
water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards
or with any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the PRA, the
PWTA, state or federal agencies.
§ 147-48. Slug discharge.
A. Each user shall provide protection from slug discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article. To prevent the
discharge of prohibited materials, facilities shall be provided and
maintained at the user's or significant industrial user's own cost and
expense. In the case of a slug discharge which has the potential to
violate any of the specific provisions contained in 40 CFR 403.5 or to
pass through or interfere with the treatment plant, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the PRA
and PWTA Manager of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and
corrective actions taken to minimize and eliminate the violation.
B. Also, within five days following a slug discharge, the user shall submit
to the PRA and the PWTA a detailed written report that shall contain the
following information:
(1) The cause of the noncompliance.
(2) The approximate time that this condition occurred and whether it
has been corrected.
(3) The steps taken by the user to reduce and minimize the impact of
the noncompliance.
(4) The steps taken by the user to prevent a reoccurrence of the
conditions that caused or led to the accidental or slug loading.
C. Submission of such a report shall not relieve the user or significant
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability that may be
imposed as described in this article, the PWTA Enforcement Response
Plan or any other applicable law.
D. In addition, the PWTA will evaluate at least once per year whether a
significant industrial user needs to develop or update a slug control
plan. Detailed slug control plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide slug control protection shall be submitted to the
PWTA for review and approval prior to implementation. A slug control
plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) A description of discharge practices, including routine or
nonroutine batch discharges.
§ 147-47 PERKASIE CODE § 147-48
137:310
§ 147-49. Discharge monitoring equipment.
The PWTA Manager reserves the right to require any user of the PRA's
sewer system to install permanent sampling equipment in order to
determine compliance with this article. The type of sampling equipment and
installation location must be reviewed and approved by the PWTA Manager.
§ 147-50. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the significant industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may be involved with hazardous materials are aware of
such emergency notification procedures.
§ 147-51. Purpose.
(2) A description of new and spent chemical storage procedures.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the PWTA Manager of any
accidental or slug discharge, including personnel responsible for
such notifications.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from an accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures shall include but are not limited to
inspection and maintenance of chemical storage areas, handling
and transferring of raw and finished products and chemicals,
control of site runoff, worker training, building of containment
structures, available containment equipment and contacted
environmental services that assist the user fulfill these plans.
E. A significant industrial user who commences contribution to the
wastewater collection system after the effective date of this article shall
not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until a slug
control plan has been approved by the PWTA. Review and approval of
such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the significant
industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility, as
necessary, to meet the requirements of this article.
F. All users are required to notify the PWTA immediately of any changes at
their facilities affecting the potential for an accidental discharge and/or
slug discharge to the PWTA. PWTA will immediately notify PRA of such
changes. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
A. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
users and significant industrial users of the PRA collection and PWTA
treatment systems for the implementation of the program established
herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the PWTA
and the PRA's schedule of charges and fees.
B. Charges and fees.
§ 147-48 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-51
137:311
§ 147-52. Wastewater discharges.
(1) The PRA or the PWTA may adopt charges and fees that may
include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of the costs of developing and
implementing the PWTA industrial pretreatment program.
(b) Annual permit fees for recovering costs associated with
monitoring, inspection and sampling activities essential to
implementation of the PWTA industrial pretreatment program.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction plans.
(d) Fees for review of permit applications.
(e) Fees associated with the review of permit appeals.
(f) Fees for consistent removal by the PWTA of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment categorical
standards.
(g) Surcharge fees for all sewerage discharged into the sewer
system which exhibit concentrations of certain compatible
pollutants in excess of the limitations established in § 147-46 of
this article.
(h) Other fees the PWTA and/or the PRA may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the PRA and/or the
PWTA.
A. It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge any wastewater to the
sewer system in any area under the jurisdiction of or within the service
area of, the Perkasie Regional Authority or PWTA, except as authorized
in writing by the PRA in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The PRA or the PWTA may require any unpermitted or permitted users
of the sewer system to provide any information needed to determine
compliance with this article or other applicable local, state or federal
laws, rules or regulations. These requirements include but are not
limited to:
(1) Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume records over a
specified time period.
(2) Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
§ 147-51 PERKASIE CODE § 147-52
137:312
§ 147-53. Significant industrial user permits.
§ 147-54. Permit application.
(3) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, biosolids, oil, solvent or
other materials that may impact the operation of the PRA collection
system.
(4) A plot plan of all sewer facilities on the user's property, including
the number and location of all sewer lateral connections to the PRA
collection system.
(5) Details of control measures taken by the user to prevent and
control stormwater, drainage and roof runoff from entering the PRA
collection system.
B. In addition, all users are required to provide details of any significant
changes to the nature or quantity of their discharge, including
increased flows of 25% or more or the promulgation of a categorical
pretreatment standard that applies to their discharge, at least 90 days
prior to commencing the changed discharge.
C. Costs incurred for developing the information described above shall be
paid by the user and are in addition to all other sewer use, permit and
surcharge fees charged by the PWTA or PRA.
D. The user shall be responsible for obtaining and submitting all
applicable PRA, Borough, county, regional, state or federal permits or
planning documents required for approval of a sewer connection. It is
also the responsibility of each user to notify the PRA and the PWTA
Manager of wastewater discharges containing materials which would
be considered hazardous if disposed of in any other manner.
A. All users proposing to or already connected into the PRA's sewer
system which are deemed a significant industrial user through PWTA
review of the waste questionnaire or permit application must obtain a
wastewater contribution permit from the PWTA 90 days prior to
commencing discharge.
B. In addition, whenever an existing insignificant industrial user becomes
subject to a new categorical pretreatment standard, the user must
reapply to the PWTA for a significant industrial user wastewater
contribution permit within 60 days of the promulgation of the
categorical standard. Based on the review of this data, the PWTA may
reissue the wastewater contribution permit for this significant
industrial user as soon as possible after incorporating the applicable
standards.
A. Any user required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall
complete and file with the PRA and the PWTA an application in the form
prescribed by the PWTA, accompanied by the required permit filing fee.
In support of the application, the significant industrial user shall
§ 147-52 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-54
137:313
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, all items required
in 40 CFR 403.12(b), including the following information:
(1) Name, address and location of the facility (if it is different from the
address).
(2) SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those parameters listed in §§ 147-43 through 147-50 of
this article, as determined by an approved analytical laboratory.
This sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of
the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(4) Time and duration of wastewater contribution.
(5) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and production processes on the
premises, including all materials that have a potential for entering
the sewer system either accidentally or by purpose.
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any authority, Borough, township, state or
federal categorical pretreatment standards; and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M), source reduction efforts and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the significant industrial user to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the schedule by which the significant
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment. For
significant industrial users subject to federal categorical
pretreatment standards, the completion date in this schedule can
be no later than the compliance date established by the EPA for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following shall also apply to
this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment facilities required for the significant industrial
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. This may
§ 147-54 PERKASIE CODE § 147-54
137:314
§ 147-55. Permit conditions.
Significant industrial user permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the PRA or the PWTA by way of separate
regulations. The permit may contain, but is not limited to, the following
requirements:
include dates for installing a sampling manhole, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing a contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(9)(a) shall exceed
nine months.
(c) No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the significant user shall submit
a progress report to the PRA and the PWTA, including, as a
minimum, whether or not he has complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which he expects to comply with this increment of progress;
the reason for delay; and the steps he is taking to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the PRA and the PWTA.
(d) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(e) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(f) Number and type of employees, the hours of plant operation
and the proposed or actual hours of pretreatment system
operation.
(g) Any other information as may be deemed by the PWTA
necessary to aid in evaluating the permit application.
(10) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
B. The PWTA will evaluate the data furnished by the significant industrial
user and will notify the user of any additional information necessary to
complete the application review process. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data supplied, the PWTA may approve the issuance of
a significant industrial user permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
A. Statement of duration.
B. Statement on nontransferability.
§ 147-54 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-55
137:315
§ 147-56. Compliance data report.
Following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewer system,
any significant industrial user subject to federal categorical pretreatment
C. All applicable pretreatment standards for the discharge of pollutants.
D. Limits on average and maximum flow rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
E. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
F. Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule.
G. A schedule for achieving compliance with this article or any other
pretreatment requirement.
H. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports
(see §§ 147-56 and 147-57).
I. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge, as specified by the PWTA, and allowing the
PWTA access thereto.
J. Requirements for ninety-day prior notification of the PWTA and the PRA
of the introduction of any new wastewater constituents or any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater collection system.
K. Requirements for: 1) immediate notification of slug discharges to the
PWTA in accordance with § 147-48 of this article; 2) immediate
notification of any changes by the user at its facility affecting the
potential for an accidental discharge and/or slug discharge to the
PWTA; and/or 3) development and implementation of slug control
measures. [Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
L. Specification of type and amount of raw materials and finished products
processed (average and maximum per day).
M. Statement of all applicable civil or criminal penalties for
noncompliance.
N. Other conditions as deemed necessary by the PRA or the PWTA to
ensure compliance with this article.
O. Requirements for development and implementation of best
management practices (BMPs) and recordkeeping and reporting for
BMPs. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
§ 147-55 PERKASIE CODE § 147-56
137:316
standards shall submit to the PWTA a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
that are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. The report
shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/
or pretreatment is necessary to bring the significant industrial user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
significant industrial user and certified by a qualified professional engineer.
§ 147-57. Periodic compliance reports.
A. Every significant industrial user shall have his wastewater sampled and
analyzed at a frequency specified in the wastewater contribution
permit, but in no case less than two times per year. The frequency and
number of pollutants analyzed for will be specific for each industry. The
sampling must be representative of the user's typical discharge during
that reporting period. The PWTA may at any time require the significant
industrial user to perform additional sampling if it believes the
conditions of this article are not being met. The significant industrial
user must submit to the PWTA during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently by the PWTA, an update
report indicating any process, production or flow rate changes that
have occurred during the previous six-month period and all sampling
requirements specified above. This report will also include a record of
all daily flow that, during the reporting period, exceeded the average
daily flow allowed in the contract. At the discretion of the PWTA and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holiday,
budget cycles, etc., the PWTA may agree to alter the months during
which the above reports are to be submitted.
B. The PWTA may impose mass limitations on significant industrial users
that combine nonregulated waste streams with categorical process
waste streams prior to the sampling point or requirements or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such
cases, the report required by Subsection A of this section shall indicate
the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the significant industrial user. These reports shall contain
the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow
and the nature and concentration or production and mass of pollutants
contained therein that are limited by the applicable pretreatment
standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established pursuant to Section 304(g) of
the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or
with any other EPA-approved test procedures. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with approved techniques.
C. When the results of this sampling indicate noncompliance with any
requirement of this article, the user must notify the PWTA Manager
§ 147-56 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-57
137:317
§ 147-58. Permit duration.
Permits shall be issued by the PWTA for a specified time period, not to
exceed five years. Each significant industrial user shall apply for a
reissuance of his wastewater contribution permit a minimum of 180 days
prior to the expiration of his existing permit. The terms and conditions of
the permit may be subject to modification by the PWTA during the term of
the permit, as limitations or requirements as identified in § 147-43 through
147-50 are modified or other just cause exists. A significant industrial user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of change. Where necessary, a schedule for
within 24 hours after becoming aware of the violation(s). The user
must also resample its discharge and submit these results to the PWTA
within 30 days. Additionally, all wastewater discharge sampling results
obtained by the user, whether or not required specifically by its
wastewater contribution permit, must be submitted to the PWTA.
D. All measurements, tests and analyses required for determining the
characteristics of waters and wastewaters to which reference is made
in this article shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis and will be specified in the
individual wastewater contribution permits issued to the significant
industrial users.
E. If a user must implement a BMP to comply with federal pretreatment
standards or requirements, the PWTA's prohibited discharge standards,
local limits, or any other condition of this article, the user shall submit
any and all documentation required by the PWTA, PRA or the
pretreatment standard at the frequency specified by the PWTA, PRA or
pretreatment standard to evaluate compliance. The user must include
information on compliance with any applicable BMPs in baseline
monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports and periodic
compliance reports. The PWTA may also require any user to submit
additional BMP-related information or data at any frequency it deems
necessary to determine compliance with federal pretreatment
standards or requirements or the Authority's rules and regulations.
[Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
F. If the PWTA performs the required monitoring of the user's wastewater
discharge, the PWTA will either perform any required repeat sampling
and analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of a violation or direct
the user to perform any required repeat sampling and analysis within
30 days of becoming aware of a violation. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 956]
G. The PWTA shall provide copies of all sampling results and
correspondence to the PRA within 10 days of the receipt of any
information surrounding any event involving a PRA user. [Added
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
§ 147-57 PERKASIE CODE § 147-58
137:318
complying with these changes or new conditions may also be issued by the
PWTA.
§ 147-59. Permit modifications.
Upon the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard, a significant
industrial user subject to such standards shall have his wastewater
contribution permit revised to require compliance with such standards.
§ 147-60. Permit transfer.
Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific significant
industrial user for a specific operation. These permits shall not be
reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, used for different premises
or used for a new or changed operation.
§ 147-61. Signatory requirement.
All reports, applications or other information required to be submitted
under this article shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user
and shall contain the following certification:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate
the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of civil and criminal penalties.
§ 147-62. Monitoring facilities. [Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No.
956]
The PWTA Manager or his duly authorized representative shall inspect
the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purposes of this article
are being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises connected to the PRA wastewater collection system
shall allow the PWTA Manager or his representative ready access at all
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and/or copying of same or in the performance of
any of his duties. The PWTA has the right to set upon a user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before
entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with
any security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the PWTA will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 147-58 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-63
137:319
§ 147-63. Pretreatment.
Users and significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this article and any applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified
by the PWTA or in the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any equipment or
facilities required by the user to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable
to the PWTA shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's
expense. The PWTA may require that detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures to be submitted for review
and be deemed acceptable to the PWTA before construction of the facility.
The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve a
user from the responsibility of modifying his facility as necessary to produce
an effluent acceptable to the PWTA under the provisions of this article. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation or
any change that may result in a new or increased discharge of pollutants
shall be reported to and be accepted by the PWTA prior to the initiation of
the changes.
§ 147-64. Recordkeeping requirements. [Amended 3-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 956]
§ 147-65. Confidential information.
A. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
maintain, and make available for inspection and copying by the PWTA,
all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this article, any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements and records associated with
implementation of BMPs. Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of
such analyses and any other information or data deemed necessary by
the PWTA. These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the PWTA, or where
the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
the PWTA. PWTA will provide PRA copies (at the latter's expense) of all
documents received within 10 days of their receipt of such documents.
B. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to the PRA, the Borough, the PWTA, the DEP or EPA
upon request (at the requester's expense).
A. Information and data on a user or significant industrial user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring
programs and inspections shall be made available to the public or
governmental agencies without restriction, unless the user or
§ 147-63 PERKASIE CODE § 147-65
137:320
§ 147-66. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or user or significant
industrial user permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article
shall be punished as provided by law and shall be subject to the fines set
forth in §§ 147-67 through 147-76.
§ 147-67. Notification of violation.
Whenever the PRA or the PWTA finds that any user has violated or is
violating this article, his wastewater contribution permit or the General
Pretreatment Regulations, the PRA or the PWTA shall serve upon the user
a written notice of violation (NOV). A copy of said notice shall also be sent
to Perkasie Borough. Within 15 days of the certified receipt of the NOV,
the user must submit, to the PWTA and the PRA, a written response that
contains the following information:
significant industrial user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the PWTA that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user or
significant industrial user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, those portions of a
report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available,
upon written request, to governmental agencies for uses related to this
article, the NPDES permit, biosolids disposal/reuse forms and/or the
General Pretreatment Regulations. Any such portions of a report shall
also be available for use by any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the PWTA as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the PWTA until after a ten-day
notification is given to the user or significant industrial user.
A. Cause of noncompliance.
B. Anticipated duration of the noncompliance and the time by which the
violation will be corrected.
C. Steps taken by the user to reduce and eliminate the noncomplying
discharge.
D. Steps taken by the user to prevent reoccurrence of the condition(s)
leading to the noncompliance.
§ 147-65 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-67
137:321
§ 147-68. Show-cause hearing.
When a response given by the user to a previous NOV is inadequate or when
a violation results in conditions that could cause the PWTA to violate its
NPDES permit or biosolids quality requirements or results in a hazardous
situation within the PWTA sewer system, the PWTA will notify a user by
certified mail of the requirement that the user attend a show-cause hearing.
A "show-cause hearing" is an official meeting between the PWTA and a user
to resolve conditions of continued violations. The hearing may result in the
PWTA issuing an administrative order to the user or assessment of civil
penalties.
§ 147-69. Administrative order.
An "administrative order" is an official enforcement document that directs a
user or significant industrial user to undertake or to cease specific activities
and that carries specific legal actions to be enforced when addressing
continued noncompliance. The order may contain a compliance schedule
specifying the time frame by which the user must perform certain activities
that will ultimately result in compliance with all requirements contained in
the order. The order may also contain the requirement that the user pay
civil penalties of up to $25,000 per day per violation.
§ 147-70. Public notification of noncompliance. [Amended
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
The PWTA shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by
the PWTA, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were
in significant noncompliance (as defined in § 147-42 of this article) with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The PWTA shall
provide PRA with the names of any users within the PRA system who will be
on such list at least 30 days prior to publication of the list.
§ 147-71. Harmful contributions.
E. The signature of an authorized representative of the user that certifies
to the validity of the report.
A. The PRA or the PWTA may suspend the wastewater treatment service
and/or wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of PRA or the PWTA, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons and/or the
environment, which causes or threatens to cause interference to the
POTW or causes or threatens to cause the PWTA to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
§ 147-67 PERKASIE CODE § 147-71
137:322
§ 147-72. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of §§ 147-67 through 147-75 of this article:
§ 147-73. Appeal.
A user, upon receipt of notification of suspension or revocation of a user
permit or significant industrial user permit, may appeal the decision, in
writing, to the PWTA Manager, with a statement of reasons therefor, within
10 days of the notice. Such an appeal shall not be cause for the discharge
to continue if the suspension or revocation was issued to stop a harmful
contribution under § 147-71.
§ 147-74. Notice of hearing; costs.
Thereafter, upon notice, in writing, given to the permit holder or any
agent or officer thereof at least five days prior to the time fixed, the
PWTA Manager shall convene and conduct a hearing on the propriety
or lack thereof of the notice of suspension or revocation. The cost of
the stenographic transcript of such a proceeding shall be borne by the
appellant, who shall pay a filing fee of $300.
§ 147-75. Method of decision.
The findings and determinations of the PWTA shall be in writing and shall
be mailed to the user's authorized representative within 48 hours of the
hearing, with a certified copy thereof to be filed with the PWTA Manager
who originally served the notice of suspension or revocation. The
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the PRA or the PWTA
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage
to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The PRA or
the PWTA may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or
the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent
any future occurrence shall be submitted by the user to the PRA and
the PWTA within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
A. Failure of the user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
§ 147-71 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-75
137:323
determination shall be binding both upon the PWTA and all parties in
interest.
§ 147-76. Action following appeal decision.
If the decision of the PWTA sustains the notice of suspension or revocation
of permit, the user shall be given 10 days' notice of the new date of
suspension or revocation by the PWTA.
§ 147-77. Civil penalty assessment.
A. In addition to the other enforcement actions described within the PWTA
Enforcement Response Plan (ERP), the PWTA may also seek to assess
civil penalties and enjoin any user who fails to comply with the
requirements of this article or his wastewater contribution permit.
B. Civil penalties vary from $500 up to $25,000 per day per violation
depending on the severity of the violation and other factors. In civil
penalty assessment, the PWTA will consider all of the following factors:
(1) Damage to the PWTA treatment plant or collection system, the
environment or collection system personnel, resulting from the
violation.
(2) The user's history of past violations.
(3) The level of cooperation obtained from the user.
(4) The economic benefit gained by the users as a result of the
noncompliance.
(5) Other relevant factors.
C. The general civil assessment policy of the PWTA is given in Table 1 of
the PWTA Enforcement Response Plan. All fines were developed in
accordance with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law
(Pennsylvania Act 9) and will be assessed on a per-day, per-violation
basis. The PWTA has the right to increase, reduce or waive the fines in
certain circumstances.
D. All civil penalties collected pursuant to the PWTA Civil Penalty
Assessment Policy will be placed in a restricted account and shall only
be used by the PWTA for the repair of damage and any additional
maintenance or other costs resulting from the violation(s) on which the
penalty was imposed, to pay any penalties imposed on the PWTA by a
state or federal agency as a result of violating any pretreatment
standards, for the costs incurred by the PWTA to investigate and initiate
enforcement actions against the noncomplying discharge (including
legal and engineering fees), for additional monitoring costs associated
with the noncomplying user and for capital improvements to the
treatment plant or collection system required by the pretreatment
program. Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements to
§ 147-75 PERKASIE CODE § 147-77
137:324
§ 147-78. Injunctive relief.
§ 147-79. Right to appeal.
The user charged with any penalty previously described or who wishes to
contest an administrative order shall have 30 days to pay the assessed
penalty in full; or, if the user wishes to contest either the amount of the
penalty or the fact of the violation, the user must file an appeal of the action
to the PWTA Board within 30 days pursuant to the Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
the treatment plant or collections system not required by the industrial
pretreatment program.
E. The PWTA's ability to assess civil penalties against noncomplying users
shall apply to all users of the PWTA wastewater collection system
regardless of political boundary.
A. The PWTA and PRA shall be able to seek injunctive relief for
noncompliance by users with pretreatment standards or requirements
or related provisions. Injunctive relief is available for violations of
pretreatment standards or requirements, any requirement stated in this
part or user permits, including, but not limited to: [Amended
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 956]
(1) A discharge from a user presents an imminent or substantial
danger to the environment.
(2) A discharge from a user causes the PWTA to violate any condition
of its NPDES permit, biosolids application standards, or other state
or federal requirement.
(3) A discharge from a user presents an imminent or substantial
danger to the PWTA treatment plant, the collection system or the
general public.
(4) The user has shown a lack of ability or intention to comply with a
pretreatment standard.
B. Injunctive relief may also be issued against a noncomplying user if the
court determines that other enforcement actions available to the PWTA
would not be adequate to affect prompt correction of the condition or
violation.
C. The PWTA's ability to seek injunctive relief against a noncomplying user
shall apply to all users regardless of political boundary. The injunctive
relief may be sought in the Court of Common Pleas where the PWTA
treatment plant is located, where the activity took place, where the
condition exists or the public was affected, and to that end a jurisdiction
is hereby conferred in law and equity upon such courts.
§ 147-77 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-80
137:325
§ 147-80. Conflict with other provisions.
All other sewer use ordinances and parts of other sewer use ordinances
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. Article III of Chapter 147
of the Perkasie Borough Code (§§ 147-41 through 147-66) is repealed in its
entirety.92
§ 147-81. Applicability.
Acknowledgment is made of overlapping service boundaries in which
Perkasie Borough residents are serviced by neighboring townships or
Boroughs. Likewise it is acknowledged that the Perkasie Regional Authority
has service areas within neighboring townships and Boroughs. This article
applies to all of these service areas equally, as if they were actual residents
of the Borough or customers of the PRA.
§ 147-82. Sampling requirements. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No.
956]
Wastewater samples collected to comply with any provision of this article
shall meet the following requirements:
A. Samples shall be collected using twenty-four-hour flow proportional
composite collection techniques. In the event that flow proportional
composite sampling is not warranted in the opinion of the PWTA, the
PWTA may authorize the use of time proportional composite sampling
or grab sampling. Where time proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling are authorized by the PWTA, the samples must be
representative of the discharge and the PWTA will solely determine the
number of grab samples required.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides,
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using standard grab
collection techniques.
C. The PWTA may allow multiple grab samples collected during a twentyfour-
hour time period for certain parameters to be composited in the
field or in the laboratory prior to analysis if proper protocols specified
in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance documents are
followed. For cyanide, total phenols and sulfides, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field. For volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the PWTA, as appropriate.
D. Sampling techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, shall
be followed.
92.Editor's Note: Refers to former Article III, Contributors to Wastewater Collection System,
adopted 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 634, as amended.
§ 147-80 PERKASIE CODE § 147-82
137:326
§ 147-83. Analytical requirements. [Added 3-19-2012 by Ord. No.
956]
Wastewater pollutant analyses completed to comply with any provision of
this article shall meet the following requirements:
E. The PWTA shall be notified a minimum of 48 hours prior to the
collection of a sample(s) by a user and may observe the collection of any
sample.
F. If a user does not follow proper sample collection protocols and/or
techniques, all samples collected inappropriately shall be discarded and
recollected at the sole expense of the user.
G. Sampling facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to
keep its sampling location or facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
H. All sampling locations utilized to meet the discharge monitoring
provisions of this article shall be approved by the PWTA.
I. All samples collected to meet the provisions of the federal pretreatment
regulations or this article shall be representative of the user's
wastewater discharge.
A. All pollutant analyses shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in
an applicable categorical standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the
Administrator.
B. The user shall provide the PWTA and the PRA with the name, address
and telephone number of any contract laboratory intended to be
utilized for pollutant analyses at least 48 hours prior to the collection of
any samples. The PWTA may recommend the use of an alternate
contract laboratory.
C. Copies of laboratory analysis results shall be forwarded to the user and
the PWTA simultaneously. Laboratory analysis results shall be available
to PRA at any time.
D. Laboratory analysis results obtained by a user following improper
protocols or deemed technically deficient by the PWTA shall be
discarded and samples shall be reanalyzed at the sole expense of the
user.
§ 147-82 PROPERTY, NUMBERING OF § 147-83
137:327
Chapter 150
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 128. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
§ 150-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall use, ride, propel or otherwise operate a skateboard in the
following areas of the Borough of Perkasie:
§ 150-2. Legislative findings and purpose.
A. Upon the cartway of any street or public alley.
B. Upon any sidewalk in the following designated areas:
On the Sidewalk on Either Side
of
Between
Arch Street Sixth Street and Seventh Street
Chestnut Street Sixth Street and Ninth Street
Market Street Sixth Street and Eighth Street
Ninth Street Chestnut Street and Market
Street
Seventh Street Race Street and Walnut Street
Shadywood Drive Fifth Street and Shadywood Place
Sixth Street Arch Street and Walnut Street
Walnut Street Fifth Street and Seventh Street
C. In and upon any municipal parking lots.
A. It is hereby found that the use of skateboards on and in the public areas
designated above in § 150-1 constitutes a threat to the public health,
safety and welfare. In addition, it is found that, with consistency, the
sidewalks in the areas designated at § 150-1B above are heavily utilized
by pedestrians, including elderly individuals.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the threat of harm to the public
arising out of the use of skateboards in the designated areas.
§ 147-83 PERKASIE CODE § 150-3
150:328
§ 150-3. Violations and penalties.93
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 152
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snowballs — See Ch. 128, Art. III.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARKING — Any area not on a street of the Borough which is intended or
used for storage or parking of vehicles.
SIDEWALKS — A paved path or footwalk for public use located between
the curbline and right-of-way line of any public or municipally maintained
roadway.
STREET — The portion of a public or private way used or intended to be
used for passage or travel by automotive vehicles and to provide access to
abutting properties.
§ 152-2. Removal from sidewalks.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly and severally, of
every parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk, whether the
parcel of real estate is occupied by a structure or not, to keep such
sidewalks adjoining such property free from snow and ice along a threefoot
width for the entire length of the sidewalk adjoining said real
estate.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from the sidewalks of all business and commercial premises
within the Borough within six hours after the cessation of any fall of
snow, sleet or freezing rain; provided, however, that snow or ice that
has ceased to fall or to be formed after 6:00 p.m. of any evening may be
removed at any time before 12:00 noon of the following day.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-3 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 152-2
152:329
§ 152-3. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owners or occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall
prevent the falling of snow, ice or water from such buildings upon said
public sidewalks.
§ 152-4. Depositing of snow and ice.
No person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate or
private contractor shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice in
the following places:
§ 152-5. Dangerous accumulations not permitted.
No person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate or
other as the case may be, shall cause the accumulation of snow and ice
on any street or roadway in such a manner as to endanger pedestrians or
obstruct the vision of motorists. In no event shall snow or ice be or be
caused to be piled on any corner by any person, partnership, corporation,
syndicate or other, as the case may be, within 10 feet of any intersection,
in excess of four feet in height which would tend to obstruct a motorist's
vision.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from all other sidewalks within the Borough within 18 hours
after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
D. However, in the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk have become so
hard that they cannot be removed without the likelihood of damage to
the sidewalk, the person or entity charged with their removal shall,
within the time mentioned in Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand
or other abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon
reasonably safe and shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits,
cause said sidewalk to be thoroughly cleaned.
A. On or against a fire hydrant.
B. On any portion of a street.
C. On any place which this chapter or any other order, rule, regulation,
resolution, ordinance or statute of the Borough of Perkasie or of any
other rule- or law-making body whose jurisdiction extends in any way to
the geographical area encompassed by the Borough of Perkasie, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania, requires to be kept clear of snow or ice.
D. On any parcel of real estate without the express permission of the
owner of the parcel of real estate upon which the snow or ice is to be
placed.
§ 152-2 PERKASIE CODE § 152-6
152:330
§ 152-6. Snow piling restricted.
No person, firm or corporation shall pile, gather up, plow up or force any
snow or ice upon any terrace or parcel of land within six feet of any street,
avenue or roadway in such a manner as to cause the height of the snow
and ice so piled, gathered, plowed or forced to exceed three feet six inches
in height above the existing natural grade of said terrace or parcel of land
within six feet of said street.
§ 152-7. Removal by Borough.
§ 152-8. Violations and penalties.94
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 158
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. Whenever any person, partnership or corporation neglects or refuses to
remove any snow or ice piled, gathered or plowed up by him or it in
violation of this chapter within four hours after a request to do so by a
representative of the Borough of Perkasie, the Borough of Perkasie may
remove said snow or ice from such street or terrace and notify the
Borough Secretary of the expense incurred by the amount of labor,
equipment and materials used.
B. The Borough Secretary shall promptly present to the violator of this
chapter a bill for the costs of removal of snow and ice. If not paid within
30 days, in the case of a property owner, the cost thereof shall be
assessed against the property and become a lien thereon, collectible in
the same manner as delinquent Borough taxes.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-6 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 152-8
152:331

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 158-1. Statement of findings.
The Borough Council of Perkasie Borough finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, degrades water
quality, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and
manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Borough and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Through project design, impacts from stormwater runoff can be
minimized to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream baseflow, and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding sensitive
areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and designing to
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
D. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens.
E. The aforementioned impacts happen mainly through a decrease in
natural infiltration of stormwater.
F. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
§ 158-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-1
152:333
§ 158-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this comprehensive stormwater management ordinance is to
promote health, safety, and welfare within Perkasie Borough by maintaining
the natural hydrologic regime and by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 158-1 of this chapter through provisions
designed to:
required to obtain a federal permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
I. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
Borough.
A. Meet water quality requirements under state law, including regulations
at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain existing uses and
maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMP).
C. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flow.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
F. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
G. Maintain the predevelopment volume of groundwater recharge and
prevent degradation of groundwater quality.
H. Maintain the predevelopment peak and volume of stormwater runoff
and prevent degradation of surface water quality.
I. Minimize nonpoint source pollutant loadings to the ground and surface
waters.
J. Minimize impacts on stream temperatures.
K. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Borough and the commonwealth.
L. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
M. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and best management practices that
are implemented in the Borough.
N. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
§ 158-1 PERKASIE CODE § 158-2
152:334
§ 158-3. Statutory authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167)
Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act;"
by the Authority of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further amended by Act 209 of
1990 and Act 131 of 1992, 53 P.S. § 10101; and by the authority of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, Act 43 of 2012.95
§ 158-4. Applicability and regulated activities.
O. Provide review procedures, performance standards, and design criteria
for stormwater planning and management.
P. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
Q. Infiltrate stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent
degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
R. Prevent streambank and streambed scour and erosion.
S. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
T. Address certain requirements of the municipal separate stormwater
sewer system (MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
U. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the MS4.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the Borough that are located
within the Tohickon Creek Watershed and/or East Branch Perkiomen
Creek Watershed as delineated in Appendix C which is hereby adopted
as part of this chapter.96
B. All construction and development activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
C. This chapter shall apply to temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated
activities listed in this section. Stormwater management and erosion
and sedimentation control during construction activities which are
specifically not regulated by this chapter shall continue to be regulated
under existing laws and ordinances.
95.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.; 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.; and 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., respectively.
96.Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-4
152:335
§ 158-5. Exemptions.
D. This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Stormwater management design criteria
(e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details,
outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
applicable ordinances, where not specifically identified herein.
E. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter except as may be exempt from provisions
of this chapter pursuant to § 158-5:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Prohibited or polluted discharges.
(4) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(5) Construction or reconstruction of impervious surfaces (e.g.,
driveways, parking lots, etc.) which cumulatively exceed 400
square feet in area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
(6) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings
which cumulatively exceed 400 square feet of impervious surface
area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
(7) Redevelopment.
(8) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
stream channel.
(9) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) or appurtenances thereto.
(10) Temporary storage of impervious or pervious material (rock, soil,
etc.) where ground contact exceeds 5% of the lot area or 5,000
square feet (whichever is less), and where the material is placed on
slopes exceeding 8%.
(11) Any activity requiring a grading/drainage permit pursuant to
Borough ordinance.
F. All regulated activities which result in earth disturbance shall comply
with the requirements for grading and excavating in the Perkasie
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),
Chapter 164 of the Borough Code.
A. Exemption from any provision of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from all other applicable requirements of this chapter, as
identified herein.
§ 158-4 PERKASIE CODE § 158-5
152:336
B. The following regulated activities, not proposed in conjunction with a
subdivision or land development, are exempt from the requirements of
this chapter (except where otherwise identified, herein):
(1) Installation of 1,000 square feet or less of cumulative impervious
surface area since February 21, 2005.
(2) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(3) Agricultural activities when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan, nutrient management plan, or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Bucks County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil, and grazing animals. Installation of
new, or expansion of existing, farmsteads, animal housing, waste
storage, production areas, or other areas having impervious
surfaces shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter unless
exempt pursuant to § 158-5.
(4) Forest management operations following the Department of
Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its
publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for
Forestry" and operating under an erosion and sedimentation
control plan approved by the Bucks County Conservation District
and which have zoning approval from Perkasie Borough.
(5) Public road replacement, replacement paving, repaving and/or
maintenance (without expansion).
(6) Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Borough.
(7) Repair and reconstruction of on-lot sewage disposal systems where
work is performed in accordance with a valid permit issued by
Bucks County Department of Health.
(8) Lots that are part of an approved subdivision utilizing overall
subdivision stormwater management facilities, such as detention
basins, are exempt from individual lot controls if the total quantity
of impervious surface area on the lot (existing plus proposed) is
equal to or less than that quantity accounted for, from the lot, in the
stormwater management design approved in conjunction with the
subdivision. This exemption does not relieve those lots from
utilizing on-lot controls where such controls are designated as part
of the overall approved subdivision stormwater management
system.
(9) Construction or reconstruction of buildings or additions to existing
buildings or other impervious surface (regulated activities) is
exempt where the following conditions are met:
§ 158-5 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-5
152:337
(a) An area of impervious surface is removed from the site so that
upon completion of the regulated activity, the total increase of
impervious surface area is 1,000 square feet or less.
(b) The area where existing impervious surface is removed
pursuant to § 158-5B(9)(a) above must be restored with a
minimum of 12 inches of topsoil and permanent vegetative
groundcover.
(10) Grading/drainage permit applications (pursuant to Chapter 158 of
the Perkasie Borough Code) where the addition of impervious
surface area is 1,000 square feet, or less.
(11) Lot line adjustment subdivisions are exempt when no increase in
impervious surface is proposed.
(12)No exemption shall be provided for regulated activities as defined
in § 158-4E(8) and (9) of this chapter.
C. Any regulated activity in Perkasie Borough, not proposed in conjunction
with a subdivision or land development, creating additional impervious
surface area, cumulatively in excess of 1,000 square feet (on the
"parent tract") but less than the quantities identified in Table 158-5.1,
and satisfying the setback criteria identified in Table 158-5.2, below, are
exempt from certain provisions of this chapter but are required to
submit a simplified stormwater management site plan, obtain a
stormwater management permit (pursuant to Article IV of this chapter)
and install an infiltration basin(s) in accordance with Perkasie Borough
design and construction criteria. This requirement shall apply to the
total development even if development is to take place in phases. The
starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" is
February 21, 2005. All impervious surface area constructed on or after
February 21, 2005 shall be considered cumulatively. Impervious surface
area existing on the "parent tract" prior to this date shall not be
included in cumulative impervious surface area summation for
determination of an exempt regulated activity. Any area initially
designated to be gravel or crushed stone shall be considered
impervious surface. All applicants seeking an exemption of stormwater
management requirements based upon criteria contained in § 158-5C,
and that are required to install an infiltration basin(s) in accordance
with Perkasie Borough design and construction criteria, shall, at a
minimum, submit the documentation identified pursuant to § 158-23 of
this chapter to the Borough for review and approval as a prerequisite to
approval of a stormwater management permit and authorization to
commence land disturbance activities. Regulated activities creating
impervious surface area greater than the quantities referenced in
Tables 158-5.1 and 158-5.2 are not exempt from the requirements of
this chapter and shall submit a stormwater management site plan and
permit application pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
§ 158-5 PERKASIE CODE § 158-5
152:338
(1) Regulated activities included within § 158-5C are exempt from
certain provisions of this chapter where the cumulative amount of
additional proposed impervious surface area and the location of the
impervious surface area conform to the following tables, 158-5.1
and 158-5.2:
Table 158-5.1 - Maximum Exempt Impervious Surface Area
Total Parcel Area
(acres)
Maximum Exempt Impervious
Surface Area
(square feet)
Less than 0.50 1,000
0.50 to 1.0 2,500
More than 1.0 to 2.0 4,000
More than 2.0 to 5.0 5,000
More than 5.0 7,500
(2) Maximum amount of impervious surface area permitted (pursuant
to Table 158-5.1) within a setback (excluding driveway access),
measured from the downslope property boundary, shall conform to
the following table:
Table 158-5.2 - Maximum Exempt Impervious Surface Area
Permitted within the Setback
Minimum Setback*
(feet)
Maximum Exempt Impervious
Surface Area Permitted within
the Setback
(square feet)
10 None permitted
20 1,000
50 2,500
100 4,000
200 5,000
500 7,500
NOTE:
* The "minimum setback" is defined as that distance between
the downslope property boundary (where surface stormwater
runoff from the regulated activity crosses that boundary) to
the nearest point of the proposed impervious improvements, or
the stormwater control structure discharge point, whichever is
closer. Setback distances may be adjusted at the discretion of
the Borough Engineer based upon factors such as topography,
surface flow path, soil conditions, and location of structures.
§ 158-5 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-5
152:339
D. Additional exemption criteria.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and property.
(2) Drainage problems. Where drainage problems are documented or
known to exist downstream of, or is expected from, the proposed
activity, the Borough may deny an exemption.
(3) HQ and EV streams. An exemption or partial exemption shall not
relieve the applicant from meeting special requirements for
watersheds draining to high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV)
waters.
E. Perkasie Borough, upon request by the applicant, may grant an
exemption from the provisions of this chapter for a regulated activity
qualifying for an exemption identified pursuant to § 158-5B. The
Borough shall require the developer to pay a fee in an amount
established by separate resolution of Borough Council to the Perkasie
Borough Stormwater Management Capital Fund for any exemption
identified pursuant to § 158-5B(1), § 158-5B(9) and/or § 158-5B(10) of
this chapter. The Borough's approval of a stormwater management
exemption shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. This time
period shall commence on the date that the Borough approves the
stormwater management exemption. The Stormwater Management
Capital Fund contribution shall be nonrefundable.
F. All applicants seeking an exemption of stormwater management
requirements based upon criteria contained in § 158-5B shall, at a
minimum, submit the following documentation to the Borough for
review as a prerequisite to approval of a stormwater management
exemption and authorization to commence land disturbance activities:
(1) Two copies of the completed Borough stormwater management
application form.
(2) Stormwater management review fee and escrow, as established by
separate resolution of Borough Council.
(3) Two copies of a plot plan for the parcel, which is the subject of the
exemption application, containing, at a minimum, the following
information:
(a) Property boundaries and area of the site, based on deed
information, or field survey.
(b) Location map identifying the site relative to streets and other
parcels in the vicinity of the site.
(c) Location of significant natural and existing manmade features,
including wetlands, watercourses, woodlands, steep slopes,
structures, parking areas, driveways, utilities, wells, and septic
§ 158-5 PERKASIE CODE § 158-5
152:340
§ 158-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Borough inconsistent with any
of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 158-7. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the viability
of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-8. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 158-9. Modification.
Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest
and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
§ 158-10. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
systems within 200 feet of proposed impervious surface,
regardless of the location of the property boundary.
(d) Location and dimensions of existing and proposed impervious
surface and other improvements, with setbacks drawn to relate
the location of same to property lines, streets, and existing
features. Impervious surface area tabulation must be provided
identifying existing area of impervious surface, existing
impervious surface area to be removed, and proposed
impervious surface areas.
(e) North arrow.
(f) Plan scale, as applicable.
(g) Other information deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer
to determine compliance with exemption criteria contained in
§ 158-5B.
§ 158-5 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-10
152:341
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Borough
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 158-10 PERKASIE CODE § 158-10
152:342
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 158-11. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,"
"designed," "maintained," or "arranged to be used," "occupied" or
"maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 158-4
of this chapter.
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:343
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS (AS-BUILT PLAN) — Drawings that are
maintained during construction of the project and which document
the actual locations of the site improvements. As-built plan must be
prepared by a professional land surveyor, landscape architect, or
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top of bank or point where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream flow that is sustained by
groundwater discharge.
BIORENTENTION — A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody
and herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration
occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — Pennsylvania Stormwater best management practices
Manual, December 2006, as amended.
BOROUGH — Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and appointed by Perkasie Borough
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Borough Code.
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater
flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and manmade
watercourses, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes that
convey continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate
to large floods.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — Bucks County Conservation District.
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:344
COUNTY — Bucks County.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit, or similar structure including appurtenant
works which conveys surface water under or through an embankment
or fill.
CURVE NUMBER (CN) — Value used in the Soil Cover Complex
Method. It is a measure of the percentage of precipitation which is
expected to run off from the watershed and is a function of the soil,
vegetative cover, and tillage method.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway,
railroad, or other purposes which does or may impound water or
another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Bucks
County Conservation District and/or governing body involved with the
administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or a registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
site plans or simplified stormwater management site plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
soon after a rainfall event.
DETENTION/RETENTION BASIN WATERSHED — All land area whose
surface runoff is captured by a detention and/or retention basin.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to, the construction or placement
of buildings or other structures, mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations, and the subdivision of land.
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:345
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written
and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not
confined to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious surface
that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or conveyance
system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area, which allows
for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration.
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands
or diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse,
floodway or body of water.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional civil engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin
or other point of interest;
(1)
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (CFS).
(2)
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:346
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan which is
designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegredation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. Farm field, disturbed earth, or
undeveloped cover conditions of a site or portions of a site used for
modeling purposes shall be considered "meadow" unless the natural
groundcover generates lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value,
such as forested land. Existing manmade impervious surfaces shall
be considered as "meadow" when developing "cover complex"
calculations.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or
depression where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates
and replenishes the groundwater.
EXISTING RESOURCES AND SITE ANALYSIS MAP (ERSAM) — A base
map which identifies fundamental environmental site information
including floodplains, wetlands, topography, vegetative site features,
natural areas, prime agricultural land and areas supportive of
endangered species.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Those areas of Perkasie Borough which are subject to
the one-hundred-year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) dated March 16, 2015, and the accompanying maps prepared for
the Borough by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
or most recent revision thereof; and also those areas along streams,
ponds, or lakes not identified within the Flood Insurance Study which
are inundated by the one-hundred-year reoccurrence internal flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the
bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forest land. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:347
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs, and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS — The US Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC-Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activity generates highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater. Typical pollutant loadings in
stormwater may be found in Chapter 8, Section 6 of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater best management practices Manual, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) no. 363-0300-002
(2006).
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long
enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic condition in
the upper part.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME (NATURAL) — The hydrologic cycle or balance
that sustains quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and
groundwater supplies under the natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation
Service, into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils,
which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.97
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface
(noun) A slope usually of a street, other public way, land area,
drainage facility or pipe specified in percent;
(1)
(verb) To finish the surface of a road bed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
(2)
97.Editor's Note: See also definition of "soil group hydrologic."
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:348
area shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, parking areas,
driveways, roads, and sidewalks. Any areas containing concrete,
asphalt, compacted stone, compacted soils, or other equivalent surfaces
shall be considered impervious surface within this definition. In
addition, other areas determined by the Borough Engineer to be
impervious within the meaning of this definition shall be classified
as impervious surface. Any area initially designated to be gravel or
crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench,
biofiltration swale).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
INVERT — The inside bottom of a culvert or other conduit.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether purposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semi-detached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(a)
The addition of a residential accessory building, including farm
building, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building; or
(b)
(3)
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:349
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other
activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata which includes one of the following:
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will
minimize proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will
minimize the need for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MS4 or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Pursuant
to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(8), "municipal separate storm sewer system" is a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains):
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an
amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional,
determined by direct observation of the water table or indicated by
soil mottling.
(1)
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to
fill the voids between the fragments.
(2)
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that is effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
(3)
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, association, or other public body (created to or pursuant
to state law) including special districts under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency
under section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges into
waters of the United States;
(1)
(2) Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:350
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where Perkasie Borough's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development
or subdivision originates as of the date of adoption of the stormwater
management Ordinance on February 21, 2005 (Ordinance No. 888).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Perkasie
Borough.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
(3) Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined
at 40 CFR 122.2.
(4)
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:351
POST-DEVELOPMENT — Period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
functioning, and all improvements in the approved stormwater
management plan are completed.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to
provide storage or filtering to help trap coarse materials and other
pollutants before they enter the system.
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and groundwater.
RECHARGE VOLUME — A calculated volume of stormwater runoff from
impervious areas which is required to be infiltrated at a site and may
be achieved through use of structural or nonstructural BMPs.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activity to which this chapter is
applicable pursuant to § 158-4.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retain stormwater runoff so
that a permanent pool is established.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A vegetated ecosystem along a waterbody
that serves to buffer the waterbody from the effects of runoff by
providing water quality filtering, bank stability, recharge, rate
attenuation and volume reduction, and shading of the waterbody by
vegetation. Riparian corridors also provide habitat and may include
streambanks, wetlands, floodplains, and transitional areas.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:352
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff
from a roof and leads it away from a structure.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth
occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the underground water (Refer to PA BMP
Manual, December 2006, Chapter 6, Section 4).
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A system of pipes, open
channels, streets, and other conveyances intended to carry stormwater
runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a Curve Number (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the NRCS
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which
are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not
very permeable and produce much more runoff.98
SPECIAL PROTECTION WATERSHEDS — Watersheds of streams that
have been designated in Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, as being exceptional
value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
98.Editor's Note: See also definition of "hydrologic soil group."
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:353
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. Refer
to "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE FACILITY (RUNOFF CONVEYANCE
FACILITY) — A stormwater management facility designed to transmit
stormwater runoff which shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes,
conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) — The control of surface runoff
generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Borough after the stormwater management site plan (SMSP) or the
simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP) has been
approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the final Borough
approval.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff within the Borough adopted as required by the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SMSP) — The stormwater
management site plan prepared by the developer or his engineer
indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site
of interest according to this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN, SIMPLIFIED (SSMSP) —
The simplified stormwater management site plan prepared by the
developer or his engineer indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — Rivers, creeks, springs, and other perennial or intermittent
watercourses containing water at least on a seasonal basis during an
average water year. The term "stream" shall include all intermittent
streams and all perennial streams.
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:354
STREAMBANK EROSION — The widening, deepening or headward
cutting of channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or
bankfull flows.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure, as
defined by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, which encloses a regulated water
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a
watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SPRINGS OR SEEPS — The point where groundwater discharges
to become surface water.
(1)
STREAM, EPHEMERAL — A reach of stream that flows only during
and for short periods following precipitation, and flows in low areas
that may or may not be a well-defined channel. Ephemeral stream
beds are located above the water table year-round. Groundwater is
not a source of water for the stream. Some commonly used names
for ephemeral streams include: stormwater channel, drain, swale,
gully, dry stream channel, hollow, or saddle.
(2)
STREAM, HEADWATER — The beginning reach of a stream, which
collects water from springs and seeps and provides a hydrologic
connection to a perennial stream. These channels may be ill defined
and may move from year to year depending upon groundwater
input, snowmelt, and runoff, but are typified by hydric soils and
hydric vegetation.
(3)
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — A reach of stream that flows only
during wet periods of the year and flows in a continuous welldefined
channel. During dry periods, when the water table is
depressed by seasonal aridity or drought, intermittent streams may
go down to a trickle of water and appear dry, when in fact there is
water flowing within the stream bottom or "substrate."
(4)
STREAM, PERENNIAL or WATERCOURSE, PERENNIAL — A body
of water in a channel that flows throughout a majority of the year
in a defined channel and is capable, in the absence of pollution,
drought, or manmade stream disturbances, of supporting a benthic
macroinvertebrate community that is composed of two or more
recognizable taxonomic groups of organisms, large enough to be
seen by the unaided eye and can be retained by a U.S. Standard
No. 30 sieve (28 mesh per inch, 0.595 mm openings) and live at
least part of their life cycles within or upon available substrates in
a body of water or water transport system. A perennial stream can
have a base flow of zero during drought periods. For the purposes
of this document, a perennial stream includes lakes and ponds.
(5)
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:355
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — Refer to "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of
overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP OF BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the
channel and over the floodplain.
TRIBUTARY AREA — The portion of a watershed that contributes runoff
to a particular point in that watershed.
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
VOLUMETRIC RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — A variable indicative of
stormwater runoff volume and dependent on the impervious coverage
for a site.
WATERCOURSE — An intermittent or perennial stream of water, river,
brook, creek, or swale identified on USGS or SCS mapping; and/or
delineated waters of the commonwealth.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — A calculated volume of stormwater runoff
from impervious areas which is required to be captured and treated at
a site and may be achieved through use of structural or nonstructural
BMPs.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES (WATERS OF THE US) —
All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may
be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including
all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(1)
§ 158-11 PERKASIE CODE § 158-11
152:356
WET BASIN — Pond for runoff management that is designed to detain
runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
WETLAND DELINEATION — The process by which wetland limits are
determined. Wetlands must be delineated by a qualified specialist
according to the 1989 Federal Manuals (as amended) for the
Delineation of Jurisdictional Wetlands (whichever is greater) or
according to any subsequent federal or state regulation. "Qualified
specialist" shall include those persons being certified professional soil
scientists as registered with Registry of Certified Professionals in
Agronomy Crops and Soils (ARCPACS); or as contained on consultant's
list of Pennsylvania Association of Professional Soil Scientists (PAPSS);
or as registered with National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists
(NSCSS), or as certified by state and/or federal certification programs;
or by a qualified biologist/ecologist.
(2) All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including
intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs,
prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the
use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could
affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters:
(1) which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers
for recreational or other purposes; (2) from which fish or shellfish
are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce;
or (3) which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by
industries in interstate commerce;
(3)
All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition;
(4)
Tributaries of waters identified in Subsections (1) through (4) of
this definition;
(5)
(6) The territorial sea; and
Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves
wetlands) identified in Subsections (1) through (6) of this
definition.
(7)
§ 158-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-11
152:357

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 158-12. General requirements.
A. All applicants proposing regulated activities in the Borough that do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 158-5B and § 158-5C of this
chapter shall submit a stormwater management site plan, consistent
with this chapter, to the Borough for review. All applicants proposing
regulated activities that fall under the exemption criteria identified in
§ 158-5C shall submit a simplified stormwater management site plan,
consistent with this chapter, to the Borough for review. These criteria
shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to
take place in stages. Impervious surface shall include, but not be
limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious unless designed as a BMP (e.g., pervious
paver blocks, reinforced turf, gravel filled grids, etc.). (Refer to
definition of "impervious surface" within § 158-11 of this chapter.)
B. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces (i.e., disconnected impervious
areas, DIAs) by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever
possible;
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees,
reducing area of impervious surface, cluster development, and
protecting open space) described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
best management practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (December
30, 2006).
C. The Borough may, after consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP), approve measures for meeting the
state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not
§ 158-12 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-12
152:359
conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams
Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth
disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various
BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (March 2012), as amended and
updated.
E. No approval of any subdivision or land development plan, or issuance of
any building, zoning, grading/drainage permit, occupancy permit, or
the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance at a project site
within the Borough shall proceed until the requirements of this chapter
are met, including approval of a stormwater management permit
pursuant to Article IV and a permit under PADEP regulations, where
applicable.
F. Erosion and sediment control during land disturbance shall be
addressed as required by § 158-20.
G. Infiltration and water quality protection shall be addressed as required
by § 158-15 and § 158-16.
H. All best management practices (BMPs) shall conform to the design
criteria of this chapter and Pennsylvania Stormwater best management
practices Manual, December 30, 2006.
I. Low-impact development techniques as described in Pennsylvania
Stormwater best management practices Manual (December 30, 2006,
as amended) are encouraged to reduce the costs of complying with the
requirements of this chapter and state water quality requirements. Use
of nonstructural BMPs is encouraged and design and applicability of
such BMPs is identified pursuant to Chapter 5 of the Pennsylvania BMP
Manual. For all proposed nonstructural BMPs, the applicant shall utilize
and submit applicable checklists included in Chapter 8, Section 8.8 of
the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, to demonstrate that the BMPs are
applicable to the project and to determine the amount of volume credit
that may be applied to the development activity.
J. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to minimize the use of natural onsite infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
K. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities designed to encourage infiltration,
groundwater recharge, and improved water quality.
§ 158-12 PERKASIE CODE § 158-12
152:360
L. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without written approval of the affected
property owner(s) and shall be subject to discharge criteria specified in
this chapter.
M. Areas of existing sheet flow discharge shall be maintained wherever
possible. If sheet flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged
onto adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge; and submit written approval from the affected adjacent
property owner(s).
N. For all subdivision and land development applications, the tributary
area discharging drainage to any location along the site property
boundary shall have no increase over the predevelopment condition
without written approval from the adjacent affected property owner(s)
receiving runoff from the site.
O. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The width of the easement shall be adequate to provide
for the unimpeded flow of stormwater runoff from the one-hundred-year
storm event. Terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement.
Periodic maintenance of the easement shall be required by the
landowner to ensure proper runoff conveyance and control of invasive
plant species, as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
P. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP through the Chapter 105 permit
process, or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general
permit process.
Q. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by PADEP through the Chapter
105 permit process, or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, the
General permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands;
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
R. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way, or discharge
stormwater to facilities located within a state highway right-of-way,
§ 158-12 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-12
152:361
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PADOT).
S. Site disturbance and impervious surface shall be minimized. Infiltrating
stormwater runoff through seepage beds, infiltration basins, etc., shall
be required, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or
eliminate the need for retention/detention facilities.
T. All storm sewer inlets must be identified with a storm drain marker.
Storm drain markers shall be embossed into the inlet hood. Marker
shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and include "No
Dumping - Drains to Waterway" and a fish symbol. Alternate designs/
sizes may be used if approved by the Borough.
U. Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall
remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped,
impeded, or altered (except for road crossings). It is the responsibility
of the developer to stabilize existing eroded stream/channel beds and
banks (refer to § 158-17).
V. The temperature and quality of water of streams that have been
declared as exceptional value (EV) and high quality (HQ) are to be
maintained as defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, Title 25
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Rules and
Regulations. All regulated development activities within HQ or EV
watersheds must provide volume controls and water quality controls
pursuant to the requirements of §§ 158-15 and 158-16 of this chapter.
W. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or groundwater as required by § 158-16 of this
chapter.
X. Hot spots.
(1) Hot spots are sites where the land use or activity produces a higher
concentration of trace metals, hydrocarbons, or priority pollutants
than normally found in urban runoff. Use of infiltration BMPs is
prohibited on hot spot land use areas. Examples of hot spots
include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes defined by
the U.S. Department of Labor).
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
§ 158-12 PERKASIE CODE § 158-12
152:362
§ 158-13. Stormwater management performance standards.
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by the Borough.
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In
no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of pretreatment
is located in the Pennsylvania Stormwater best
management practices Manual.
Y. West Nile guidance requirements. All wet basin designs shall
incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance
found in Appendix D of this chapter.99
A. Mapping of Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts. In order to
implement the provisions of the Tohickon Creek Watershed stormwater
management plan and East Branch Perkiomen Creek Watershed
stormwater management plan, Perkasie Borough is hereby divided into
Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts consistent with the plans. The
boundaries of the districts are indicated on the runoff peak rate district
map that is available for inspection at the Borough Administration
Building (a large-scale Watershed Boundary Map is included as
Appendix C for reference100). Proposed conditions peak rates of runoff
from any regulated activity shall meet the peak release rates of runoff
prior to development for the design storms specified in § 158-13C, D
and E of this chapter.
B. The exact location of the Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate District
boundary as it applies to a given development site shall be determined
by mapping the boundaries using the two-feet or five-feet topographic
contours. The district boundaries as originally drawn coincide with
topographic divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the
intersection of the watercourse or a potential flow obstruction to the
topographic divide consistent with topography. This information shall
be provided as part of the stormwater management site plan. The
locations determined on the plan shall be reviewed and verified by the
Borough Engineer.
99.Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-12 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-13
152:363
C. All portions of the Borough within the Tohickon Creek Watershed are
within the 75% release rate district of the watershed management plan;
therefore, in the design of stormwater management facilities to control
runoff from regulated activities with the Tohickon Creek Watershed,
post-development rates of runoff shall not exceed 75% of the peak rates
of runoff prior to development for the two-year through one-hundredyear
frequency design storms.
D. For the purpose of implementing the provisions of the East Branch
Perkiomen Creek Watershed stormwater management plan,
Management District "A," design storm proposed conditions shall be
controlled to design storm existing conditions as follows:
Design Storm Proposed
Conditions to
Design Storm Existing
Conditions
2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
E. For the purpose of implementing the provisions of the East Branch
Perkiomen Creek Watershed stormwater management plan,
Management District "B," design storm proposed conditions shall be
controlled to design storm existing conditions as follows:
Design Storm Proposed
Conditions to
Design Storm Existing
Conditions
2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 50-year
F. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located in both the Tohickon Creek Watershed and the East Branch
Perkiomen Creek, and/or within two or more release rate management
districts, the peak discharge rate shall be the predevelopment peak
discharge for each management district area multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether proposed grading or drainage facilities result in
modification of the boundary of the watershed or management district.
G. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
§ 158-13 PERKASIE CODE § 158-13
152:364
§ 158-14. Project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
peak runoff rates or volume reduction. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the
development site for the one-hundred-year frequency storm event.
H. Site areas. Where the area of a site being impacted by a proposed
development activity not associated with a subdivision or land
development differs significantly from the total site area as determined
by the Borough Engineer, the Borough may, but is not required to,
permit only the proposed impact area, which includes areas of the site
to be compacted due to construction activity, to be subject to the
release rate criteria (performance standards).
I. Stormwater conveyance corridor protection (riparian corridor
preservation and vegetation). Runoff from developed areas of the site,
including but not limited to areas of impervious surface, shall be
managed through a series of riparian corridor vegetation facilities
whenever possible. This will be accomplished in a manner satisfactory
to the Borough, utilizing the "Pennsylvania Handbook of best
management practices for Developing Areas," 1998, Riparian Forested
Buffer, and the priority goal of the riparian vegetation will be the
reduction of thermal impacts on stormwater runoff associated with
impervious areas, with a secondary goal being the protection of
capacity of existing stormwater conveyance channels. These goals will
be achieved through the use of design criteria in § 158-18I of this
chapter, and shall be in addition to any other Borough ordinance
provisions.
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following steps in
sequence to minimize stormwater impacts.
(1) The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious
surfaces, and the degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and
must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime of
the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of being
completed after considering cost, existing technology, and logistics
in light of overall project purposes, and other Borough
requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of
waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that regulated activities are designed
in the following sequence to minimize the increases in stormwater
runoff and impacts to water quality:
§ 158-13 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-14
152:365
(1) Prepare an existing resources and site analysis map (ERSAM),
showing environmentally sensitive areas including, but not limited
to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
vernal pools, floodplains, riparian corridors, hydrologic soil groups
A, B, C, and D, woodlands, surface waters regulated by the state or
federal government, any existing recharge areas, and any other
requirements outlined in the Subdivision and Land Development
and Zoning Ordinances.101
(2) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 158-14B(1) and minimizing total site earth disturbance as much
as possible. The ratio of disturbed area to the entire site area and
measures taken to minimize earth disturbance shall be included in
the ERSAM.
(3) Identify site specific existing conditions, drainage areas, discharge
points (points of interest), recharge areas, and hydrologic soil
groups A and B.
(4) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives (refer
to the Pennsylvania BMP Manual).
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(c) Break up large impervious surface areas.
(d) Protect existing trees [not within protected areas as described
in § 158-14B(1)].
(e) Direct rooftop runoff to pervious areas.
(f) Revegetate and reforest disturbed areas.
(g) Utilize natural flow pathways.
(5) Satisfy volume control standards (§ 158-15).
(6) Satisfy water quality objective (§ 158-16).
(7) Satisfy stream bank erosion protection objective (§ 158-17).
(8) Determine the management district within which the site is located
(refer to § 158-13 and Appendix C102) and conduct a
predevelopment runoff analysis.
(9) Prepare final project design to maintain predevelopment drainage
areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance and
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 186, Zoning,
respectively.
102. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-14 PERKASIE CODE § 158-14
152:366
§ 158-15. Volume control and Infiltration BMPs.
impervious surfaces, to reduce runoff to the maximum extent
possible, and to minimize the use of surface or point discharges.
(10) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis, based on the final
design, to meet the release rate criteria (performance standards).
(11) Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to
discharge, as part of detention, biorentention, direct discharge or
other structural control.
A. For all regulated activities not exempt from requirements of this
chapter pursuant to § 158-5B and § 158-5C, water volume mitigation
controls shall be implemented. The total volume of runoff that must be
infiltrated may be calculated based on the Design Storm Method, in
which case the post-development total runoff volume shall not be
increased from predevelopment total runoff volume for all design
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation. The Design Storm Method requires detailed stormwater
runoff modeling based on site conditions. The required recharge
volume may also be determined based on Equation 158-15.1, described
in § 158-15D. The recharge volume (Rev) must either be reused,
evapotranspired, or infiltrated through structural and/or nonstructural
means. An alternative standard is allowed in this chapter where it can
be demonstrated that due to existing natural site conditions [refer to
§ 158-15A(1)(b)], substantial infiltration and recharge are not occurring
in the predevelopment condition resulting in greater than anticipated
runoff volume.
(1) Alternate standard for runoff volume.
(a) Applicants may request from Perkasie Borough that an
alternate standard be applied, where a portion of the runoff
volume requirement of § 158-15A is not achieved but at least
50% of the total required volume of infiltrated runoff is
achieved. Use of this alternate standard is permitted by the
Borough only after thorough scrutiny has been directed toward
all possible stormwater management options at all possible
locations at the site, consistent with the process set forth in
§ 158-15A(1).
(b) Required analysis for allowing use of alternate standard for
runoff volume. The alternate standard shall be used only in
those situations where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Borough that due to natural site conditions infiltration is
not occurring in the predevelopment condition, resulting in
greater runoff volumes (than would normally be anticipated)
due to bedrock near or at the surface (less than two feet in
depth); presence of seasonal high water table (SHWT) (less
than two feet in depth); and soils with low permeability (e.g.,
§ 158-14 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-15
152:367
0.20 inches per hour or less). Alternate standard shall be
permitted by the Borough only in those cases where the
applicant has demonstrated that one or all of the above
described conditions exist throughout the site, such that there
is no reasonable means of infiltrating required stormwater
volumes and that the property cannot be reasonably developed
utilizing a stormwater management system which infiltrates
the two-year frequency storm event volume (difference
between the pre and post-development storm). The applicant
must demonstrate that there is no area of the site where the
runoff volume requirement can feasibly be infiltrated. It is not
grounds for approval of the alternate standard that infiltrating
the runoff volume requirement will utilize areas that could
otherwise be developed to obtain the most building area or
lots.
(c) Applicants requesting to utilize the alternate standard must
provide a feasibility study for infiltration utilizing BMPs as well
as other runoff volume stormwater management systems and
provide the following information:
[1] Site plan demonstrating the extent of site area with
seasonal high water table (SHWT) (less than two feet): The
site will be evaluated both as to the extent of site with
SHWT and the actual locations of SHWT areas. Use of the
alternate standard shall be permitted by the Borough only
in those cases where it is demonstrated that site areas free
of SHWT are not feasible for use as stormwater BMPs (i.e.,
they are located upgradient from reasonable site building
areas).
[2] Site plan demonstrating extent of site area with less than
two feet to bedrock: The site will be evaluated both as to
the extent of site with shallow depth to bedrock and actual
locations of shallow bedrock areas. Use of the alternate
standard shall be permitted by the Borough only in those
cases where it is demonstrated that site areas free of
shallow bedrock constraints are not feasible for use as
stormwater BMPs (i.e., they are located upgradient from
reasonable site building areas).
[3] The site plan shall demonstrate the extent of site area with
less than 0.20 inches/hour of permeability in accordance
with the soil testing protocol set forth in § 158-15E and
Appendix B.103
[4] Sum of infiltration area.
103. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-15 PERKASIE CODE § 158-15
152:368
[a] In order to utilize the alternate standard, the applicant
must demonstrate that the sum total of limited
infiltration areas [the total of areas described in
§ 158-15A(1)(c)[1] through § 158-15A(1)(c)[3]] exceed
the following percentages of the total site:
[i] 75% (sites less than five acres).
[ii] 80% (sites five to 10 acres).
[iii] 85% (sites greater than 10 acres).
[b] In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that there
is no feasible site area free of the above described
infiltration constraining features which exist in a
location such that the runoff volume requirement can
be achieved.
B. If it is determined to the satisfaction of the Borough that the recharge
volume standard set forth in § 158-15A cannot be achieved, then the
peak rate standards for post-development runoff are modified so that
peak rate discharges from the site for all storms up to the ten-year
frequency design storm must be additionally reduced to be equal to or
less than 75% of the design peak rates permitted pursuant to § 158-13.
C. Water volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect
stream channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and
contribute to water quality improvements. The applicant must
demonstrate how the required recharge volume is controlled through
stormwater best management practices (BMPs) which shall provide the
means necessary to capture, reuse, evaporate, transpire or infiltrate
the total runoff volume. The low-impact development practices
provided in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual shall be utilized for all
regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Volume
controls provided through nonstructural BMPs may be subtracted from
the required recharge volume to determine the volume of structural
BMPs necessary for compliance with § 158-15A of this chapter. Design
and applicability of nonstructural BMPs is identified pursuant to
Chapter 5 of the Pennsylvania BMP Manual. For all proposed
nonstructural BMPs, the applicant shall utilize and submit applicable
checklists included in Chapter 8, Section 8.8 of the Pennsylvania BMP
Manual, to demonstrate that the BMPs are applicable to the project and
to determine the amount of volume credit that may be applied to the
development activity.
D. To determine the volume of runoff that must be infiltrated at a site, the
recharge volume (Rev), the following calculation formula may be used:
Equation 158-15.1
Rev = [(S)(Rv)(A)]/12 (inches/foot)
§ 158-15 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-15
152:369
Where:
Rev = Recharge Volume (acre-feet)
S = Soil specific recharge factor (inches)
A = Site area contributing to the recharge facility (acres)
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient, Rv = 0.05 + 0.009 (I),
Where:
I = percent of the area that is impervious surface
(impervious area ÷ total project study area) x
100%.
"S" shall be obtained based upon hydrologic soil group
based upon the table below:
Hydrologic Soil Group
Soil Specific Recharge Factor
(S)
A 0.38
B 0.26
C 0.14
D 0.07
If more than one hydrologic soil group (HSG) is present at a site,
a composite recharge volume shall be computed based upon the
proportion of total site area within each HSG.
E. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions. All
applicants proposing regulated activities that are not exempt from
preparation and submission of a stormwater management site plan
(SMSP) are required to perform a detailed soils evaluation of the
project site by a qualified geotechnical engineer, geologist and/or soil
scientist, pursuant to Appendix B of this chapter,104 which at minimum
addresses soil permeability, soil mottling, depth to groundwater table,
depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade
stability. Infiltration/permeability tests shall be completed (in
conjunction with the soils evaluation) with an infiltrometer or other
method approved by the Borough Engineer, pursuant to Appendix B, to
determine the saturated hydraulic conductivity of the soil (at the
location and the level of the proposed infiltration surface(s).
"Percolation" tests are not permitted for design of infiltration BMPs,
unless approved by the Borough Engineer.
F. Infiltration BMPs must include safeguards against groundwater
contamination for uses where it is anticipated that pollutants may enter
the facility, by mishap or spill or where salt or chloride might be a
nonpoint source contaminant since soils do little to filter this pollutant.
104. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-15 PERKASIE CODE § 158-15
152:370
§ 158-16. Water quality requirements.
If it is anticipated that pollutants may enter the infiltration facility
(or other stormwater facility impounding water), resulting in potential
groundwater contamination, Perkasie Borough may require the
developer to submit a hydrogeologic study of the site and proposed
infiltration BMPs, prepared by a qualified design professional, to
determine the risk for such contamination. The Borough may require
the installation of a mitigative layer or an impermeable liner in the
BMP and/or detention basins where the possibility of groundwater
contamination exists.
G. Infiltration BMPs within high quality/exceptional value waters shall be
subject to PADEP's Title 25, Chapter 93, Antidegradation Regulations.
H. The requirements for volume control and infiltration are applied to all
disturbed areas, even if they are ultimately to be a pervious or
permeable land use given the extent to which development-related
disturbance leads to compaction of the soils and reduces their
infiltrative capacity.
I. If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be demonstrated
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the design
criteria and specifications of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual
(2006) and as additionally identified pursuant to § 158-18I(1) of this
chapter.
A. In addition to the performance standards and design criteria
requirements of Article III of this chapter, adequate storage and
treatment facilities must be provided to capture and treat stormwater
runoff from developed or disturbed areas, unless otherwise exempted
by provisions of this chapter. The recharge volume computed under
§ 158-15 may be a component of the water quality volume if the
applicant chooses to manage both components in a single facility. If the
recharge volume is less than the water quality volume, the remaining
water quality volume may be captured and treated by methods other
than recharge/infiltration BMPs. The required water quality volume
(WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and to treat a portion
of stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site produced
from 90% of the average annual rainfall (P). The following calculation
formula is to be used to determine the required water quality storage
volume, (WQv), in acre-feet of storage:
Equation 158-16.1
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12 (inches/foot)
§ 158-15 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-16
152:371
Where:
P = Rainfall Amount equal to 90% of events producing this
rainfall (inches). The P value to be utilized to meet this
requirement is 1.95 inches.
A = Area of the project contributing to the water quality BMP
(acres).
Rv = Volumetric Runoff Coefficient, 0.05 + 0.009(I), where I
is the percent of the area that is impervious surface
(impervious area ÷ total project study area) x 100%.
B. Provisions shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at the bottom of
the BMP facility outflow control structure) so that the proposed
condition, one-year frequency design storm takes a minimum of 24
hours to drain from the facility from a point where the maximum volume
of water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). The design of the facility
shall minimize clogging and sedimentation. Orifices smaller than three
inches in diameter are not recommended. However, if the design
engineer can verify that the smaller orifice is protected from clogging
by use of trash racks, etc., smaller orifices may be permitted. Trash
racks are required for any primary orifice.
C. To accomplish Subsection A and B above, the land developer may
submit original and innovative designs to the Borough Engineer for
review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water quality
objectives through a combination of BMPs. Infiltration BMPs shall be
used wherever feasible. Wet ponds, artificial wetlands, or other
permanent BMP acceptable to the Borough, shall be used if infiltration
BMPs are deemed not feasible.
D. Design of BMPs used for water quality control shall be in accordance
with design specifications outlined in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
BMP Manual or other applicable manuals. The following factors must
be considered when evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control
water quality at a given development site:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Topographic slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
§ 158-16 PERKASIE CODE § 158-16
152:372
§ 158-17. Stream bank erosion requirements.
§ 158-18. Design and construction criteria for stormwater
management facilities and best management practices.
(9) Streambank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) Volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) Nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
A. In addition to the water quality volume, to mitigate the impact of
stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion, BMPs must be
designed to detain the proposed conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS
Type II distribution.
B. Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall
remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped,
impeded, or altered (except for road crossings). It is the responsibility
of the developer to stabilize all eroded stream/channel banks within a
subdivision or land development site and obtain all permits necessary
from PADEP, to do so. The developer must submit pictorial
documentation of existing stream/channel beds and banks to determine
whether existing banks must be stabilized.
A. Stormwater runoff which may result from regulated activities identified
in § 158-4 shall be controlled by permanent stormwater runoff BMPs
that will provide the required standards within Article III. The methods
of stormwater control or best management practices (BMPs) which may
be used to meet the required standards are described in this chapter
and the "Pennsylvania Stormwater best management practice Manual,"
December 30, 2006, as amended, and are the preferred methods of
controlling stormwater runoff. The choice of BMPs is not limited to the
ones appearing in this chapter and the Manual; however, any selected
BMP must meet or exceed the runoff peak rate requirements of this
chapter.
B. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
C. Collection system standards.
§ 158-16 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:373
(1) Curb inlets. Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the
uphill side of street intersections, and at intervals along the curb
line to control the maximum amount of encroachment of runoff on
the roadway pavement so that same does not exceed a width of four
feet during the design storm event. Design and location of curb
inlets shall be approved by the Borough.
(2) Pipe materials. All storm sewer piping shall be either Class III
reinforced concrete pipe, except when pipe class and strength is
required to be increased in accordance with PennDOT
specification, or high-density polyethylene pipe. Piping shall be
saw-cut at ends, as needed, and not hammered or broken. All pipe
joints and lift holes must be mortared except where designed for
infiltration.
(3) Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches (or
an equivalent flow area of 1.23 square feet).
(4) Inlet and manhole construction. Inlet and manhole castings and
concrete construction shall be equivalent to PennDOT design
standards. Manhole castings and covers shall have the word
"STORM" cast in two-inch-high letters on the top of the cover. All
inlet grates shall be bicycle-safe heavy-duty structural steel. All
storm sewer inlets must be identified with a storm drain marker.
Storm drain markers shall be embossed into the inlet hood. Marker
shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and include "No
Dumping - Drains to Waterway" and a fish symbol. Alternate
designs/sizes may be used if approved by the Borough.
(5) Open end pipes must be fitted with concrete or high-density
polyethylene endwalls, flared end section, or wing walls in
accordance with PennDOT Standards.
(6) Flow velocity. Stormwater collection systems shall be designed to
produce a maximum permissible velocity of 15 feet per second.
Pipe slopes shall not be less than one half of one percent (0.005 ft/
ft), with the exception that sections of pipe used for infiltration may
have zero percent (0 ft/ft) if approved by the Borough.
(7) Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300
feet, and shall be located wherever branches are connected or sizes
are changed, and wherever there is a change in alignment or
grade. For drainage lines of at least 36 inches diameter, inlets and
manholes may be spaced at intervals of 400 feet.
(8) Storm sewer bedding/backfill requirements shall conform to the
Perkasie Borough Roadway Construction Standards and
Specifications, Chapter 160, Attachment 2, Section 4 (Storm
Sewer).
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:374
(9) Inlets shall be located to intercept concentrated runoff prior to
discharge over public/private rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, and
driveways.
(10) The capacity of all Type 'C' inlets shall be based on a maximum
surface flow to the inlets of four cfs, calculated based on the onehundred-
year frequency design storm event. The maximum flow to
Type 'C' inlets located in low points (such as sag vertical curves)
shall include the overland flow directed to the inlet as well as all
bypass runoff from upstream inlets. The bypass flow from upstream
inlets shall be calculated using inlet efficiency curves included in
PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, latest edition. If the surface flow to
an inlet exceeds four cfs, additional inlets shall be provided
upstream of the inlet to intercept the excessive surface flow. A Type
'C' inlet at a low point of a paved area may be designed to accept a
maximum of six cubic feet per second (CFS). Type 'M' inlets shall
be designed to accept a maximum surface flow of six CFS based on
the one-hundred-year frequency design storm event, unless
otherwise approved by the Borough. Double inlets will not be
permitted where additional pipe and inlets can be placed upstream
to intercept excessive surface flow. A maximum of 12 cfs shall be
permitted to be collected by a Type 'M' inlet located in an isolated
pervious area provided the designer can verify that such an inlet
would not cause stormwater to accumulate on any adjoining public
or private property, outside of a storm sewer easement, and that
the depth of the accumulated stormwater would not exceed 12
inches.
(11) A minimum drop of two inches shall be provided between the inlet
and outlet pipe invert elevations within all inlets and manholes.
When varying pipe sizes enter an inlet or manhole, the elevation of
crown of all pipes shall be matched. Storm sewer pipes shall enter
and exit the sides of inlet boxes and shall not encroach into the
corner, wherever possible.
(12) Stormwater pipes shall have a minimum depth of cover of 18 inches
(including over the bell) or as designated by the American Concrete
Pipe Association (whichever is greater), and in no case shall any
part of the pipe project into the road subbase or curb. Where cover
is restricted, equivalent pipe arches may be specified in lieu of
circular pipe, to achieve required cover. Stormwater pipes
conveying swale flow under driveway crossings shall have a
minimum cover of 12 inches, including over the bell, but in no case
shall the cover be less than that required for the anticipated traffic
loading. For driveway culverts, cover may be less than 12 inches if
the design engineer verifies proposed pipe has sufficient strength
to withstand loading from anticipated design vehicles. Where cover
is restricted, concrete trench drain with bolt-down metal grates
may be used.
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:375
(13) The capacity of all stormwater pipes shall be calculated utilizing
the Manning Equation for open channel flow as applied to closed
conduit flow. The Manning's roughness coefficient shall be 0.13 for
all concrete pipe and 0.12 for all high-density polyethylene (HDPE)
pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the hydraulic grade
line shall be calculated throughout the storm sewer system to
verify that at least one foot of freeboard will be provided in all inlets
and manholes for the design storm event.
(14) Culverts shall be designed based on procedures contained in
Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, HDS #5, U.S. Department
of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. Where
pressure flow is anticipated in storm sewer pipes (non-open
channel flow), the applicant's designer shall be required to
calculate the elevation of the hydraulic grade line through the
storm sewer system. Wherever the hydraulic grade line elevation
exceeds the pipe crown elevation for the design flow, pipes with
watertight joints must be specified.
(15) Storm sewer structures (e.g., endwalls, inlets, pipe sections, etc.)
may not be located on top of, or within 10 feet of electric,
communication, water, sanitary sewer, or gas services and/or
mains, and structures, unless approval is received from the
Borough and the authority or utility having jurisdiction over same.
(16) Stormwater pipes must be oriented at right angles to electric,
water, sanitary sewer, and gas utilities when crossing above or
beneath same. Crossing angles of less than 90° will only be
permitted at the discretion of the Borough. When skewed crossings
are permitted, interior angles between alignment of the storm
sewer pipe and utility may not be less than 45°. Vertical and
horizontal design of storm sewer must be linear.
(17) Roadway underdrain is required along both sides of all proposed
roadways, existing roadways proposed to be widened, and within
existing or proposed roadside swales as directed by the Borough
Engineer.
(18) Where a public storm sewer system is not located within a right-ofway,
or dedicated public property, a twenty-foot-wide easement
shall be established to encompass the storm sewer system. For
multiple pipes or utilities, the width of the easement shall be a
minimum of 30 feet.
(19) A minimum of one foot of freeboard, between the inlet grate and
the design flow elevation, shall be provided in all storm sewer
systems (inlets and manholes) for the one-hundred-year frequency
design storm event.
(20) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly onto a
sidewalk or a street and shall be constructed to discharge above
ground entirely on the subject property, except where such
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:376
discharge could flow across sidewalk or onto a street. If approved
by the Borough Engineer, roof drains may be discharged directly
to a storm sewer system if such system discharges to a stormwater
BMP or water quality facility.
D. Open swales and gutters. Open swales shall be designed on the basis of
Manning's Formula as indicated for collection systems with the
following considerations:
(1) Roughness coefficient. The roughness coefficient shall be 0.040 for
earth swales.
(2) Bank slopes. Slopes for swale banks shall not be steeper than one
vertical to three horizontal.
(3) Flow velocity. The maximum velocity of flow as determined by
Manning's equation shall not exceed the allowable velocities as
shown in the following table for the specific type of material, unless
otherwise approved by the Borough and the Bucks County
Conservation District
Note: Source of the following design criteria is the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Soil
and Water Conservation Publication, Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (Document No.
363-2134-008).
Allowable Velocity
Material
Velocity
(feet per second [fps])
Well established grass on good
soil
Short pliant bladed grass 4.0 to 5.0
Bunch grass, soil exposed 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff stemmed grass 3.0 to 4.0
Earth without vegetation
Fine sand or silt 1.0
Ordinary firm loam 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff clay 3.0 to 5.0
Clay and gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Coarse gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Soft shale 5.0 to 6.0
Shoulders
Earth (as defined above)
Stabilized 6.0
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:377
Allowable Velocity
Material
Velocity
(feet per second [fps])
Paved 10.0 to 15.0
(4) Swales shall be stabilized with biodegradable erosion control
blanket to permit establishment of permanent vegetation. Swales
shall be of such shape and size to effectively contain the onehundred-
year, Rational Method design storm, or greater, and to
conform to all other specifications of the Borough.
(5) To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the
lower side of roads or streets, and to divert flow away from building
areas, the cross-section of the street as constructed shall provide
for parallel ditches or swales or curb on the lower side which shall
discharge only at drainage easements, unless otherwise approved
by the Borough.
(6) Gutters and swales adjacent to road paving shall be permitted to
carry a maximum flow of four cubic feet per second prior to
discharge away from the street surface, unless it is proven to the
satisfaction of the Borough by engineering calculations that the
road slopes or other factors would allow higher gutter or swale
capacity.
(7) Flows larger than those permitted in gutters and roadside swales
may be conveyed in swales outside the required road right-of-way
in separate drainage easements, or may be conveyed in pipes or
culverts inside or outside the required road right-of-way.
(8) Existing and proposed swales shall be provided with underdrains
as deemed necessary by the Borough should overland seepage
result in potential maintenance problems. Underdrains must
discharge into a natural drainage channel or stormwater
management system.
(9) Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away
from buildings, they shall be sodded, landscaped, or otherwise
protected as required and shall be of a slope, shape, and size
conforming to the requirements of the Borough. Concentration of
surface water runoff shall be permitted only in swales,
watercourses, retention or detention basins, bioretention areas, or
other areas designed to meet the objectives of this chapter.
(10) Except for drainage at roadway stream crossings, artificial swale
discharge shall be set back 75 feet from a receiving waterway, and
shall be diffused or spread out to reduce and eliminate highvelocity
discharges to the impacted ground surface.
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:378
E. Bridge and culvert design. Any proposed bridge or culvert to convey
flow within a watercourse, perennial stream, intermittent stream or
ephemeral stream shall be designed in accordance with the following
principals:
(1) Culverts and bridges shall be designed with an open bottom to
maintain natural sediment transport and bed roughness, avoiding
acceleration of water velocity above the natural (preexisting)
condition. Rock (rip rap) lining (native material if possible) shall be
installed within the culvert as needed to prevent erosion within the
structure. Approximate top of rock lining must be at the level of the
existing stream bottom so as to maintain unimpeded movement of
native animal species and a normal water depth of 12 inches unless
a greater depth is required by PADEP.
(2) Bottom of opening shall be designed to match the bankfull channel
condition in terms of width and depth. The cross-sectional area of
the bankfull channel (measured at a reference location upstream of
the structure) shall be matched with area in the crossing structure.
(3) Above the bankfull elevation, the width shall increase a minimum of
30% to disperse the energy of higher flow volumes and avoid
undermining of the supporting structure by secondary currents.
(4) The total cross-sectional area of the structure opening must be
equal to or greater than the flood-prone area (cross-sectional
stream area at a depth of twice the maximum bankfull depth,
measured at a reference location upstream of the structure). The
flood prone area is approximately equal to the area flooded by a
fifty-year return period flood.
(5) All bridges, culverts, and drainage channels shall be designed to
convey a flow rate equal to a one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storm as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Technical Release No. 55. All bridges and
culverts shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year design
storm without increasing the extent and depth of the one-hundredyear
floodplain, upstream or downstream of the structure.
F. Storm sewer design.
(1) Design flow rate. The storm sewer system shall be designed to
carry the one-hundred-year frequency design storm peak flow rate.
The drainage area and runoff coefficient to each inlet shall be
indicated on the stormwater management plan. The one-hundredyear
flow rate shall be determined by the Rational Method formula:
Q = CIA
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:379
Where:
Q = Peak runoff rate measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs)
C = Runoff coefficient - The coefficient of stormwater
runoff includes many variables, such as ground
slope, ground cover, shape of drainage area, etc.
I = Intensity — Average rainfall intensity in inches per
hour for a time equal to the time of concentration
A = Area — Drainage area in acres
Values for the rainfall intensity shall be based on NOAA Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3.0, rain data found in Table A-3 and Figure A-2
of Appendix A of this chapter.
(2) Consideration shall be given to future land use changes in the
drainage area in selecting the Rational ("C") coefficient. For
drainage areas containing several different types of ground cover, a
weighted value of "C" shall be used.
(3) In determining the peak flow rate to individual storm sewer inlets
(or other collection structures) the time of concentration method
(as referenced in § 158-19) shall be used for inlet drainage areas in
excess of one acre, unless otherwise approved by the Borough. For
inlet drainage areas less than one acre, a five-minute time of
concentration shall be used unless otherwise approved by the
Borough.
(4) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration (storm
duration) results in a pipe size exceeding a thirty-inch diameter
pipe (or equivalent flow area of 4.9 square feet), the time of
concentration approach (as defined herein) shall be used in
determining storm duration.
(5) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration results
in a pipe size exceeding 30 inches, within any run of pipe, the time
of concentration approach may be used for sizing of pipes from that
point on, by adjusting the time of concentration.
(6) Overflow system. An overflow system shall be provided to carry all
bypass flow and/or flow in excess of storm sewer pipe design
capacity, to the detention basin (or other approved outlet point)
when the capacity of the system is exceeded. Stormwater runoff
will not be permitted to surcharge from storm sewer structures
[refer to § 158-18C(19)].
(7) Except for drainage at roadway stream crossings, pipe discharge
shall be set back 75 feet from a receiving waterway, and the pipe
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:380
discharge shall be diffused or spread out to reduce and eliminate
high-velocity discharges to the impacted ground surface.
G. Grading and drainage.
(1) After completion of rough grading, a minimum of eight inches of
topsoil shall be returned to remaining disturbed areas prior to final
grading and seeding.
(2) Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away
from buildings and to prevent the collection of storm water in
pools. Minimum two-percent slopes shall be maintained away from
and around all structures. Separation between the top of
foundation wall (or slab) and final grade shall comply with Perkasie
Borough Building Code requirements.
(3) Construction. The developer shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures and/or pipe which are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off such surface waters
to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural water course.
(4) Excavation. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in
slope than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 = 25%), except under
one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than 4:1 and a written
statement (certification) from a professional civil engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
experienced in erosion control, to this effect is submitted to the
Borough Engineer for review. This statement shall indicate the
site has been inspected and that the deviation from the slope
specified herein will not result in injury to persons or damage
to property.
(b) A concrete, segmental block, or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Borough requirements, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(5) Fill. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 = 25%)
except under one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys, or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a professional civil engineer, licensed
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in
erosion control, certifying the site has been inspected and that
the proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:381
endanger any property or result in property damage, is
submitted to and approved by the Borough.
(c) A concrete, segmental block, or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Borough requirements, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(6) Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a
minimum of five feet from property or right-of-way lines of streets
or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property. Where walls or slopes
(steeper than two horizontal to one vertical) are approved under
the criteria in this chapter, and are four feet or more in height, a
protective fence, no less than four feet in height, shall be required
at the top of the wall (or bank).
(7) Clean up. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances
whatsoever during construction.
(8) Design of erosion and sedimentation control facilities (particularly
stormwater/sediment basins) shall incorporate best management
practices as defined herein.
(9) Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. Wherever
feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and
supplemented. Cut and fills shall not endanger or otherwise
adversely impact adjoining property.
(10)No grading equipment shall be permitted to be loaded and/or
unloaded on a public street, and no grading equipment shall be
permitted to travel on or across a public street unless licensed for
operation on public thoroughfares.
(11) Grading equipment shall not be permitted to cross intermittent and
perennial streams. Temporary crossing shall only be permitted
where application is made, and approval is received, from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (where
applicable), the Bucks County Conservation District, and Perkasie
Borough.
(12) Design of energy dissipation for high volume and/or high velocity
discharge from storm sewer pipes and channels shall be in
accordance with Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 14,
"Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and
Channels" as published by Department of Transportation, FHA,
when deemed necessary by the Borough, and as approved by the
Bucks County Conservation District.
(13) To control the dissemination of mud and dirt on to public roads and
driveways, tire cleaning areas constructed of AASHTO #1 stone
(underlain by geotextile structural fabric), at least 50 feet in length,
shall be installed at each point of access to the site and individual
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:382
lots (upon construction of internal streets in a binder condition).
When deemed necessary by the Borough, washing stations shall
also be set-up at every construction entrance in order to wash
mud and dirt from exiting vehicles. Appropriate measures must be
taken to control runoff from such locations. The developer shall be
responsible for the placement of appropriate signage identifying
construction entrances and washing stations. Construction
entrances shall be maintained by the developer during
construction, as determined by the Borough.
(14) In the event any mud and/or debris is transported from the site
onto a public roadway, the debris shall be removed immediately
and the roadway swept and/or washed as deemed necessary by the
Borough at the owner's expense.
(15) Adequate provision shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavation and the sloping surfaces of
fills.
H. Stormwater detention/retention basins.
(1) If permanent ponds (retention basin) are proposed, the developer
shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed to protect the
public's health and safety. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under the PADEP Chapter 105
regulations, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning
dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger than a onehundred-
year event.
(2) During construction, duly authorized representatives of Perkasie
Borough may enter at any reasonable time upon any property
within the Borough to investigate whether construction activity is
in compliance with this chapter.
(3) When basins are provided, they shall be designed to utilize the
natural contours of the land whenever possible. When such design
is not practical, the construction of the basin shall utilize slopes as
flat as possible to blend the structure into the terrain. To minimize
the visual impact of detention basins, they shall be designed to
avoid the need for safety fencing. To meet this requirement,
detention basins shall be designed as follows:
(a) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 24 inches for a twoyear
or ten-year storm event.
(b) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 36 inches for a onehundred-
year storm event.
(c) The basin inflow and outflow structures shall not be located
directly across from each other and shall not be in close
proximity to one another. A length-to-width ratio in all
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:383
detention/retention basins and other such storage facilities
of at least 2:1 shall be provided to maximize the flow path
between the inflow point and the outlet structure. The distance
between these two structures must be at least 50% of the
maximum length of the basin as measured at the top of berm
elevation. Alternatively, a means for extending the time of
surface flow from basin inflow point to basin outlet structure,
designed to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, may be
utilized.
(4) Landscaping and planting in and around the perimeter of basins
shall be provided. Proposed planting shall also be in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,105 and as recommended by the Borough
Engineer. When a detention basin is not designed as a stormwater
management constructed wetland, it shall be planted with lowmaintenance
grass or similar satisfactory to the Borough.
(5) If a stormwater management basin will serve as a temporary
sediment control device, the temporary sediment control measures
shall be shown including perforated riser pipes or standboxes, filter
berms, clean-out stakes and other measures as may be required by
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Chapter
102 Regulations. Plans for such facilities shall require Bucks
County Conservation District approval prior to implementation.
Sedimentation basins shall be in place prior to any earthmoving
activities within their tributary drainage areas. A note identifying
the above criteria shall be on all plan sheets required to be
recorded as well as the development agreement with the Borough
and the stormwater management facilities operation and
maintenance agreement.
(6) As-built drawings of the stormwater management basins(s) shall be
submitted to the Borough for review. The basin shall not be
considered functional until it is proved by the developer that the
basin meets the volume requirements and the outflow
characteristics of the original design of the basin(s).
(7) Runoff shall not be directed to any infiltration structure until all
tributary drainage areas are permanently stabilized.
(8) Except where otherwise identified herein, all detention or retention
basins shall have slopes of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 =
25%), or flatter on the basin's outer berm and five horizontal to one
vertical or less on the basin's inner berm. The top or toe of any
slope shall be located a minimum of five feet from any property
line. The maximum difference between the top of berm elevation
and the invert elevation of the outlet structure shall be seven feet.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:384
(9) All portions of a detention basin bottom shall have a minimum slope
of 2%. For portions of basin bottoms with grades less than 2%, the
applicant shall provide a landscape design which minimizes
maintenance provisions and encourages infiltration. These
requirements may be altered when approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(10) Basin berm construction requirements.
(a) Site preparation. Areas under the embankment and any
structural works shall be cleared, grubbed, and the topsoil
stripped to remove the trees, vegetation, roots or other
objectionable material. In order to facilitate clean-out and
restoration, the pool area will be cleared of all brush and
excess trees except where designed to retain such existing
vegetation as stormwater BMPs.
(b) Cut off trench. A cut-off trench will be excavated along the
centerline dam on earth fill embankments. The minimum depth
shall be two feet. The cut-off trench shall extend up both
abutments to the riser crest elevation. The minimum bottom
width shall be eight feet but wide enough to permit operation
of compaction equipment. The side slopes shall be no steeper
than 1:1. Compaction requirements shall be the same as those
for the embankment. The trench shall be kept free from
standing water during the backfilling operations.
(c) Embankment:
[1] The fill material shall be taken from the selected borrow
areas. It shall be free of roots, wood vegetation, oversized
stones, rocks or other objectionable material. Areas on
which fill is to be placed shall be scarified prior to
placement of fill.
[2] The fill material should contain sufficient moisture so that
it can be formed by hand into a ball without crumbling. If
water can be squeezed out of the ball, it is too wet for
proper compaction.
[3] Fill material will be placed in six- to eight-inch layers and
shall be continuous over the entire length of the fill. Fill
material must be compacted to a minimum of 95% of
Modified Proctor Density as established by ASTM D-1557.
Compaction testing by a certified soils engineer/geologist
must be completed as directed by the Borough Engineer to
verify adequate compaction has been achieved.
Compaction tests shall be run on the leading and trailing
edge of the berm along with the top of the berm.
Verification of required compaction shall be submitted to
the Borough prior to utilization of any basin for
stormwater management.
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:385
(11) Emergency overflow facilities/spillway shall be provided within
basins in order to convey basin inflow in excess of design flows, out
of the basin, or in the event the outlet structure becomes blocked
and is unable to convey flow. Emergency spillways discharging over
embankments shall be constructed of an approved liner to protect
the berm against erosion. Design calculations shall be provided to
the Borough demonstrating that the liner is sufficient to handle up
to and including the design storm. The approved lining shall extend
to the toe of the embankment on the outside of the berm, and shall
extend to an elevation of three feet below the spillway crest on the
inside of the berm. Vegetated spillways may be utilized for
spillways constructed entirely on undisturbed ground (i.e., not
discharging over fill material). A dense cover of vegetation shall be
rapidly established in such spillways by sodding or seeding with a
geotextile anchor. The vegetated spillway must be stabilized before
runoff is directed to the basin. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be equivalent to the peak flow rate of the
one-hundred-year, post-development design storm (entering to the
basin).
(12) In all cases, the discharge end of the basin shall be provided with a
properly designed outlet control structure (headwall, orifice
structure or other approved flow control structure), culvert pipe,
and endwall. Perforated riser pipes alone, without provision for
permanent outlet control structure (as stated above), and culvert
pipe are not permitted for permanent basins.
(13) The minimum top of basin berm width (at the design elevation)
shall be 10 feet.
(14) The minimum freeboard through the emergency spillway shall be
one foot. "Freeboard" is defined as the difference between the
design flow elevation through the spillway and the elevation of the
top of the settled basin berm.
(15) Anti-seep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel and shall
be centered within the normal saturation zone of the berm. The
anti-seep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall be
watertight. The anti-seep collars shall be cast-in-place in the field
and extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the
principal pipe barrel. Precast collars shall be permitted if approved
by the Borough Engineer. A minimum of two collars shall be
installed on each basin outlet pipe. Collars shall have a minimum
thickness of 12 inches and may not be installed within two feet of
pipe joints.
(16) A perforated sediment control structure, sized in accordance with
Bucks County Conservation District requirements, shall be
provided at each basin outlet structure (if more than one is to be
utilized) for sediment control. Sediment control structures shall not
be removed until the entire area tributary to the basin has been
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:386
permanently stabilized and until approved by the Bucks County
Conservation District.
(17) Stormwater management facility outlet piping shall be Class III
reinforced O-ring concrete pipe. All joints shall be mortared.
Crushed stone bedding/backfill shall not be utilized through basin
berms.
(18) The top of the basin outflow control structure box (emergency
overflow grate) shall be at least six inches lower than the elevation
of the earthen emergency spillway. Six inches, minimum, is also
required between the one-hundred-year water surface elevation
and the emergency overflow grate on the basin outflow control
structure.
(19) Energy dissipating devices (rock lining/rip rap, or other approved
materials) shall be provided at all basin outlets and shall be sized in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation Publication,
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, latest
revision.
(20) Stone gabion baskets or concrete or segmental block retaining
walls shall not be permitted for use in construction of detention/
retention basins within the berm or within the one-hundred-year
water surface elevation (as measured through the earthen
emergency spillway).
(21) Access easement and stabilized drive to stormwater detention
facilities shall be provided for maintenance and operation. This
access easement shall be cleared and, when possible, be at least 20
feet in width. Multiple accesses shall be encouraged for major
facilities. The developer shall provide access easements and drives
of interlocked, reinforced pervious paving systems (back-filled with
topsoil and seeded) or other similar paver acceptable to the
Borough Engineer, over a six-inch bed of compacted PennDOT type
3A coarse aggregate (or approved equivalent). Accessways to
basins shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and be no steeper in
slope than 10 feet horizontal to one foot vertical (10:1). In addition,
depressed curb and reinforced concrete apron (six-inch minimum
thickness) shall be provided where the accessway enters a street/
driveway and the stabilized driveway shall extend from the bottom
of the interior basin berm embankment to the point of access to the
basin from a public right-of-way or paved driveway within an access
easement. Access easement shall be owned and maintained by the
individual lot owner(s) or homeowner's association but shall be
established to permit access by Perkasie Borough or its designee,
for emergency inspection and/or maintenance, at any reasonable
time.
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:387
(22) If the basin is not designed to meet the requirements of
§ 158-18H(3), a split rail fence must be provided as follows:
(a) A level area (two-percent slope) eight feet in width shall be
provided on both the inside and outside of the fence, along the
entire length of the fence for proper access by maintenance
equipment. The total width of this generally level area shall be
at least 16 feet.
(b) Each basin fence installation shall include two points of access
with ten-foot-wide self-closing, self-latch gates to allow for
maintenance equipment/vehicle access.
(c) Fence shall be split-rail consisting of locust posts (two or three
rail), four feet high, minimum, with assorted hardwood rails
(eight feet to 10 feet long), and epoxy-coated wire mesh (black
or green in color) installed six inches above finished grade. The
mesh shall be installed on the outside of the fence.
(d) Split rail fence shall also be required around any detention or
retention basin, where directed by Perkasie Borough.
(23) Landscaping:
(a) The perimeter berms and embankments of retention/detention
basins including wet ponds and artificial wetland stormwater
management BMPs shall be designed to create a natural
appearance and reduce future maintenance requirements.
Landscaping shall include a mixture of native tall grasses and
perennial plants, ground cover, shrubs, and trees to eliminate
the necessity of periodic mowing.
(b) Artificial wetland basins shall be designed pursuant to
requirements of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual.
Plant material and arrangement shall be subject to approval of
the Borough Engineer.
(c) Required planting.
[1] The perimeter of the retention/detention basin shall be
landscaped with a mixture of deciduous trees, evergreens,
and shrubs arranged in an informal manner. Retention
basin (wet ponds) and artificial wetland basin landscaping
shall be designed to create a "natural" appearance.
Minimum plant material shall include the following per
100 linear feet of basin perimeter measured at the onehundred-
year water surface elevation:
[a] Three evergreen trees (minimum height five feet).
[b] Two deciduous trees (minimum caliper 2 1/2 inches).
[c] Five shrubs (minimum height three feet).
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:388
[2] Retention/detention basin landscaping design is subject to
approval by the Borough.
(24) Special requirements for stormwater detention/retention BMPs
within defined exceptional-value and high-quality watersheds as
defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, Title 25,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Rules and
Regulations:
(a) Temperature-sensitive BMPs and stormwater conveyance
systems are to be used and designed with storage pool areas
and supply outflow channels, and shaded with trees. At a
minimum, the southern half of pond shorelines shall be planted
with shade or canopy trees within 10 feet of the pond
shoreline. In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum
slope allowed on the berm area to be planted is 10 to one. This
will lessen the destabilization of berm soils due to root growth.
A long-term maintenance schedule and management plan for
the thermal control BMPs must be identified on the stormwater
management site plan and recorded at the Bucks County
Recorder of Deeds for all development sites.
(b) As an alternative to mitigating the temperature of stormwater
runoff as described in § 158-18H(25)(a), alternative
temperature-sensitive BMPs may be utilized, if approved by the
Borough Engineer, upon the applicant demonstrating such
BMPs will effectively reduce the temperature of detained
runoff before it is released from the development site. Such
alternative BMPs may include, but are not limited to, facilities
that cool runoff through underground storage and filtration
and retention ponds/basins where outflow from the facility is
drawn from a depth of five feet (or greater) below the
permanent pool surface.
(25) The developer shall provide written assurance, satisfactory to the
Borough, that the retention/detention basin will be properly
maintained. Such assurances shall be in a form to act as a covenant
that will run with the land, and shall provide Borough maintenance
at the cost of the landowner in case of default, and further provide
for assessment of costs and penalties in case of default.
(26) As an alternate to the above subsection, the Borough may, at their
own option, assume responsibility of the basin and may accept
dedication of the basin by the developer. If the retention/detention
basin is dedicated or offered to the Borough for long-term
maintenance, the following regulations shall apply:
(a) The dedicated area shall include the entire ponded area for the
one-hundred-year storm event and the outside slope at the
berm.
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:389
(b) The dedicated area shall not be considered part of the open
space and recreation land required elsewhere in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and Zoning
Ordinance.106
(c) The developer shall provide for the special financial burden the
Borough will be accepting if the Borough accepts the detention
basin maintenance. To help mitigate this future financial
burden, the developer shall contribute to the Borough a cash
payment in the amount established by resolution of the Council
for any detention/retention basin site or area dedicated to the
Borough and being accepted by the Borough.
I. All developments which create impervious surface shall provide
capacity for and treatment of the water quality volume and recharge
volume, unless exempt from applicability under § 158-5. Developers
shall utilize BMPs to provide for additional water quality improvement
and groundwater recharge. In evaluating potential stormwater BMPs,
the order of preference is as follows: (1) infiltration BMPs; (2) flow
attenuation methods (e.g., vegetated open swales and natural
depressions); (3) artificial wetlands, bioretention structures, and wet
ponds; (4) minimum first flush detention or dual purpose detention
(where appropriate). Infiltration BMPs shall be utilized unless the
applicant can demonstrate use of infiltration techniques is not feasible
due to site conditions based upon site specific soil testing. Vegetated
swales, wetlands or artificial wetlands and bioretention structures shall
be utilized wherever possible if infiltration BMPs are deemed
unfeasible. BMP techniques can and should be used in conjunction with
each other (e.g., vegetated swales with infiltration or retention
facilities).
(1) Infiltration best management practices (BMPs). Infiltration BMPs
shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria and
specifications of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (2006)
and shall conform to the following minimum requirements:
(a) A soils evaluation and infiltration/permeability testing of the
project site shall be conducted in accordance with Appendix B
of this chapter.107
(b) A minimum soil depth of 24 inches shall be provided between
the bottom of the infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or
seasonally high water table. The minimum required separation
between the infiltration surface and these limiting zones shall
be increased by the Borough should project specific conditions
exist (such as anticipated increased contaminants) which
dictate greater prevention of groundwater contamination.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 186, Zoning,
respectively.
107. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:390
(c) Infiltration BMPs must have an infiltration rate sufficient to
accept the design stormwater load and dewater completely as
determined by field permeability tests. The minimum fieldtested
infiltration rate permitted for construction of infiltration
BMPs shall be 0.2 inches/hour (in/hr). A safety factor of 50%
shall be applied to field-tested rates to determine the
infiltration rate that must be utilized for design of infiltration
BMPs (e.g., for soil which measured 0.4 in/hr, the BMP design
rate shall be 0.2 in/hr to insure effective infiltration after
construction).
(d) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive rooftop runoff shall
include appropriate measures such as leaf traps and cleanouts
to prevent clogging by vegetation. Surface inflows shall be
designed to prevent direct discharge of sediment into the
infiltration system.
(e) Adequate storage shall be provided to accommodate the
volume of runoff calculated as the difference between the
predevelopment runoff volume and post-development runoff
volume based on the one-hundred-year design storm.
(f) The facility shall be designed to control the post-development
peak rate of runoff to the predevelopment peak rate of runoff
for all design storms identified in § 158-13 of this chapter.
(g) An overflow or spillway shall be provided that safely permits
the passing of runoff greater than that occurring during the
one-hundred-year design storm event.
(h) Underground infiltration basins and BMPs shall have positive
overflow controls to prevent storage within one foot of the
finished surface over the basin.
(i) When infiltration methods such as seepage pits, beds, or
trenches are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed
septic tanks, infiltration areas, and wells must be shown. A
separation distance of no less than 50 feet shall be provided
between any septic system and any facility used for
stormwater management and infiltration.
(j) A minimum of 10 feet of undisturbed soil shall separate the
foundation wall of any building and an infiltration BMP.
(k) All infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely
infiltrate runoff volume within four days (96 hours) from the
peak of the design storm.
(l) Special attention shall be paid to proper installation of
infiltration-oriented stormwater management systems during
the construction and to careful avoidance of soil compaction
during site development. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:391
shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during
the construction phase, so as to maintain their maximum
infiltration capacity.
(m) The Borough may require the installation of a mitigative layer
or an impermeable liner in an infiltration BMP and/or other
stormwater structure that impounds runoff, where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the Borough.
(n) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff
until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration
BMP has achieved final stabilization.
(o) Infiltration BMPs shall be designed based on field-tested
infiltration/permeability rates at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface(s) and based on a safety factor of 50%.
(2) Non-infiltration facilities used as best management practices
(BMPs). All facilities shall be designed in accordance to the design
criteria and specifications in the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP
Manual.
(3) Artificial wetlands, wet ponds, and bioretention structures.
(a) Wet pond BMPs shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Wet ponds shall be constructed on hydric or wet soils and/
or soils which have an infiltration rate of less than 0.2
inches/hour.
[2] A minimum drainage area of five acres shall be directed to
the pond unless a source of recharge is utilized such as a
natural spring or well.
[3] The length of the pond between the inflow and outlet
points shall be maximized. In addition, an irregular
shoreline shall be provided. By maximizing the flow length
through the pond and providing an irregular shoreline, the
greatest water quality benefit will be achieved by
minimizing "short circuiting" of runoff flowing through the
pond.
[4] A shallow forebay shall be provided adjacent to all inflow
areas. The forebay shall be planted as a marsh with
emergent wetland vegetation. The forebay serves to
enhance sediment trapping and pollutant removal, as well
as concentrating accumulated sediment in an area where
it can be readily removed.
[5] All wet ponds shall be designed with public safety as a
primary concern. An aquatic safety bench shall be
provided around the perimeter of the permanent pool. The
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:392
depth of the bench shall be a maximum of 15 inches and a
minimum of 12 inches for a width of at least 10 feet. A 3:1
slope shall lead from the edge of the safety bench toward
the deep water portion of the pond. At least 15 feet of 3:1
slope shall be provided from the edge of the safety bench.
Slopes in the remainder of the pond below the permanent
pool elevation shall be a maximum of 2:1.
[6] The perimeter slope above the permanent pool shall have a
maximum slope of 5:1.
[7] Wet ponds shall have a deep water zone of at least five feet
to encourage gravity settling of suspended fines, and
prevent stagnation and possible eutrophication.
[8] Wet ponds shall be capable of being substantially drained
by gravity flow. Wet ponds shall be equipped with a
manually operated drain that can be secured against
unauthorized operation.
[9] A planting plan shall be developed for the wet pond,
showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland
plantings required pursuant to this chapter and the Zoning
and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances
(where specifically identified).108
[10]Wet ponds shall be designed to discourage use by Canada
geese. Techniques employed shall include the following:
[a] Elimination of straight shorelines, islands, and
peninsulas;
[b] Placement of walking paths (where applicable) along
the shoreline;
[c] Placement of grassed areas (i.e., playing fields) at
least 450 feet from the water surface;
[d] Vegetative barriers;
[e] Rock barriers;
[f] Installation of tall trees within 10 feet of the water
surface;
[g] Use of ground covers not palatable to Canada geese;
[h] Other techniques as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(b) Artificial wetland BMPs shall meet the following requirements:
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 186, Zoning,
respectively.
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:393
[1] Artificial wetlands shall be constructed on hydric or wet
soils and/or soils which have an infiltration rate of less
than 0.2 inches/hour.
[2] Runoff entering artificial wetlands shall be filtered through
a sediment removal device before entering the wetland.
[3] A planting plan shall be developed for the artificial wetland
showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland
plantings required pursuant to this chapter and the Zoning
and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances
(where specifically identified).109 The planting plan shall
be developed to provide a diversity of species resulting in a
dense stand of wetland vegetation.
[4] At least 75% of the surface area of the wetland shall be
developed as a shallow water emergent wetland, with a
water depth of less than 12 inches. The reminder shall be
constructed as open water with depths between two feet
and four feet.
(4) Minimum first flush detention/dual purpose BMPs.
(a) Minimum first flush detention/dual purpose detention basin
BMPs shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
[1] Post-development runoff from a "water quality storm" (a
one-year, twenty-four-hour event) shall be released over a
minimum period of 24 hours.
[2] Two stage basins shall be utilized where first flush
detention will be employed for water quality and
conventional detention used for peak rate control of
storms exceeding the one-year, twenty-four-hour event.
[3] Two stage basins shall be constructed so that the lower
part of the basin is graded to detain stormwater from the
"water quality storm," and the remainder of the basin
graded as a flat overbank area to provide storage only for
the larger, less frequent storm events. The overbank area
is encouraged to be developed as an active or passive
recreational area.
[4] The area inundated by the "water quality storm" is
encouraged to be maintained as a wetland environment,
which will increase the water quality benefits of the first
flush/dual purpose detention basin, and will prevent the
need for mowing of a frequently saturated area.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 186, Zoning,
respectively.
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-18
152:394
J. Riparian corridor restoration. Within all major subdivisions and
nonresidential land developments, from the top of watercourse bank,
75 feet on either side of the watercourse, which contains wetlands and/
or floodplain, shall be planted to establish a Zone 1 and Zone 2 buffer in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Handbook of best management
practices for Developing Areas, 1998, Riparian Forested Buffer. Where
existing vegetation on the site essentially duplicates buffer
requirements, this provision shall not apply. Additionally, this
requirement may be modified or waived by Borough Council where
existing man-made improvements or agricultural operations to be
retained encroach within the buffer area.
K. General design requirements.
(1) Prior to finish grading of a development site and final overlay of
streets, roads, and driveways, temporary measures, acceptable to
the Borough, shall be taken to ensure that all runoff intended to be
intercepted and collected by an inlet or other facility will be
collected. The plan shall include such details, notes, or
specification including bituminous "eyebrows" at inlets, diversion
berms, etc.
(2) Water originating from other than natural sources, such as air
conditioning units, sump pumps, or other dry weather flow,
wherever practical and possible, shall be connected to a
stormwater management BMP or stormwater conveyance facility
that is designed as part of a stormwater management BMP.
(3) All stormwater runoff and floodplain calculations and stormwater
management facilities design shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Borough for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not a portion.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Borough shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the occupancy or continuation of an adverse
hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed.
L. All stormwater control facility designs shall conform to the applicable
standards and specifications of the following governmental and
institutional agencies:
(1) American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM).
(2) Asphalt Institute (AI).
§ 158-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-18
152:395
§ 158-19. Calculation methodology.
(3) Bucks County Conservation District (BCCD).
(4) Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).
(5) National Crushed Stone Association (NCSA).
(6) National Sand and Gravel Association (NSGA).
(7) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP).
(8) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT).
(9) U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Pennsylvania (USDA, NRCS, PA)
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations shall use generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex
method. Table 158-19.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods.
Method must be selected by the applicant based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site.
(1) The Rational Method may be used to estimate peak discharges
from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres. The Rational
Method is recommended for drainage areas under 100 acres.
Table 158-19.1 Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Designs
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans
within limitations
described in TR-55
HEC-1, HEC-HMS US Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of
a hydrologic computer
model is desirable of
necessary; simpler than
TR-20 or HEC-1
§ 158-18 PERKASIE CODE § 158-19
152:396
Table 158-19.1 Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Designs
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
Applicable sites less than
200 acres, or as
approved by the
Borough Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved
by the Borough Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
rain data corresponding to the Perkasie, Pennsylvania rain gage, as
presented in Table A-1 of Appendix A of this chapter.110 The SCS Type II
rainfall curve data from NOAA is listed in Figure A-1 in Appendix A of
this chapter. This data may also be directly retrieved from the NOAA
Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0 website: hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds.
If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is
used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall
shall be 24 hours.
C. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table A-2 in Appendix A of this chapter.111
D. Suggested runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed
conditions for use in the Rational Method are contained in Table A-4 in
Appendix A of this chapter.112
E. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate time-of-concentration for overland flow and
return periods from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 Version 3.0, rain data
corresponding to the Perkasie, Pennsylvania rain gage, as presented in
Table A-3 of Appendix A of this chapter. The Rational Method rainfall
curve data from NOAA is listed in Figure A-2 in Appendix A of this
chapter.113 Times-of-concentration for overland flow shall be calculated
using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall
be computed using Manning's equation.
110. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-19 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-19
152:397
F. For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination for all
development activity, undeveloped land and existing impervious
surfaces shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition, unless the
natural ground cover generates a lower curve number (CN) or Rational
'C' value (e.g., forest), as listed in Tables A-2 and A-4 in Appendix A of
this chapter.114 Wooded areas shall use a ground cover of "woods in
good condition." An area shall be considered wooded if there is a
contiguous canopy of trees existing over an area of 1/4 acre or more.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table A-5 in Appendix A of this
chapter.115
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater management facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing
the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the storage
indication method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in area,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph.
J. The time of concentration (Tc) is the time required for water to flow
from the hydraulically most remote point of the drainage area to the
point of interest (design point). Use of the rational formula requires
calculation of a Tc for each design point within the drainage basin.
Travel time estimation for the rational method shall be based on NRCS
Technical Release No. 55 (2nd Edition). For design purposes the time of
concentration may not be less than five minutes. Travel time (Tt) is the
time it takes runoff to travel from one location to another in a
watershed (subreach) and is a component of time of concentration. Tc is
computed by summing all the travel times for consecutive components
of the drainage conveyance system.
K. Water moves through a watershed as sheet flow, shallow concentrated
flow, open channel flow, or some combination of these. Sheet flow rates
shall be calculated using the NRCS TR-55 (1986) variation of the
kinematic wave equation. Sheet flow length may not exceed 50 feet
over paved surfaces and 150 feet over unpaved surfaces. Maximum
permitted sheet flow length shall be 150 feet unless site specific
conditions exist (that can be demonstrated) that warrant an increase of
the sheet flow length. Under no circumstances shall sheet flow length
exceed 300 feet. Shallow concentrated flow time and open channel flow
time shall be calculated using standard engineering methodologies.
114. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-19 PERKASIE CODE § 158-20
152:398
§ 158-20. Erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
A. Whenever vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such activity
must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part 1, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Sub-Part C, protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, and in
accordance with the Bucks County Conservation District and the
standards and specifications of the Borough. Various BMPs and their
design standards are identified in the PADEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (March 2012), as amended and
updated.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a PADEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities of one acre or more.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be submitted to the Borough.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by PADEP or Bucks County Conservation District
regulations, shall be available at the project site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed,
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity. Thirty-three-inch
super filter fabric fence (or other approved protection mechanism)
must be installed around proposed infiltration areas to prevent
encroachment and compaction by construction equipment.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization. If necessary, thirty-three-inch super
filter fabric fence (or other approved protection mechanism) must
be installed in the vicinity of infiltration area to prevent
contamination by runoff containing suspended sediment.
(3) Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from
encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles to maintain the
existing infiltration characteristics of the soil. Four-foot-high
orange safety fence or other similar protection fence approved by
the Borough must be installed around the entire limit of
§ 158-20 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-20
152:399
disturbance/clearing prior to commencement of earthmoving
activities, and maintained until completion of all construction
activity.
G. Peak discharge rates from the site during land disturbance shall comply
with the appropriate sections in this chapter related to allowable postdevelopment
stormwater runoff rates, with the following additions:
(1) For purposes of calculating required detention storage during land
disturbance, peak discharges shall be calculated based upon the
runoff coefficients for bare soils during the period of maximum
anticipated disturbance from clearing and grading, in combination
with the entire quantity of proposed impervious surface
installation, indicated on the development plan. Runoff controls
shall insure that the peak rate of "during construction" runoff does
not exceed predevelopment runoff rates for the one-year frequency
through one-hundred-year frequency design storm events.
Detention storage during the period of land disturbance and prior
to establishment of permanent cover may require additional
detention facilities on a temporary basis. Such measures shall be
located so as to preserve the natural soil infiltration capacities of
the planned infiltration areas. Calculations based on the above
parameters must be submitted to verify compliance with this
requirement.
(2) Wherever soils, topography, cut and fill or grading requirements or
other conditions suggest substantial erosion potential during land
disturbance, the Borough may require that the entire volume of all
storms up to a two-year storm from the disturbed areas be retained
on site and that special sediment trapping facilities (such as check
dams, etc.) be installed.
H. Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from
encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles to maintain the
existing infiltration characteristics of the soil.
§ 158-20 PERKASIE CODE § 158-20
152:400
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Application and Permit Requirements
§ 158-21. General requirements.
§ 158-22. Stormwater management site plan (SMSP) contents and
requirements.
For all regulated activities not exempt from provisions of this chapter, a
stormwater management site plan (SMSP) is required and shall consist of
all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer
to the associated computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan
by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and
date. All SMSP application documents shall be submitted to the Borough in
a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise,
A. For any of the development activities regulated by this chapter as
defined pursuant to § 158-4E, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building, zoning, or
occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance
activity may not proceed until the property owner or developer or his/
her agent has received a stormwater management permit (permit) or
approval of a stormwater management exemption by the Borough. Final
approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan and recordation
of same with the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, shall constitute
approval of the stormwater management permit for stormwater
facilities/BMPs proposed on the plan.
B. A stormwater management site plan (SMSP) shall be required in
conjunction with a stormwater management permit for all regulated
development activities that do not qualify for exemption from the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to § 158-5B and § 158-5C. The SMSP
shall include all items identified pursuant to § 158-22. The SMSP
approved by the Borough shall be on-site throughout the duration of the
regulated activity.
C. A simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP) shall be
required in conjunction with a permit for regulated development
activities qualifying for exemption of the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to § 158-5C. The SSMSP shall include all items identified
pursuant to § 158-23. The SSMSP approved by the Borough shall be onsite
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
D. A stormwater management permit shall only be issued upon approval of
a stormwater management site plan or simplified stormwater
management site plan by the Borough. A stormwater management
permit is not required for regulated activities exempt pursuant to
§ 158-5B of this chapter, but approval of a stormwater management
exemption must be issued by the Borough pursuant to § 158-5B and
§ 158-5F, prior to commencement of regulated activities.
§ 158-21 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-22
152:401
the stormwater management site plan shall be disapproved and returned
to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the stormwater
management site plan:
A. Two copies of the completed Borough stormwater management
application form.
B. Grading/drainage review fee and escrow, as established by separate
resolution of Borough Council.
C. A feasibility analysis that evaluates the potential application of
infiltration, flow attenuation, bioretention, wetland, or wet pond BMPs
must be submitted with the stormwater management site plans
required in Article IV.
(1) The feasibility analysis must allow the Borough to review the
general soil characteristics of a site and the proposed development
for that site and determine if infiltration BMPs or wet pond or
artificial wetland BMPs could have been more thoroughly pursued
for use by the developer. The information required in the analysis
shall be detailed enough to determine the potential applicability of
these BMPs for a proposed development, but general enough not to
force a developer into incurring excessive cost associated with
conducting laborious field and/or laboratory soil testing for a site
which ultimately may not be suitable for infiltration or wet pond or
artificial wetland BMP implementation. However, with the
requirements for conducting a feasibility analysis, developers must
be aware that they are expected to use these BMPs wherever
possible and are required to provide adequate justification if these
BMPs are not to be implemented. Essentially, all developers will be
conducting feasibility analysis since such analysis would become
the preliminary step in evaluating the potential for implementation
of these mandatory BMPs where possible. Developers for those
sites that are determined to be generally suitable from these
analysis (taking into consideration the areal extent of suitable soils
necessary to accommodate an infiltration or wet pond or wetland
BMP for the type and size of development proposed) are required
to conduct the detailed soil testing and other feasibility testing
required in other sections of this chapter which contain the
description and additional design criteria of these BMPs. This
analysis shall provide:
(a) A general assessment of the anticipated additional runoff
based on the design storm and post-development condition and
utilizing the calculation procedures required in § 158-19;
(b) Indication of drainage areas on the development site resulting
in impervious, pervious, and rooftop runoff;
(c) Indication of type of land use (residential, nonresidential)
generating the impervious surface runoff;
§ 158-22 PERKASIE CODE § 158-22
152:402
(d) Delineation of soils on the site from the NRCS, Web Soil Survey
and onsite soil study. Soil study shall be conducted by a soil
scientist and shall include sufficient probes/deep holes to
evaluate application of BMPs;
(e) Indication of soils generally suitable for infiltration and/or wet
pond/artificial wetland BMPs;
(f) Calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and
wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs and percentage of suitable
soils based on total site acreage;
(g) Calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and
wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs made unavailable due to
proposed development layout and justification that alternative
development layout which would reduce impact on suitable soil
availability is unfeasible;
(h) Analysis of potential infiltration or wet pond or artificial
wetland BMPs which could be implemented to manage the
projected post-development runoff with consideration of
suitable soil availability runoff point of and type of land use
(Subsection C(1)(6) and (c) above) and the general design
standards and maintenance issues included in this chapter
including an indication of how most post-development runoff
can be managed by these BMPs (e.g., the entire postdevelopment
runoff or partial amount of runoff expressed as a
percentage); and
(i) Rationale for the decision to not proceed with implementation
of infiltration BMPs or wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs
such as excessive cost of implementation, insufficient soil
suitability, and development constraints.
D. A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site pursuant to § 158-15E
and Appendix B of this chapter116 shall be performed to determine the
suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a
qualified geologist and/or soil scientist, and at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and
subgrade stability.
E. Whenever a stormwater management facility will be located in an area
underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location
shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations.
The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent ground water contamination and, where
necessary, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of basins
shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors). Installation of an
impermeable liner shall be required in detention basins to be
constructed over or in close proximity (less than 150 feet) to limestone.
116. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-22 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-22
152:403
(1) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all
stormwater management site plans and signed and sealed by the
developer's professional engineer "I, _________________, certify that
the proposed stormwater management facility (circle one) is/is not
underlain by limestone."
F. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
G. Two copies of the stormwater management site plan for the parcel shall
be submitted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets or other
approved sheet size and shall be prepared in a form that meets the
requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Bucks County. The contents of the plan shall include, but not be limited
to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities, or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Watershed(s) within which the project is located (e.g., Tohickon
Creek, East Branch Perkiomen Creek).
(3) Existing contours at intervals of two feet or less. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 25%), five-foot contours may be used.
(4) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(5) Other physical features including riparian corridors, flood hazard
boundaries, sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses,
wetlands, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total
extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
(6) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines located on the site and/or within 50 feet of property
lines with minimum setback distances for all existing and proposed
water supply wells and on-lot sewage disposal systems.
(7) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries. This overlay shall
include a table on the map showing the recharge capabilities of
each soil represented onsite in inches per hour and describe their
recharge or infiltration capabilities.
§ 158-22 PERKASIE CODE § 158-22
152:404
(8) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including a tabulation of impervious surface area which identifies
the type of surface and the quantity of existing impervious surface
area, existing impervious surface area to be removed and proposed
impervious surface area.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings. Where
pervious pavement is proposed for parking lots, recreational
facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas, detailed pervious
pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet or less.
(11) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(12) The date of submission.
(13) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet. For tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale may be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(14) A North arrow.
(15) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(16) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(17) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(18) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(19) All existing and proposed stormwater management facility and/or
drainage easements described by metes and bounds, including the
purpose and ownership and maintenance provisions for each
easement.
(20) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way or paved driveway within an existing or
proposed easement that accesses a public right-of-way.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
§ 158-22 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-22
152:405
(23) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
Borough, which shall be recorded with the record plan and which
shall be applicable to all future landowners.
(24) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(25) The following signature block for the design engineer:
__________________________ (Design engineer), on this date (date of
signature), has reviewed and hereby certify that the stormwater
management site plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the current Perkasie Borough stormwater management
Ordinance.
(26) The stormwater management site plan shall include an operation
and maintenance plan for all existing and proposed stormwater
management/BMP facilities, addressing long-term ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for such facilities, including schedule
for operation and maintenance activities.
H. Required supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP and/or
Bucks County Conservation District.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volume, peak flow, and
discharge duration) on adjacent properties and on any existing
Borough stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PADOT District Office when utilization of a PADOT storm drainage
system is proposed.
(6) An operations and maintenance (O&M) plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater facilities, as well as schedules and
§ 158-22 PERKASIE CODE § 158-22
152:406
§ 158-23. Simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP)
contents and requirements.
For all regulated activities that qualify for exemption of certain provisions
of this chapter pursuant to § 158-5C, and that are required to install an
infiltration basin(s) in accordance with Perkasie Borough design and
construction criteria, a simplified stormwater management site plan
(SSMSP) is required and shall include the following items:
costs for O&M activities. The plan shall address long-term
ownership and responsibilities for O&M.
I. Stormwater management BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds,
or trenches are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed
septic tank infiltration areas, and wells must be shown. A minimum
separation distance of no less than 50 feet shall be provided
between any septic system and any facility used for stormwater
management. An analysis shall be submitted to verify that
stormwater infiltration shall not affect groundwater elevations of
the septic drain field site if this distance is approved by the
Borough to be less than 50 feet. In no case shall this distance be
less than 10 feet.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown. If multiple
facilities are proposed in conjunction with each other, such as
infiltration best management practices with vegetation based
management practices, a summary narrative, shall be included
describing any sequence and how the facilities are meant to
function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.
(4) All stormwater management/BMP facility easements required by
this chapter must be shown on the stormwater management site
plan, including the bearing and distance of each segment of the
easement(s) boundary.
A. Two copies of the completed Borough stormwater management
application form.
B. Stormwater management review fee and escrow, as established by
separate resolution of Borough Council.
C. Two copies of the simplified stormwater management site plan for the
parcel containing, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Property boundaries and area of the site, based on deed
information or field survey.
§ 158-22 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-23
152:407
(2) Location map identifying the site relative to streets and other
parcels in the vicinity of the site.
(3) Location of significant natural and existing manmade features,
including wetlands, watercourses, riparian corridors, woodlands,
steep slopes, structures, parking areas, driveways, utilities, flood
hazard boundaries, sinkholes, wells, and septic systems within 200
feet of proposed impervious surface, regardless of the location of
the property boundary.
(4) Location and dimensions of existing and proposed impervious
surface and other improvements, with setbacks drawn to relate the
location of same to property lines, streets, and existing features.
Impervious surface area tabulation must be provided identifying
existing area of impervious surface, existing impervious surface
area to be removed, and proposed impervious surface area.
(5) North arrow.
(6) Plan scale, as applicable.
(7) Existing contours at intervals of two feet or less. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 25%), five-foot contours may be used.
(8) Proposed contours at intervals of two feet or less.
(9) Seepage pit design calculations and construction details.
(10) An overlay on the site showing soil names and boundaries from the
NRCS, Web Soil Survey or onsite soil study, conducted by a soil
scientist. This overlay shall include a table on the map showing the
recharge capabilities of each soil represented onsite in inches per
hour and describe their recharge or infiltration capabilities.
(11)Watershed(s) within which the project is located (e.g., Tohickon
Creek, East Branch Perkiomen Creek).
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet. For tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale may be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(14) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP and/or
Bucks County Conservation District.
(15) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
§ 158-23 PERKASIE CODE § 158-23
152:408
§ 158-24. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission of a SMSP or SSMSP (both referred to in this section as
"plan"). For any activities that require a PADEP permit regulated under
Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of PADEP's Rules and Regulations, require a
PADOT highway occupancy permit, or require any other permit under
applicable local, state, or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of
the plan submission.
Borough, which shall be recorded with the record plan and which
shall be applicable to all future landowners.
(16) The following signature block for the design engineer:
__________________________ (Design engineer), on this date (date of
signature), has reviewed and hereby certify that the stormwater
management plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
current Perkasie Borough stormwater management Ordinance.
(17) Locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas,
and wells must be shown. A minimum separation distance of no less
than 50 feet shall be provided between any septic system and any
facility used for stormwater management. An analysis shall be
required to verify that stormwater infiltration shall not affect
groundwater elevations of the septic drain field site, if this distance
is approved by the Borough to be less than 50 feet. In no case shall
this distance be less than 10 feet.
(18) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all
simplified stormwater management site plans and signed and
sealed by the developer's professional engineer:
"I, ____________________, certify that the proposed stormwater
management facility (circle one) is/is not underlain by limestone."
A. The SMSP shall be submitted by the developer as part of any
preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan submission.
B. A minimum of two copies of the plan shall be submitted in conjunction
with regulated activities not exempt pursuant to § 158-5B of this
chapter. Additional copies shall be submitted if requested by the
Borough.
C. Distribution of the plan will be as follows:
(1) One copy to the Borough accompanied by the requisite Borough
review fee and escrow, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Borough Engineer.
§ 158-23 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-25
152:409
§ 158-25. Review of stormwater management site plan and
simplified stormwater management site plan.
A. The Borough Engineer shall review the plan for consistency with the
adopted Watershed Act 167 stormwater management plan and
applicable Borough ordinances. The Borough shall require receipt of a
complete plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Borough Engineer shall review the plan for any subdivision or land
development against the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance117 provisions not superseded by this chapter.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter (not including subdivision or
land development), the Borough Engineer shall notify the Perkasie
Borough Secretary in writing whether the plan is consistent with
Borough ordinances and other relevant regulations including the
Watershed Act 167 stormwater management Plan. Should the plan
submitted by the applicant be determined to be consistent with
Borough ordinances and other relevant regulations, the Borough
Engineer will forward a review letter to the applicant with a copy to the
Perkasie Borough Secretary. Any disapproved plan may be revised by
the developer and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
D. The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land development or
regulated activities specified in § 158-4E(1) and (2) of this chapter if the
plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Watershed Act 167
stormwater management plan. All required permits from PADEP must
be obtained prior to, or as a requirement of, final approval.
E. The Perkasie Borough Building Code Official shall not issue a building
permit for any regulated activity specified in § 158-4 of this chapter if
the stormwater management site plan has been found to be
inconsistent with the adopted Watershed Act 167 stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Borough Engineer, or without
considering the comments of the Borough Engineer. All required
permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
F. The Borough's approval of a stormwater management site plan or
simplified stormwater management site plan prepared in conjunction
with a stormwater management permit application (for a regulated
activity that is not a subdivision or land development, and which is not
exempt from provisions of this chapter pursuant to § 158-5B), shall be
valid for a period not to exceed one year. This time period shall
commence on the date that the Borough signs and issues a stormwater
management permit. If stormwater management facilities included in
the approved plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built survey of
these facilities pursuant to § 158-28 of this chapter has not been
approved within this time period, the Borough may consider the Plan
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 158-25 PERKASIE CODE § 158-25
152:410
§ 158-26. Modification of plans.
§ 158-27. Resubmission of Disapproved Plans.
A disapproved stormwater management site plan or simplified stormwater
management site plan may be resubmitted, with revisions addressing the
Borough Engineer's concerns, documented in writing, to the Borough
Engineer in accordance with § 158-24 of this chapter and be subject to
review as specified in § 158-25 of this chapter. The applicable Borough
review fee and escrow must accompany resubmission of a disapproved Plan.
§ 158-28. As-built plans.
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Plans that are
considered disapproved by the Borough shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 158-27 of this chapter.
G. The Borough's approval of a stormwater management site plan
prepared in conjunction with an approved subdivision or land
development shall remain valid and protected from any change in
Borough codes and ordinances for a period no greater than five years
from the date of preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan
approval, pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
A. A modification to a submitted stormwater management site plan or
simplified stormwater management site plan for a development site
that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other
conditions are not as stated on the plan as determined by the Borough
Engineer, shall require a resubmission of a modified plan consistent
with § 158-27 of this chapter and be subject to review as specified in
§ 158-25 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved plan shall be
submitted to the Borough, accompanied by the applicable Borough
review fee and escrow. A modification to a plan for which a formal
action has not been taken by the Borough shall be submitted to the
Borough, accompanied by the applicable Borough review fee.
A. The developer of any regulated activity requiring a stormwater
management site plan and stormwater management permit shall be
responsible for completing an as-built survey, sealed by a professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a registered
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, of all
stormwater management facilities/improvements included in the
approved plan. An as-built survey is required for infiltration basin(s)
installed in conjunction with a simplified stormwater management site
plan. The as-built survey and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for
§ 158-25 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-28
152:411
§ 158-29. Retention of plans at project site.
A set of plans approved by the Borough shall be on file at the site throughout
the duration of the development activity. Periodic inspections may be made
by the Borough or designee during development activities.
§ 158-30. Adherence to approved plan.
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any regulated activity on
any property except as provided for in the approved plan and pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
stormwater management facility or BMP required by the plan pursuant to
this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not
conform to the approved plan.
§ 158-31. Certification of completion.
At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee required pursuant to § 158-37, the owner or his
representatives shall:
approval. In no case shall the Borough approve the as-built survey until
the Borough receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy,
highway occupancy permit from the PADOT District Office (if
applicable), any applicable permits from PADEP, and NPDES Notice of
Termination (if applicable) approved by PADEP or the Bucks County
Conservation District.
B. Completed stormwater management facilities and BMPs, including
detention/retention basins, shall be surveyed by a professional land
surveyor or engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to
verify compliance with the character of stormwater management
facilities as depicted on the approved plan. As-constructed plans shall
be submitted to Perkasie Borough for review and approval, upon
completion of construction of all facilities and prior to offer of
dedication of any public facilities and/or submission of financial security
for the required maintenance period associated with subdivisions and
land developments. Public facilities will not be accepted by Perkasie
Borough until such time the as-constructed plans have been reviewed
and approved by the Borough Engineer.
A. Provide a set of as-built drawings pursuant to § 158-28 of this chapter
and/or Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance requirements.
The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a licensed, qualified professional verifying that all permanent
stormwater management/BMP facilities have been constructed
according to the approved stormwater management site plan and
specifications.
B. Contact the Borough Engineer to request inspection of the site for
completion of stormwater management facilities and compliance with
§ 158-28 PERKASIE CODE § 158-31
152:412
§ 158-32. Occupancy permit.
A use and occupancy permit for any improvements constructed in
conjunction with a subdivision and/or land development or other Borough
permit (requiring issuance of use and occupancy permit) shall not be issued
unless the certification of completion, pursuant to § 158-31 of this chapter,
has been obtained by the Borough (in conjunction with regulated
development activities requiring a stormwater management site plan and
stormwater improvements/BMPs).
the approved plan and provisions of this chapter. This final inspection
shall be conducted by the Borough after receipt of the certification of
completion.
§ 158-31 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-32
152:413

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 158-33. Schedule of inspections.
§ 158-34. Right-of-entry during construction.
A. The Borough Engineer or his assignee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities
required pursuant to a stormwater management site plan and simplified
stormwater management site plan.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Borough Engineer determines that
temporary or permanent erosion and sedimentation control or
stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance
with the approved plan, the Borough shall revoke any existing permits
until a revised plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this
chapter.
A. During construction, duly authorized representatives of the Borough
may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Borough to
inspect the implementation, condition, or operation and maintenance of
the stormwater BMPs to investigate whether construction activity is in
compliance with this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Borough ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Borough shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Borough such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the direct access to a BMP is a violation
of this chapter.
§ 158-33 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-34
152:415

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 158-35. Stormwater management permit and review fees.
The Borough shall establish a fee schedule by resolution of the governing
body to defray plan review, construction inspection and administrative costs
incurred by the Borough from any outside agencies or entities (required to
review the plans) and the Borough Engineer. The Borough shall periodically
update the review fee schedule to ensure that incurred costs are adequately
reimbursed. The applicant shall pay all such fees and escrows.
§ 158-36. Expenses covered by fees and escrow.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover the following:
A. Administrative costs.
B. Review of the plan by the Borough and the Borough Engineer.
C. Site inspections by the Borough staff and/or Borough Engineer.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities and stormwater
management improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and stormwater management improvements presented in the
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and ensure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 158-35 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-36
152:417

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibility
§ 158-37. Performance guarantee.
The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Borough for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved stormwater management site plan and
this chapter equal to the full construction cost of the required controls plus
construction contingency and construction inspection costs.
§ 158-38. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The stormwater management site plan for the development site shall
contain a BMP operation and maintenance plan (BMP O&M) prepared
by the design engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall
outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary
to insure proper operation of the BMPs and shall be subject to review
and approval of the Borough.
B. The BMP O&M for the development site shall establish responsibilities
for the continuing operation and maintenance of all proposed
stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, storm sewers, and other
stormwater management public improvements are to be dedicated
to the Borough, stormwater control facilities may also be dedicated
to and maintained by the Borough, if accepted by the Borough.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
storm sewers and other stormwater management improvements
are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and
maintenance of stormwater control facilities shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
C. The stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan shall include the following:
(1) Description of how each stormwater facility and BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity and contact information
associated with the person(s) responsible for O&M.
(2) Name of the project site, name and address of the owner of the
property, and name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(3) A statement, signed by the facility owner, acknowledging that the
stormwater facilities and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the Borough.
D. Facilities, areas, or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or conservation easements that run with the land.
§ 158-37 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-38
152:419
§ 158-39. Review of stormwater facilities and BMP operations and
maintenance (O&M) plan.
§ 158-40. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
E. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
F. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater management
site plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater
management controls. The right of the Borough to accept ownership in
the future shall be stated in the maintenance agreement (refer to
§ 158-40).
G. The Borough may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provision of this chapter.
H. In the event a property owner or other entity responsible for
maintenance (such as a homeowner's association) fails to honor their
maintenance responsibilities set forth in the O&M Plan, in any manner,
Perkasie Borough shall have the right of entry upon and within the area
of the easement to undertake any required corrective or maintenance
effort. The total cost of such, including administrative, engineering, and
legal costs for enforcement, may be imposed upon the responsible party
as determined by Perkasie Borough. Failure to remedy all associated
costs described above, may be subject of the imposition of a lien by the
Borough against the owner(s) in question, in the same manner as the
Borough might otherwise be empowered by law to assess or impose a
lien against a property for municipal improvements.
A. The Borough shall review the stormwater facilities and BMP O&M plan
for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, and
any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan is approved.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management site plan,
the applicant shall sign and record an O&M agreement prepared and
approved by the Borough Solicitor covering all stormwater control
facilities that are to be privately owned. The form and substance of the
agreement shall be consistent with the agreement in Appendix E of this
chapter.118
118. Editor's Note: This appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-38 PERKASIE CODE § 158-40
152:420
§ 158-41. Stormwater management easements.
§ 158-42. Stormwater maintenance fund.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The O&M agreement shall be subject to review and approval of the
Borough.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the Borough may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property as described in
§ 158-38.
A. Stormwater management easements shall be granted by the property
owner as necessary to provide for:
(1) Access to the property by the Borough for facility inspections and
emergency maintenance.
(2) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the onehundred-
year storm event.
B. Stormwater management/BMP facilities easements are required for all
areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by
Borough Council.
C. All easements shall be recorded with the Bucks County Recorder of
Deeds prior to final stormwater management site plan approval,
issuance of a building permit or recordation of a subdivision or land
development plan.
D. The purpose of any easement shall be specified in the O&M agreement
signed by the property owner.
E. The record plan and development agreement for an approved
subdivision or land development shall define the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities as well as access rights for all drainagerelated
easements. Specifically, the record plan shall contain a
provision permitting access to such easement(s), at any reasonable
time, for inspection and/or emergency repair/maintenance, by Perkasie
Borough or its designee, of all facilities deemed critical to public
welfare.
A. If stormwater management/BMP facilities are accepted by the Borough
for dedication, persons installing stormwater management/BMP
facilities shall be required to pay a specified amount to the Borough
stormwater maintenance fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
§ 158-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-42
152:421
§ 158-43. Post-construction maintenance inspections.
(1) If the facilities are to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the
deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and
inspections for 10 years. The Borough Engineer will establish the
estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Borough Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of Borough Council.
B. If a stormwater management/BMP facility is proposed that also serves
as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, pond), the Borough may, but is
not required to, reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund
deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will
be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the
storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
D. A financial deposit to the Borough stormwater maintenance fund shall
be required to be paid by the developer to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses associated with all stormwater
management facilities, storm sewer, culverts, or other such
improvements required by PennDOT, to be constructed within the rightof-
way of public roadways or easement areas, that are to be maintained
after dedication by the Borough. The deposit shall cover the estimated
cost for maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Borough
Engineer will establish the estimated cost upon review of information
submitted by the applicant. The amount of the deposit to the fund shall
be converted to present worth of the annual series values. The Borough
Engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be
subject to the approval of Borough Council.
A. Stormwater management BMPs should be inspected for proper
operation by the landowner, or the owner's designee (including
Perkasie Borough for dedicated and owned facilities), on the following
basis:
(1) Twelve months after completion of the facility and acceptance of
completion of the facility by the Borough;
(2) At least once every two years thereafter;
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year frequency
or greater storm; and/or
§ 158-42 PERKASIE CODE § 158-43
152:422
(4) As specified in the operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
B. The entity conducting the inspection shall submit a report to Perkasie
Borough summarizing observations of inspection and necessary
repairs, if any.
§ 158-43 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-43
152:423

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 158-44. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows nonstormwater discharge including, but not limited to, sewage,
processed wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person in the Borough shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the Borough's municipal separate storm sewer system
which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges
allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. Discharges which may be allowed under the Borough's NPDES permit
based on a finding by the Borough that the discharge(s) do not
significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
commonwealth by the Borough are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including waterline and fire hydrant
flushing.
(3) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(5) Lawn watering.
(6) Irrigation drainage.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Routine external building wash-down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(9) Air conditioning condensate.
(10)Water from individual residential car washing.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (pursuant to PADEP
requirements).
(12) Springs.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from crawl space pumps or sump pumps.
(15) Diverted stream flows.
§ 158-44 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-44
152:425
§ 158-45. Prohibited connections.
§ 158-46. Roof drains and sump pumps.
D. In the event that the Borough subsequently determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 158-44C of this chapter degrade the quality of
waters of the commonwealth or U.S. by the Borough, then the Borough
will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the Borough under § 158-44D, the discharger
will have a reasonable time to cease the discharge consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibility under
state law.
A. Prohibited connections. The following connections are prohibited,
except as provided in § 158-44C above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the regulated small
MS4 or the waters of the commonwealth, and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor waste water drains and sinks;
and;
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the regulated small MS4 which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by
the Borough.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection, drain or
conveyance was previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a
government agency, or otherwise permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
A. Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches and shall discharge to infiltration areas or
vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable to satisfy the
criteria for disconnection of impervious surfaces. Roof drains may be
connected to streets, storm sewers or roadside ditches when it is more
advantageous and when those facilities ultimately discharge to
stormwater BMPs or water quality facilities. This shall be permitted on
a case by case basis by the Borough and only when approved by the
Borough Engineer.
B. Sump pumps shall not be discharged directly to Borough streets or
roadside ditches, or connected to the sanitary sewer system. Overland
flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater from a discharge from
sump pumps shall be promoted where site conditions allow. Developers
and/or property owner may connect to the storm sewer system only
§ 158-44 PERKASIE CODE § 158-46
152:426
§ 158-47. Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, or other component
of the Borough's municipal separate storm sewer system, any refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles,
and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution.
Waste deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of
collection is exempted from this prohibition.
§ 158-48. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
upon approval by the Borough. The cost of connecting to the storm
system shall be the responsibility of the property owner, and all work
shall be performed as directed by the Borough. If a storm sewer is
not available for connection, then the property owner must pursue
other options for discharge, including the construction of a seepage pit
or on-site stormwater management facilities. Any deviation from this
requirement will only be permitted on a case-by-case basis after review
and approval by the Borough and/or the Borough Engineer.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater management BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance
program, and written approval of the Borough has been obtained.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater management facility or BMP or within a drainage
easement without the written approval of the Borough.
§ 158-46 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-48
152:427

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 158-49. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
Perkasie Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property within
the Borough to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 158-50. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Borough shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Failure to comply within
the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provision of
this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative. In addition,
the Borough may pursue any and all other remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter. In the case where the violation
poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, no notice under this section shall be required.
§ 158-51. Enforcement.
The Perkasie Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the stormwater management site plan or simplified stormwater
management site plan shall be the responsibility of the Borough Engineer or
other qualified persons designated by the Borough as directed by Borough
Council.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Borough shall be on file at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Borough or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 158-4 on any
property except as provided for in the approved stormwater
management site plan, simplified stormwater management site plan
and pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the plan pursuant to
this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition which
does not conform to the approved plan.
§ 158-49 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-51
152:429
§ 158-52. Violations a public nuisance.
C. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, Borough Council will
schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no
immediate danger to life, public health or property.
D. Suspension and revocation of permits
(1) Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Council for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others, or as outlined in Article VIII of this
chapter.
(2) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by Borough Council when:
(a) The Borough Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
erosion and sedimentation control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The Council is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) A permit that has been revoked by the Council cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Whenever the Borough finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Borough may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
§ 158-51 PERKASIE CODE § 158-52
152:430
§ 158-53. Violations and penalties.
§ 158-54. Appeals.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent Perkasie Borough from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment
of not more than 10 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, Perkasie Borough, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Appeals from the determination of the Borough or its designee, or from
the determination of the Borough Engineer in the administration of this
chapter as it relates to stormwater management of a project, shall be
made to the Perkasie Borough Council within 30 days of that
determination or decision.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Council may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the decision.
C. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or
Borough Council may appeal to the Bucks County Court of Common
Pleas within 30 days of the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or
Council.
§ 158-52 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 158-54
152:431
Chapter 160
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Parades — See Ch. 115.
Ballplaying and snowballs in public
ways — See Ch. 128, Art. III.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Skateboarding — See Ch. 150.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 152.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 158-54 PERKASIE CODE § 158-54
152:432
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk and Curb Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 895119]
§ 160-1. Property owner to construct or reconstruct sidewalk and
curbing; time limits.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Perkasie shall, on 60 days'
notice from the Borough Council, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk or
curbing, or both, in front of or alongside of such property. All sidewalk
and curbing construction and reconstruction shall conform to the Borough's
specifications set forth in the "Perkasie Borough Specifications for
Reconstruction and/or Repair of Curbs and Sidewalks”120 which
specifications are a part of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie, subject
to change only by ordinance. Copies of the said Specifications shall be
available at the Borough Hall.
§ 160-2. Property owners to repair sidewalk and curbing; time
limits.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Perkasie shall, on 30 days’
notice from the Borough Council, repair the sidewalk or curbing, or both,
in front of or alongside such property. However, where a condition exists
of an emergency nature, such repairs shall be made within 48 hours of
notice. All repairs shall conform to the "Perkasie Borough Specifications
for Reconstruction and/or Repair of Curbs and Sidewalks"121 which
specifications are a part of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie, subject
to change only by ordinance. Copies of the said Specifications shall be
available at the Borough Hall.
§ 160-3. (Reserved)
§ 160-4. (Reserved)
§ 160-5. (Reserved)
§ 160-6. (Reserved)
§ 160-7. (Reserved)
§ 160-8. (Reserved)
§ 160-9. (Reserved)
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Sidewalk and Curb Rules and
Regulations, adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 160, Art. I, of the 1985 Code, as amended.
120. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Specifications for Reconstruction and/or Repair of
Curbs and Sidewalks are inluded at the end of this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: The "Perkasie Borough Specifications for Reconstruction and/or Repair of
Curbs" are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-10
152:433
§ 160-10. (Reserved)
§ 160-11. (Reserved)
§ 160-12. (Reserved)
§ 160-13. (Reserved)
§ 160-10 PERKASIE CODE § 160-13
152:434
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Rights-of-Way122
[Adopted 10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 915]
§ 160-14. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Perkasie Borough Rights-of-Way
Ordinance."
§ 160-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number:
AFFILIATE — A person:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Perkasie, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
CABLE SERVICE — The same meaning as used in the Communications Act.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as amended
as of the time of enactment of this article.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain a
facility in the public way.
EXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses within
the service area, but which is exempt from the provisions of this article
under § 160-17B of this article.
FACILITY — Any tangible asset in the public way used or required to
provide a nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service
area. The following are not a facility: a railroad, street railway, gas pipe,
With a direct or indirect ownership interest in the subject entity of 5%
or more or which controls such interest, including forms of ownership
such as general, limited, or other partnership interests, direct
ownership interests, limited liability companies and other forms of
business organizations and entities but not including corporations;
A.
With a stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a
corporation and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director
of the grantee or who directly or indirectly owns or controls 5% or more
of the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting; or
B.
Which controls the grantee and/or is controlled by or is under common
control with such person or entity.
C.
122. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Repair Standards,
adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 160, Art. II, of the 1985 Code, as amended, was repealed
10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 895.
§ 160-14 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-15
152:435
water pipe, electric conduit, electric piping, telephone pole, telegraph pole,
electric light pole, electric power pole, coal tipple or obstruction to the
public way.
GRANTEE — A person who enjoys a nonexclusive privilege to occupy or use
a public way to provide nonexempt service under this article and who is in
continuous compliance with this article.
GROSS REVENUE — All gross revenue of the grantee or any affiliate of
the grantee derived from the use or occupancy of public ways for the
provision of nonexempt services to persons having a residence or place
of business in the service area. "Gross revenue" shall include amounts
earned, regardless of whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade, or
by means of some other benefit to the grantee or its affiliates; whether the
services with which the revenue is associated are provided at cost or the
revenue amount can be matched against an equivalent expenditure; and/
or how the amounts are initially recorded by the grantee or its affiliates.
Gross revenue shall not be a net of expense, including but not limited to
any operating expense, capital expense, sales expense or commission; any
accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or any
other expenditure, regardless of whether such expense, deduction, accrual,
or expenditure reflects a cash payment. Gross revenue shall not be double
counted, viz., gross revenue which has been included as gross revenue of
both the grantee and an affiliate but which sum is included in gross revenue
due solely to a transfer of funds between the grantee and the affiliate shall
not be counted for purposes of determining gross revenue.
NONEXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses
within the service area, but which is not exempt from the provisions of this
article under § 160-17B of this article.
PERSON —
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, unopened right-of-way, highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley,
court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or
other public right-of-way held by the Borough in the service area. Public
way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Borough
within the service area for the purpose of public travel and/or for utility and/
or public service use dedicated for compatible uses.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the Borough, and
shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
Any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, association,
limited-liability company, corporation or other form of organization
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
A.
Provides or seeks to provide one or more nonexempt services to
residences or businesses in the service area.
B.
C. A governmental entity or a municipal authority is not a person.
§ 160-15 PERKASIE CODE § 160-16
152:436
§ 160-16. Registration.
Each person, other than on a transitory basis, who occupies or uses or
seeks to occupy or use a public way to provide a nonexempt service to
residences or businesses within the service area, or places any equipment
or facility in a public way other than on a transitory basis, including persons
with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or
assignment, must register with the Borough. Registration is accomplished
by filing with the Borough a completed provider certification in the form
shown at Appendix A123 to this article.
§ 160-17. Grant of ordinance; exemptions.
A. Grant. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, remove,
relocate or perform any work on or use any facilities or any part thereof
in a public way unless in compliance with this Rights-of-Way Ordinance.
Continuous compliance with this Rights-of-Way Ordinance grants to the
grantee a nonexclusive privilege to construct, repair, remove, relocate
or perform any work on or use any facilities or any part thereof in the
public ways within the service area and to occupy or use the public
ways for the purpose of providing nonexempt service to residences or
businesses within the service area.
B. Exemptions. This Rights-of-Way Ordinance shall not apply to occupation
or use of the public ways to provide:
(1) The transportation of passengers or property or both as a common
carrier by means of elevated street railway, inclined plane railway,
railroad, street railway or underground street railway, tracklesstrolley
omnibus or by any combination of such means.
(2) The transportation of artificial or natural gas, electricity, petroleum
or petroleum products or water or any combination of such
substances for the public.
(3) The production, generation, manufacture, transmission, storage,
distribution or furnishing of natural or artificial gas, electricity,
steam, air conditioning or refrigerating service or any combination
thereof to or for the public.
(4) The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or
furnishing of water from either surface or subsurface sources to or
for the public.
(5) The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage for the public.
(6) The conveyance or transmission of messages or communications by
telephone or telegraph for the public.
123. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 160-16 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-17
152:437
§ 160-18. Standards of service.
(7) The diverting, pumping or impounding of water for the
development or furnishing of hydroelectric power to or for the
public.
(8) The transportation of oxygen or nitrogen, or both, by pipeline or
conduit for the public.
(9) Any ancillary service reasonably necessary or appropriate for the
accomplishment of services specified in Subsection B(1) through
(8).
(10) Cable service.
C. Not a cable system. This article does not authorize a person to provide
cable service. A person seeking to provide cable service must obtain
permission from the Borough under separate legislation of the
Borough.
D. Not a pole attachment agreement. This article does not authorize the
grantee to attach to any pole or other structure in a public way devices
for the intentional transmission or radiation of radio frequency
emissions or energy through the ether by any means now known or
hereafter developed.
A. Conditions of street occupancy. All facilities and equipment installed or
erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so
as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public
ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
B. Restoration of public ways. If during the course of the grantee's
construction, operation, and/or maintenance of its facilities and
equipment there occurs a disturbance of any public way by the grantee,
the grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to
a condition which existed immediately prior to such disturbance. If the
grantee excavates the surface of any public way, the grantee shall be
responsible for restoration of the public way and its surface within the
area affected by the excavation. The Borough reserves the right, after
providing notice to the grantee, to remove and/or repair any work done
by the grantee which is inadequate. The reasonable cost thereof,
including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the
grantee. All excavations made by the grantee in the public way shall be
properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents.
C. Trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall notify the Borough and all
affected property owners regarding the grantee's need to trim trees or
other natural growth upon and overhanging public ways so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its
facilities or equipment. Trimming shall be limited to the area required
to clear its facilities or equipment.
§ 160-17 PERKASIE CODE § 160-18
152:438
§ 160-19. Rental.
D. Safety requirements. All such work in the public ways shall be
performed in accordance with applicable safety codes and technical
requirements.
E. Maps. Prior to beginning any construction of facilities, the grantee shall
provide the Borough with a construction schedule for work in the public
ways, which schedule shall be updated as changed. Upon completion of
initial construction and upon completion of construction of any
modification to its facilities, the grantee shall provide the Borough with
a map showing the location of its installed facilities in the public ways.
Such maps shall be provided in both paper form, as well as in an
electronic format for placement on the Borough's GIS system. Annually
thereafter, the grantee shall provide a map to the Borough showing the
location of the grantee's facilities in the public ways on a scale of 150
feet per inch or whatever standard scale the Borough adopts for
general use.
F. Excavations. The grantee may make excavations in public ways for any
facility subject to obtaining excavation permits from the Borough. Prior
to doing such work, the grantee must apply for, and obtain, appropriate
permits from the Borough, and give appropriate notices to any other
licensees and/or permittees of the Borough, and/or other units of
government owning or maintaining facilities which may be affected by
the proposed excavation.
G. Reservation of Borough public ways. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to prevent the Borough or other agency of government or
municipal authority from constructing sewers, grading, paving,
repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying down, repairing and/
or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or establishing any
other public work or improvement. If any of the grantee's facilities or
equipment interferes with the construction or repair of any street or
public improvement, including construction, repair or removal of a
sewer or water main, the grantee's facilities or equipment shall be
removed or replaced in the manner the respective Borough or other
agency of government or municipal authority shall direct. Any and all
such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee.
Should the grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate its facilities by the
date established by the Borough or other agency of government or
municipal authority, the Borough or other agency of government or
municipal authority may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment
or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the grantee,
including all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Borough or
other agency of government or municipal authority due to the grantee's
delay.
A. In consideration of occupying or using the public ways under this
article, the grantee shall pay to the Borough a rental equal to 5% of
gross revenue.
§ 160-18 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-19
152:439
§ 160-20. Indemnification, insurance and bonds or other surety.
B. The rental shall be assessed on a calendar quarterly basis and shall be
payable to the Borough no later than 45 days after the expiration of the
calendar quarter for which payment is due. The grantee shall file with
the Borough a complete and accurate statement, under notarial seal, at
the end of each calendar year quarter, certified as true and correct by a
representative of the grantee authorized to make such certification,
explaining how the payment was calculated. In connection with the
rental payment due on February 14, the grantee shall also submit to the
Borough, on that date or no later than six months thereafter, a detailed
statement by an officer of the grantee, certified by the grantee's
independent certified public accountant, verifying the accuracy of the
gross revenue and rental payments for the previous calendar year, with
a detailed breakdown and explanation of the calculation by each month.
C. The grantee shall keep accurate books of account which shall clearly
support the calculation of rentals and describe in sufficient detail the
amounts attributable to each specific component of gross revenue.
Such books of account and all supplemental information and source
documents in support thereof, including, but not limited to, third-party
remittances and contract documents, shall be made available to the
Borough and its authorized representatives for examination at a
location in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, at any time during regular
business hours on 10 days' prior written notice and from time to time
for the purpose of verifying or identifying rentals owed to the Borough.
The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to obtain financial records of
affiliates for the Borough for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of
the rental payments. Borough shall have the right to examine and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this article;
provided, however, that such examination shall take place within 48
months following the close of each year. Any additional amount due to
the Borough as a result of the examination and recomputation shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the
Borough, which notice shall include a copy of the examination report. In
the event that said examination determines that funds are owed to the
Borough in an amount in excess of 2%, the cost of said examination
shall be borne by the grantee and reimbursed to the Borough within 30
days following written notice to the grantee.
D. In the event that any rental or other payment is not made or the
requisite documentation and certification is not provided on or before
the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be compounded
daily and set at the one-year United States Treasury Bill rate existent on
the date payment was due, plus three percentage points. Any amount
recomputed to reflect correct payment due shall bear interest as
described from the date such payment was originally due.
A. The grantee shall save the Borough, its agents, employees and elected
and appointed officials, harmless from and against all claims, damages,
§ 160-19 PERKASIE CODE § 160-20
152:440
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, sustained on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever
arising out of the construction, leasing, operation or maintenance of the
grantee's equipment, facilities, and services specified by this article,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed
and/or prohibited by this chapter and the rights granted thereunder.
B. Insurance.
(1) The grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of this article insurance with an insurance
company licensed to do business and doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Borough. All
companies will be required to be rated A-VII or better by A.M. Best
or A or better by Standard and Poors. The grantee shall provide the
Borough with proof of such insurance so required.
(2) The grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at the
grantee's sole expense, insurance coverage in the following types
and minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and
statutory employers' liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public)
liability, to include coverage for
the following where the
exposure exists:
Combined single limit for
bodily injury and property
damages $2,000,000 per
occurrence or its equivalent
Premises operations
Independent contractors
Products/completed operations
Personal injury
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse and
underground property damage
Comprehensive vehicle
insurance coverage for loading
and unloading hazards, for:
Combined single limit of bodily
injury and property damage
$1,000,000 per occurrence or
its equivalent
Owned/leased vehicles
Nonowned vehicles
Hired vehicles
(3) The Borough shall receive, without expense, copies of certificates
of insurance evidencing coverage stated above.
§ 160-20 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-20
152:441
(4) The grantee agrees that with respect to the above-required
insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following
required provisions:
(a) Name the Borough and its officers, employees, board members
and elected and appointed officials as additional insured
parties (as the interests of each insured may appear) as to all
applicable coverage (except worker's compensation);
(b) Provide for 60 days' written notice to the Borough for
cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change;
(c) Provide that all provisions of this article concerning liability,
duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity provisions,
shall be underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to
include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to
policy terms and conditions.
(5) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse
against the Borough for payment of any premiums or assessments
which all are set at the sole risk of the grantee. Insurance policies
obtained by the grantee shall provide that the issuing company
waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the
Borough in connection with any damage covered by these policies.
C. The grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and
file with the Borough, a corporate surety bond with a surety company
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the
amount of 15% of the grantee's estimated costs to secure the grantee's
performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all
requirements of this article.
(1) No action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such
bond shall affect the Borough's rights to demand full and faithful
performance under this article or limit the grantee's liability for
damages.
(2) The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor any intention not to renew be exercised by the surety
until 60 days after receipt by the Borough of Perkasie, by
registered mail, of written notice of such intent."
D. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the
grantee.
E. The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement
stating the following: Should any policies of insurance be canceled or
coverages be reduced before the expiration date of said policies of
insurance, the issuer shall deliver 60 days' advance written notice to
the Borough.
§ 160-20 PERKASIE CODE § 160-20
152:442
§ 160-21. Violations and penalties.
§ 160-22. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The grantee shall at all times be subject to the exercise of the police
power of the Borough. The grantee shall comply with all lawful ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations of the Borough, County of Bucks,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the United States of America which
are now in effect or hereafter enacted.
§ 160-23. (Reserved)
§ 160-24. (Reserved)
§ 160-25. (Reserved)
§ 160-26. (Reserved)
§ 160-27. (Reserved)
§ 160-28. (Reserved)
§ 160-29. (Reserved)
§ 160-30. (Reserved)
§ 160-31. (Reserved)
F. Neither the provisions of this article nor any insurance accepted by the
Borough pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Borough
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
grantee and/or limit the liability of the grantee under this chapter
issued hereunder and/or for damages, either to the full amount of the
bond or otherwise.
A. General. In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserved
and/or retained by the Borough under this Rights-of-Way Ordinance or
otherwise, the Borough reserves the right to bring a civil action to
collect any sums due to the Borough by the grantee and/or forfeit or
revoke all privileges of the grantee under this article in the event of
willful or repeated violation of this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who commits or suffers the violation of this
article shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a fine of $600 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough. A
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation is found to exist or for each section of this article which is
found to have been violated. In addition, the Borough also may enforce
this article by an action brought in equity.
§ 160-20 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-31
152:443

ARTICLE III
Use of Streets
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 160, Art. III, of the 1985 Code]
§ 160-32. Definitions and word usage.
§ 160-33. Display of articles for sale unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose or display for sale, within any
street, any article, which shall include but shall not be limited to any bicycle,
motorcycle, automobile or vehicle of any kind.
§ 160-34. Work on and repair of vehicles unlawful. [Amended
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park any motor vehicles or to
allow the same to remain standing or parked on any street or any Perkasie
Borough-owned or leased parking lot while such vehicle shall be undergoing
any work or repairs of any nature, except for minor repairs or adjustments
reasonably required to facilitate the removal of such vehicle.
§ 160-35. Violations and penalties.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
STREET — The roadway or portion within the curbline of any street,
road or public alley located in the Borough of Perkasie.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties. [Amended
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
B. Each day on which any such violation shall be committed shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 160-32 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-35
152:445

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)124
§ 160-36. (Reserved)
§ 160-37. (Reserved)
124. Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Sledding on Streets, consisting of §§ 160-36 and 160-37, was
deleted 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835. See § 180-15, Play highways.
§ 160-36 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-37
152:447

ARTICLE V
Street Openings, Excavations and Pavement Cuts
[Adopted 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 704]
§ 160-38. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Perkasie, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action. 125
PERMANENT REPAIRS — Such restoration of excavated areas as so defined
in the “Perkasie Borough Roadway Construction Standards and
Specifications”126 which standards and specifications are a part of the Code
of the Borough of Perkasie, subject to change only by ordinance. Copies
of the said Standards and Specifications shall be available at the Borough
Hall.[Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 895]
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all of the terms of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility or
corporation, but shall not include the Borough of Perkasie or any
Department of the Borough of Perkasie.
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, public highway, public
alley, public way, public road or public easement within the Borough.
STREET OPENING — Any ditch, excavation, tunnel or opening in or under
the surface of any street, or within any street right-of-way, except, however,
work performed by any property owner or his agent or contractor within
that portion of the street right-of-way abutting his property and lying
between the curbline and the property line, or a line 12 inches beyond the
curbline in the case of construction or repair of curbs.
§ 160-39. Permit required.
A. No person shall make any street openings, by drilling or otherwise, in
or upon any of the streets of the Borough of Perkasie, Pennsylvania,
without first obtaining a permit from the Borough Manager or his
designee.
125. Editor's Note: See also § 160-44, Emergency openings.
126. Editor's Note: The "Perkasie Borough Roadway Construction Standards and
Specifications" are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-38 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-39
152:449
§ 160-40. Application fee. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
An application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council shall be paid to the Borough Manager, in order that the applicant's
permit request be processed.
§ 160-41. Failure to complete work prior to date of expiration of
permit.
B. Permission to make such street openings, by drilling or tunneling or
boring or otherwise, may be obtained upon compliance with the
following conditions:
(1) Written application must be made to the Borough Manager for a
permit. Upon application, a permit shall be issued by the Borough
Manager, or his designee, within a one-week period.
(2) Such application must set forth the name of the street and a
description of the property in front of which the proposed street
openings are to be made, by drilling or otherwise, as well as the
character, extent and purpose of such proposed street openings,
said statement of character, extent and purpose to include a
statement of approximate width, length and depth of street surface
to be opened.
A. In case the work applied for has not been completed before the date of
expiration as shown on the permit, which date shall be fixed when the
permit is granted and shall not be more than 120 days from date of
issuance, the Borough Manager may, if he deems it advisable, take the
proper steps to backfill the trench and replace the street surface over
the opening for which the permit has been issued and bill the permittee.
The Borough Manager shall give notice to the permittee, in writing, that
such action is impending. The permittee shall be given 48 hours to
respond to such written notice. If an extension of time on the said date
is necessary for the completion of the work, a written application for an
extension of time must be filed with the Borough Manager.
B. All permits for the opening of street surfaces are subject to revocation
at any time by the Borough Manager or by Borough Council or in the
event of failure of the permittee to comply with any of the conditions
upon which the permit has been granted, said conditions to be in
accordance with the provisions of this article. In the event of revocation
of a permit, the Borough Manager shall take the proper steps to backfill
the trench and replace the street surface over the opening for which the
permit was issued and bill the permittee. All such repairs shall be made
pursuant to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications,
PUB No. 408.
§ 160-39 PERKASIE CODE § 160-42
152:450
§ 160-42. Permanent repairs to street surfaces.
All permanent repairs to street surfaces within the Borough shall be made
between 90 days and 150 days after the temporary repair is completed.
§ 160-43. Responsibility of permittee.
A. The permittee shall assume all responsibility for such excavation,
tunneling or opening, and for refilling the same, and for all damages
whatsoever that may arise by reason of the excavation, tunneling or
opening.
B. The permittee shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) The permittee shall assume all responsibility for such excavation,
tunneling or opening, and for refilling the same, and for all
damages whatsoever that may arise by reason of the excavation,
tunneling or opening.
(2) The permittee shall pay all costs and expenses incident to or arising
from the project, including the prescribed fees for same, the cost of
making and maintaining temporary restoration of the disturbed
areas and making permanent restoration.
(3) The permittee shall notify the Borough Manager of the date that
work undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under § 160-39 of this
article has been completed.
(4) Permanent restoration shall be made pursuant to the “Perkasie
Borough Roadway Construction Standards and Specifications”127
which standards and specifications are a part of the Code of the
Borough of Perkasie, subject to change only by ordinance. Copies of
the said Standards and Specifications shall be available at the
Borough Hall. [Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 895]
(5) The person causing such cut or opening to be made in the street
shall provide suitable barricades and guards to protect persons
using the street from injury, and at night the cut or opening shall be
marked with sufficient hazard lights to warn persons using the
street of such cut or opening.
(6) When a trench is cut into any roadway within the Borough, the
permit holder shall be required to mill and overlay the half-width of
the roadway a depth of 1 1/2 inches for the entire length of the
trench cut. In cases where the trench cut occurs on both sides of
the roadway and/or along the centerline of the roadway, the permit
holder shall be required to mill and overlay the entire width of the
roadway a depth of 1 1/2 inches for the entire length of the trench
cut. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 973]
127. Editor's Note: The "Perkasie Borough Roadway Construction Standards and
Specifications" are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-42 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-44
152:451
§ 160-44. Emergency openings.
Each and every street opening shall be made only after application has
been made therefor and permit granted by the Borough Manager, or his
designee, except in the event of an emergency opening. "Emergency" shall
mean any condition constituting a clear and present danger to life or
property by reason of escaping gas, exposed wires, collapsed water or
sewer lines or other breaks or defects in the user's line. The Borough
Manager shall be notified immediately of the need for an emergency
opening. Permit application for all emergency openings shall be filed within
five days after the emergency cut has been made.
§ 160-45. Gutters, lights and identification.
§ 160-46. Additional work.
In no case shall a permittee open or remove a greater area of street
surface than specified in the original application. The permittee shall not
open any street at any location not specified in the original permit. If the
permittee determines during construction than an additional area of the
street will have to be opened, he shall notify and secure permission from
the Department of Public Works for the additional opening. Upon receipt
of permission, the permittee shall file a supplementary application for the
work no later than the next work day.
§ 160-47. Guaranty of work.
The permittee shall guarantee and maintain its work for 24 months from
the completion of the restoration and replacement work. Within this twentyfour-
month period, upon notification from the Borough of necessary
A. All gutters shall be left open so as not to obstruct the free passage of
water and sidewalks and footways must be kept in a safe and passable
condition. All excavations or material from them shall have placed upon
them sufficient lights and barricades to identify them from all directions
during the day and after dark.
B. If, for safety purposes, the Department of Public Works deems it
necessary to install additional warning devices such as lights,
barricades or signs, the permittee shall be notified of the decision and
shall receive instructions on the installation. In case of emergencies,
the Borough may install all additional warning devices deemed
necessary by the Department of Public Works. The permittee shall be
notified of this decision. The Borough shall invoice the permittee for
rental and installation costs incurred from the date of installation until
the permittee installs warning devices.
C. Work performed pursuant to the issuance of a permit under § 160-39 of
this article shall be completed pursuant to the standards set out at
Chapter 459 of the Pennsylvania Code, and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, PUB No. 408.
§ 160-44 PERKASIE CODE § 160-47
152:452
correctional work required, the permittee shall correct or cause to be
corrected all restoration work required within 10 working days of receipt of
the notification. The Department of Public Works shall determine the extent
of restoration required and the method of correction. Any and all work not
completed within the ten-day period may be completed by the Borough at
the discretion of the Director of Public Works. The Borough shall invoice the
permittee for all costs incurred by the Borough in the performance of this
work.
§ 160-48. Conditions for issuance of permits.
Permits shall be granted only to the owners of the property on which the
work is done, or to public utilities or authorities whose service lines or
poles occupy the streets of the Borough, under a legal right or franchise.
No permits shall be issued to contractors or subcontractors. Issuance of a
permit may be delayed up to a period of one year where the proposed work
will interfere with work being done or to be done within one year, by or for
the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 160-49. Indemnification.
The permittee agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Perkasie from all liability for damages or injury occurring to any person or
persons or property, at such openings in streets through, or in consequence
of, any act or omission of any contractor, agent, servant, employee or person
engaged or employed in, about or upon said work by, at the instance or with
the approval or consent of the permittee.
§ 160-50. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties. Each violation of any
provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 160-47 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 160-50
152:453
Chapter 164
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 35.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical service — See Ch. 85.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 94.
Light fixtures on private property — See Ch.
106, Art. I.
Plumbing — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 137.
Sewers — See Ch. 147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 158.
Street and sidewalk construction — See Ch.
160.
Trees — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 186.
§ 160-50 PERKASIE CODE § 160-50
152:454
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Legislative intent.
§ 164-2. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Perkasie Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations."
§ 164-3. More restrictive provisions to prevail.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 164-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the divisions and
development of land within Perkasie Borough, in order to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
B. It is the general intent of this chapter to regulate the division and
development of land so as to:
(1) Lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
(2) Further the orderly and appropriate use of land.
(3) Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
(4) Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities.
(5) Assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation
and to provide for the harmonious development of Perkasie
Borough.
(6) Coordinate existing streets with proposed streets, parks or other
features of the Borough.
(7) Ensure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air.
(8) Provide proper distribution of the population.
(9) Give effect to the policies and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan
for Perkasie Borough.
§ 164-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:455
A. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows: words used in the present tense include the
future; and the singular includes the plural.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
C. As used in this chapter, unless a contrary intention is clear, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Areas which are subject to periodic flooding as
defined in Interim Soil Survey Report, Volumes I and II, Soil
Conservation Service, 1970.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application
for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for
approval of a development plan.[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164) known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."128[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
BEGINNING OF REVIEW PERIOD —
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code129 to render final
adjudications.[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
BOROUGH ARBORIST — A person, selected by the Borough Manager
with the approval of Borough Council, whose responsibilities include
ensuring that the tree protection standards are followed correctly. The
"Borough Arborist" must have a degree in arboriculture, horticulture,
forestry, landscape architecture, silviculture or plant physiology and
The review period shall begin on the date of the first regular
meeting of the Perkasie Borough Planning Commission following
receipt by the Borough Manager of an applicant's complete
submission.
(1)
The review period shall begin on the 30th day following receipt by
the Borough Manager of an applicant's complete submission, in the
event that no regular meeting of the Perkasie Borough Planning
Commission occurs during the 30 days following receipt by the
Borough Manager of the applicant's complete submission.
(2)
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-4
152:456
have a knowledge of and experience in the methods of tree
protection.[Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof which is used or intended to be
used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. The
word "building" shall include any part thereof.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum required
front yards. The "building setback line" shall be measured from the
future right-of-way line.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of any street or that
portion of a street customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of
travel over the street.
COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION — The Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission.
CONDOMINIUM —
COUNCIL or BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Perkasie Borough Council.
CUL-DE-SAC — A secondary street with one end open for vehicular
and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code130 to do so, either by reason of the grant
of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations.
All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of
the county and judicial district wherein the Borough lies.[Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
A dwelling unit which has all of the following characteristics:
The unit, the interior and associated exterior areas designated
for private use in the development plan, as owned by the
occupant.
(a)
(b) The unit may be any permitted dwelling type.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with
the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.,
and in accordance with the provisions for open space, roads or
other development features in Chapter 186, Zoning, and this
chapter. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
(c)
(1)
A "condominium" is an ownership arrangement and not a land
use, therefore it is allowed in any district and under the same
restrictions of the residential land use that comprises it.
(2)
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 164-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:457
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwelling units per unit area.
The unit area for the R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts131 is the net
buildable site area. The unit area for all other districts is the base site
area. "Density" shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre.
DETERMINATION [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644] —
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord.
No. 644]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities.[Added 5-21-1990
by Ord. No. 644]
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, pipe, culvert, storm sewer or
structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of
diverting surface water from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or land development.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by
one family.
EASEMENT — A grant of the use of a parcel of land to the use of the
public, a corporation or person for a specific purpose.
FEEDER ROOTS — The smallest roots of a tree, which are responsible
for most of the absorption of nutrients into the tree. Most are located
within the top 12 inches of the soil.[Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of any land use ordinance or applications
thereunder, except the following:
(a) The governing body.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board.
The planning agency, only in and to the extent the planning
agency is charged with final decision on preliminary or final
plans under this chapter.
(c)
(1)
"Determinations" shall be appealable only to the boards designated
as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
(2)
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Zoning.
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-4
152:458
FLOODPLAINS — Areas adjoining any stream, watercourse, lake or
pond which are subject to flooding as defined and delineated in Ch. 186,
Zoning, and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map therein.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed
in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania,
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
1999, as being on the floodplain or subject to flooding. The following
soil types are "floodplain soils": [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
FOREST — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees
(i.e., greater than six inches in caliber) covering an area greater than
1/4 of an acre; or groves of mature trees (greater than eight inches in
caliber) consisting of more than 10 individuals.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces which are impervious to
rain. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any
areas in concrete and asphalt shall be considered "impervious surfaces"
within this definition. In addition, paved areas and other areas
determined by the Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this
definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of use of a
piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces within the site by the gross site area.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Borough,
county or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which is
paved with an approved hardtop surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations and
changes, such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sewers,
drainage facilities, public utilities and other appropriate items required
to render land suitable for the use proposed.
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year round. Artificial "ponds" may be created by dams or result
from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured
from the permanent pool elevation. "Lakes" are bodies of water two or
(1) Alluvial land.
(2) Alton gravelly loam, flooded.
(3) Bowmansville silt loam.
(4) Hatboro silt loam.
(5) Marsh.
(6) Pope loam.
(7) Rowland silt loam.
§ 164-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:459
more acres in extent. "Ponds" are any water body less than two acres in
extent.
LAND DEVELOPMENT [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644] — Any of
the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.[Added 5-21-1990
by Ord. No. 644]
LOT — A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the
site of one or more buildings and buildings accessory thereto or for any
other purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street. A "lot,"
for the purpose of this chapter, may or may not coincide with a lot of
record, includes plot or parcel. A designated parcel, tract or area of
land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord.
No. 644]
LOT AREA — The total area of a lot lying within the lot lines and shall
specifically exclude the area of any easements within the aforesaid lot
lines.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The following shall not be considered a "land development:"
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
(b)
(3)
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-4
152:460
LOT, CORNER — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135º at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street
or streets shall be considered a "corner lot" if the tangents to the curve
at the points beginning with the lot or at the points of intersection of the
side lot lines with the street right-of-way lines intersect at an interior
angle of less than 135º.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
MANAGER — The Borough Manager, appointed as such by the Borough
Council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land into not more than two lots, tracts or parcels of land for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of
building development, provided that the proposed lots, tracts or parcels
of land thereby created have frontage on an improved public street or
streets and provided further that there is not created by the subdivision
any new street or streets, the need for required improvements,
easement of access or the need therefor.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate
living quarters for two or more families.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
Perkasie Borough.[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
NATURAL RETENTION AREAS — Areas of 1/4 acre or more of poorly
drained soils which lie along stream channels or swales or are adjacent
to floodplain soils and which are subject to periodic flooding. These
are portions of the following soil types where slope is less than 1/
2%: Doylestown silt loam and Urban land — Abbottstown complex, as
delineated in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties,
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
1975, or as currently amended.
OPEN SPACE —
Land held in common ownership, protected by easement, dedicated
to the public or identified in another suitable manner in accordance
with this chapter as "open space." To qualify as "open space," such
land shall be used only for "open space" uses, i.e., recreation,
amenity, buffer or resource protection. "Open space" does not
include land occupied by buildings, roads or road rights-of-way, nor
does it include the yards or lots of individuals or group dwelling
units as required by the provisions of Chapter 186, Zoning,
§ 186-18 or 186-20.
(1)
"Open space" shall be left in its natural state, except in the case of
recreation uses. All impervious surfaces within "open space" areas
shall be counted as part of the total impervious surface area in
arriving at the impervious surface ratio for the development.
(2)
§ 164-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:461
OPEN SPACE RATIO — A measure of intensity of land use. It is arrived
at by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the
gross site area.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, partnership and association, in
addition to the individual.
PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water
year round. Artificial "ponds" may be created by dams or result from
excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured from
the maximum condition rather than permanent pool, if there is any
difference.
PRUNING — Removal of branches from a tree using proper tools and
approved cutting techniques.[Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act
170), 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act
of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 65 P.S.
§ 271 et seq. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 835]
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a
solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon their recipient, board,
officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any "report"
used, received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency
rendering a determination or decision shall be made available for
inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding
upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of
production.[Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, alley, crosswalk, sanitary or storm sewer, stream, drainage
ditch or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way"
for land plotting purposes in the Borough shall mean that every "rightof-
way" hereafter established and shown on a final record plan is to be
separate and distinct from lots or parcels adjoining such "right-of-way"
and not included with the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-4
152:462
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE —
SITE — A parcel or parcels of land which are intended to have one or
more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA, BASE — The area of a tract of land remaining after
subtracting land which is not contiguous, land previously subdivided
and existing road and utility rights-of-way from the site area. See
§ 164-40 of this chapter for the specific calculations.
SITE AREA, NET BUILDABLE — A calculated area upon which the
density and impervious surface ratio requirements for the various
districts are computed. It can be determined for a particular tract of
land by completing the calculations found in § 164-40 of this chapter.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8%, which
are subject because of this slope to higher rates or runoff and therefore
erosion.
STREET —
The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing
streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
(1)
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
(2)
A public or private way used or intended to be used for passage
or travel by automotive vehicles and pedestrians and to provide
access to abutting properties.
(1)
"Streets" are further defined and classified as follows:
Thoroughfares.
EXPRESSWAY — Designed for large volumes and highspeed
traffic with access limited to grade separated
intersections.
[1]
ARTERIAL STREET — Designed for large volumes and
high-speed traffic with access to abutting properties
controlled.
[2]
COLLECTOR STREET — Designed to carry a moderate
volume of fast-moving traffic from primary and secondary
streets to arterial streets, with access to abutting
properties controlled.
[3]
(a)
Local streets.
PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL STREET — Designed to carry
a moderate volume of traffic, to intercept secondary
(residential) streets, to provide routes to collector streets
and community facilities and to provide access to the
abutting properties.
[1]
(b)
(2)
§ 164-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:463
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The
"street line" shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line, provided
that the street right-of-way shall not be less than required in § 164-20A
through D of this chapter and where a future right-of-way width for a
street has been officially established, the street right-of-way line shall
be the side line of the future right-of-way so established.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed
or erected at a fixed location, including a building, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
SUBDIVISION, PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Considered as
subdivision or land development for the purpose of the procedural
sections of this chapter. It is a subdivision or land development for
which the developer chooses to use the performance standards set
forth in the Chapter 186, Zoning, rather than the traditional zoning.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. "Topsoil" is usually found in the uppermost eight inches.[Added
10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 770]
TREE DRIPLINE — The line marking the outer edges of the branches of
the tree.[Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
SECONDARY RESIDENTIAL STREET — Designed to
provide access to the abutting properties and a route to
primary residential streets.
[2]
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A secondary street which
is parallel to and adjacent to an expressway, arterial or
collector street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
[3]
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or the side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
[4]
DRIVEWAY — Generally a private street for the use of
vehicles and pedestrians providing access between a
public street and a parking area within a lot or property.
[5]
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-4
152:464
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ) — An area that is radial to the trunk of
a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The "tree protection
zone" shall be 15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained or the
distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where
there is a group of trees or woodlands, the "tree protection zone"
shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual
trees.[Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract
of land.
WETLANDS — Areas of undrained, saturated soils supporting wetland
vegetation, where the water table is at or near the surface or where
shallow water covers the area due to permanent or seasonal inundation
of surface or ground water. For the purposes of this chapter, "wetlands"
are identified using a three-parameter approach. The first is the
presence of hydrophytic or wetland vegetation. The second parameter
considers whether the soil develops under saturated conditions and will
exhibit certain morphological characteristics that distinguish it as a
hydric soil. Finally, the third parameter considers the hydrology, so that
an area must have either permanent surface water or be periodically
inundated during the growing season by ground- or surface
water.[Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
WOODLANDS — Areas comprised of one or more acres of mature or
largely mature trees in which the largest trees measure at least six
inches dbh (diameter at breast height or 4 1/2 feet above the ground).
The "woodlands" shall be measured from the dripline of the outer trees.
"Woodlands" are also 10 or more individual trees which measure at
least 10 inches dbh and form a contiguous canopy.[Added 9-19-1988
by Ord. No. 604]
YARD — An open space unobstructed from the ground up, on the same
lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or street line and inward
to the structure. The size of a required "yard" shall be measured as the
shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner
§ 164-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-4
152:465
§ 164-5. Plan approval required prior to subdivision. [Amended
8-17-1987 by Ord. No. 594]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land in the Borough or any
other person, firm or corporation to subdivide any lot, tract or parcel of
land or lay out, construct, open or dedicate for public use or travel any
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage facility or other facility in
connection therewith or for the common use of occupants of buildings
within the subdivision or land development unless and until final plans
of such subdivision or development have been prepared by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor, submitted to and
approved in writing thereon by the Borough Council (except for minor
subdivisions) and recorded in the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds' office
in Doylestown, Pennsylvania; provided, however, that notwithstanding
anything set forth herein, the Borough, with regard to a library which is
on land owned by the Borough and which is opened to the public and not
conducted as a private gainful business, may enter into a long-term lease
of the site wherein such library may be located with another governmental
agency or a not-for-profit corporation without the necessity of following the
regulations and procedures set forth herein.
§ 164-6. Occupancy of buildings and sale of lots: prerequisites.
§ 164-7. Preventive remedies. [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644132]
lot, the yards extending along all streets are "front yards." In the case
of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the
yards extending along all streets are "front yards."
A. No lot in a subdivision may be sold and no permit to erect, alter or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land development may
be issued unless and until a plan has received final approval and until
the municipal improvements required by the Borough Council in
connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as
hereinafter provided.
B. No building in a subdivision or land development depending on ingress
and egress upon the improvement of any street or streets herein
provided for shall be permitted to be occupied before improvements are
fully completed from a now-existing paved street to and across the front
of the lot on which the building is located and/or to a sufficient depth
along the side of the lot to service any driveway, driveways or parking
spaces.
C. No building depending upon public water and sewer facilities shall be
permitted to be occupied before such facilities are fully provided and
operational.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 164-7, Violations and penalties, as
amended.
§ 164-4 PERKASIE CODE § 164-7
152:466
§ 164-7.1. Enforcement remedies. [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No.
644]
A. In addition to other remedies provided for herein, the Borough may
institute and maintain appropriate actions in law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction,
recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling
or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough, its Zoning Officer or other officers, may refuse to issue
any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or
develop any real property which has been developed or which has
resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of any provision
of this chapter. This authority to deny any such permits or approvals
shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. No permit shall be issued nor shall any approval be granted to any
applicant identified in Subsection B above, unless such applicant
complies with the conditions which would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property, unless the Borough waives such condition or conditions.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, shall pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs plus reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment
shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation,
§ 164-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-7.1
152:467
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter
each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition of the defendant, may grant
an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the Borough, the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 164-7.1 PERKASIE CODE § 164-7.1
152:468
ARTICLE II
Procedures
§ 164-8. Compliance required. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No.
644]
A. The procedures set forth in this article shall be strictly followed by all
applicants.
B. The separate stages of approval may require the submission of
preliminary plans and final plans. These plans differ in their purpose
and the required level of detail. The tables below indicate the required
plan for the different types of submission. [Amended 11-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 897]
Plan
Lot Line
Adjustment or
Minor Subdivision
Major
Subdivision
Land
Development
Tentative
sketch
Not required Optional Optional
Preliminary Not required Required Required
Final Required Required Required
C. All applicants for sketch plan review, preliminary plan review and
preliminary/final plan review shall be required to provide notice of the
filing of the plan to the owner or owners of record of all abutting
property, which shall include, in addition to owners whose land directly
abuts the land(s) of the applicant, owners of property across a street
from the applicant's property(ies). The notice shall set forth the street
address(es) and Tax Map parcel identification number(s) for the
applicant's property(ies) and advise the abutting property owner(s) that
a plan relating to applicant's property(ies) has been filed and may be
reviewed at the Borough offices. The notice shall further inform the
abutting property owner(s) that public meetings will be held to consider
the application and that the dates of the meetings where the application
will be considered can be obtained by contacting the Borough. All
sketch plan, preliminary plan and preliminary/final plan applications
shall include a certification in the form that follows. Failure to provide
notice shall not constitute grounds for the denial of a pending
application. [Added 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 908]
I, ________________________________, hereby certify that first-class mail
notice has been provided to the following owner(s) of record of
abutting property:
(LIST ALL ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS BY NAME AND
ADDRESS)
§ 164-8 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-8
152:469
§ 164-9. Tentative sketch plan.
The above are all of the owners of record of properties abutting
the property that is the subject of this application. I verify that the
statements made herein are true and correct. I understand that false
statements herein are made subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. §
4904 relating to unsworn falsification to authorities.
Signature of Applicant or Applicant's Authorized
Representative
Date
A. A tentative sketch plan is an optional submission. It is offered to give
the applicant an opportunity to consult early and informally in the plan
preparation phase with the municipality and the County Planning
Commission. The purpose of this submission is to allow the municipality
and the applicant the opportunity to discuss such things as the lot
layout, location of buildings, street layout, the arrangement and
location of open space and other matters dealing with the land
development and subdivision before detailed engineering is done. The
municipality will comment on not only whether the sketch plan meets
the objectives of the Borough ordinances but also if it feels it is
consistent with sound planning and design principles. It is not intended
in any way to replace the preliminary plan, but rather to give the
applicant guidance in preparing the much more detailed preliminary
plan. Recommendations and comments made by the Borough in
response to a tentative sketch plan submission shall in no way be
regarded as official approval, nor shall any such action grant any legal
rights to the applicant or immunity from full compliance with the
requirements and procedures set forth for preliminary and final plans.
B. Procedure. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604; 5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 644; 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 707]
(1) The applicant shall prepare the sketch plan and application.
(2) The applicant shall submit three copies of the sketch plan and
application to the Borough Manager. Applications for tracts of land
along the Borough boundary line shall submit one additional set of
plans which shall be forwarded to the adjacent municipality for its
comments. The Borough may solicit comments from an adjacent
municipality even if the plan is not on the boundary of the Borough,
where a plan, in the opinion of the Borough, affects the adjacent
municipality.
(3) The Borough Manager shall check submission against the Appendix
B checklist133 for completeness and, if the submission is
incomplete, immediately return the submission to the applicant and
133. Editor's Note: Appendix B is available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-8 PERKASIE CODE § 164-9
152:470
§ 164-10. Preliminary plan.
indicate the deficiencies or, if the submission is complete, accept
the sketch plan and application.
(4) The Borough Manager shall immediately distribute copies of the
sketch plan and application as follows:
(a) Borough Planning Commission: one copy.
(5) At the first regular meeting following receipt of the complete
submission to the Borough Manager, the Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission shall:
(a) Receive and review the applicant's submission.
(b) Listen to the applicant's presentation.
(c) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(6) The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, either the same
evening or at least within 90 days following the receipt by the
Borough Manager of the applicant's complete submission, shall:
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and presentation. When
comments are solicited from adjacent municipalities, the
Planning Commission shall review the report.
(b) Determine whether the sketch plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Inform the applicant, in writing, of the decision, including
required changes in the sketch plan and the reasons for the
decision.
(7) In the event that the Perkasie Borough Planning Commission
deems that the sketch plan cannot meet the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances or otherwise
rejects the sketch plan or fails to take any action within 90 days
following the receipt, by the Borough Manager, of the applicant's
complete submission, then the applicant must comply with the
requirements of § 164-10 relating to a preliminary plan, unless this
is waived by the Planning Commission, and the requirements of
§ 164-11 relating to the final plan before the Borough Council shall
be deemed to disapprove the final plan entitling the applicant to
rights of appeal set forth in § 164-11E.
A. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to require formal conditional
approval in order to minimize changes and revisions before final plans
are submitted.
B. Submission. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 164-9 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-10
152:471
(1) A preliminary plan shall be submitted and all information and
procedures relating thereto shall, in all respects, be in compliance
with the provisions of § 164-10, except where modification
therefrom may be specifically requested by the applicant.
(2) When the applicant is requesting a modification to a provision or
provisions of this chapter, a written request shall accompany the
plan submission. The request shall cite the section(s) of the chapter
to be modified, the extent of modification and the reasons for the
modification. (See § 164-73, Modifications.)
C. Deposit and fee.134
(1) Upon the submission of a complete preliminary plan to the Borough
Manager, the applicant shall pay to the Borough Manager a cash
deposit to reimburse the Borough for all reasonable engineering
and legal expenses incurred by the Borough for services rendered
by the Borough Engineer and Borough Solicitor. The amount of the
deposit shall be in accordance with a deposit schedule adopted by
Borough Council. As the deposit fund is expended, the applicant
shall make further deposits upon notice from the Borough Manager
in such manner that the total deposit with the Borough shall be at
all times equal to the original deposit. Upon approval of the final
plan, the Borough Manager shall refund to the applicant any
deposit remaining.
(2) In addition to the above deposit, a review fee in accordance with
the fee schedule adopted by the Borough Council shall accompany
the submission of the complete preliminary plan.
(3) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the review of a plan or the inspection of
improvements, the procedures listed in § 164-75E shall be
followed. [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
D. Procedure.
(1) The applicant shall prepare the preliminary plan and application.
(2) Number of sets of plans. [Amended 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621;
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 942]
(a) Submission and distribution.
[1] The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the preliminary
plan and application to the Borough Manager. In addition,
the applicant shall provide to the Borough Manager a
digital copy (pdf format) of the record plan sheets of the
submission. This shall be provided either on a compact
134. Editor's Note: The deposit and fee are set by resolution of the Borough Council. Current
deposits and fees are available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-10 PERKASIE CODE § 164-10
152:472
disc or as an email attachment. Copies may be distributed
to:
[a] Borough Secretary (file copy).
[b] Borough Planning Commission (7).
[c] County Planning Commission.
[d] Borough Engineer.
[e] Borough Solicitor.
[f] Regional Authority.135
[g] Electric Department.
[h] Public Works Department.
[i] Fire Company.
(b) Upon request of the Borough Manager, the applicant may be
required to submit additional copies of the preliminary plan.
(3) The Borough Manager shall check submission against the Appendix
C checklist136 for completeness and, if the submission is
incomplete, immediately return the submission to the applicant and
indicate the deficiencies or, if the submission is complete, accept
the preliminary plan, application, deposit and fees.
(4) (Reserved)137
(5) The Bucks County Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary plan and prepare a report for review by the Perkasie
Borough Planning Commission in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.138
[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(6) Following receipt of the complete submission to the Borough
Manager, the Borough Engineer shall: [Amended 9-19-1988 by
Ord. No. 604]
(a) Receive the applicant's submission.
(b) Review the applicant's submission from an engineering
standpoint.
135. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
136. Editor's Note: Appendix C is available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
137. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4), regarding distribution of copies of the preliminary
plan and application by the Borough Manager, as amended, was repealed 5-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 942.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 164-10 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-10
152:473
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission and Borough
Council.
(7) At the first regular meeting following receipt of the complete
submission by the Borough Manager, the Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission shall: [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No.
604]
(a) Review the applicant's submission.
(b) Receive and review the reports by the Bucks County Planning
Commission and other applicable reviewing agencies.
[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(c) Review the report of the submission by the Borough Engineer.
(d) Listen to the applicant's presentation.
(e) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(8) The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, following receipt by
the Borough Manager of the applicant's submission, shall:
[Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and presentation and
discuss the County Planning Commission's report and the
Borough Engineer's report with the applicant.
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Prepare a report on the project for use by the Borough Council.
(9) Following receipt of the report of the Borough Planning
Commission and within 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the
submission is filed, provided that should said next regular meeting
of the Planning Commission occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application has
been filed, the Borough Council shall:
(a) Receive and review the applicant's submission.
(b) Receive and review the reports by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Engineer, the Bucks County
Planning Commission and any other applicable reviewing
agency. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(c) Listen to the applicant's presentation, if requested.
(d) Discuss the project with applicant.
(10) The Borough Council shall:
§ 164-10 PERKASIE CODE § 164-10
152:474
§ 164-11. Final plan.
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and presentation, its
discussion with the applicant and the Borough Planning
Commission's report.
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Communicate its decision regarding approval or disapproval of
the plan to the applicant in writing within 15 days following the
decision, but in no event later than 90 days from the beginning
of the review period. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
[1] An application may be granted preliminary approval
subject to specific conditions. These conditions shall be
included in the written communication to the applicant
and, in addition, a written notification stating that if the
applicant does not accept the conditions the application
shall be deemed denied.
[2] Within seven days of the receipt of the written
communication granting the conditional approval by the
Borough Council, the applicant shall notify the Borough in
writing of his or her acceptance or rejection of the
conditions of approval. If the applicant does not so notify
the Borough within seven days of the receipt of the written
approval, the plan shall automatically be rescinded and the
rejection deemed effective as of the date of the conditional
preliminary approval.
[3] When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the application
and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the chapter
relied upon.
(11) Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute conditional
approval of the subdivision or development as to the character and
intensity, but shall not constitute approval of the final plan or
authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(12) Any approval of the preliminary plan shall be conditional subject to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
approval of the corresponding planning modules. [Added
9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
A. The purpose of the final plan is to require formal approval by the
Planning Commission and the Borough Council before plans for all
subdivisions and land development are recorded as required by § 164-5
of this chapter.
§ 164-10 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-11
152:475
B. A final plan shall be submitted conforming to the changes
recommended during the preliminary plan procedure. The final plan
and all information and procedures relating thereto shall, in all
respects, be in compliance with the provisions of these regulations,
except where modification therefrom may be specifically authorized in
accordance with § 164-73. All improvements shall be completed prior to
approval of the final plan or contracts guaranteeing the completion
thereof shall be submitted as part of the final plan application. (See
§ 164-63.) [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
C. Deposit and fee.139
(1) If no preliminary plan has been filed, a deposit and fee required in
§ 164-10C shall be paid upon the submission of the complete final
plan to the Borough Manager.
(2) If the final plan is submitted more than one year after receiving
conditional approval of the preliminary plan as required, an
additional review fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by Borough Council. The cash deposit required in
§ 164-10C(1) hereof shall be reestablished or maintained.
D. Procedure.
(1) The applicant shall prepare a final plan, application and applicable
improvement contracts as may be required in §§ 164-63 and 164-4
hereof.
(2) Submission and distribution.
(a) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the final plan and
application to the Borough Manager within one year from the
day of receiving conditional approval of the preliminary plan.
In addition, the applicant shall provide to the Borough
Manager a digital copy (pdf. format) of the record plan sheets
of the submission. This shall be provided either on a compact
disc, or as an email attachment. Copies may be distributed to:
[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644; 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 942]
[1] Borough Secretary (file copy).
[2] Borough Planning Commission (7).
[3] County Planning Commission.
[4] Borough Engineer.
[5] Borough Solicitor.
[6] Regional Authority.140
139. Editor's Note: The deposit and fee are set by resolution of the Borough Council. Current
deposits and fees are available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-11 PERKASIE CODE § 164-11
152:476
[7] Electric Department.
[8] Public Works Department.
[9] Fire Company.
(b) Upon request of the Borough Manager, the applicant may be
required to submit additional copies of the final plan.
(3) The Borough Manager shall check submission against the Appendix
D checklist141 for completeness and, if the submission is
incomplete, immediately return submission to the applicant and
indicate the deficiencies or, if the submission is complete, accept
the final plan and application and also deposit and fee if no
preliminary plan was filed.
(4) (Reserved)142
(5) The Bucks County Planning Commission shall review the final plan
and prepare a report in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.143 [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord.
No. 644]
(6) Following the receipt of the complete submission to the Borough
Manager, the Borough Engineer shall: [Amended 9-19-1988 by
Ord. No. 604]
(a) Receive the applicant's submission.
(b) Review the applicant's submission from an engineering
standpoint.
(c) Prepare a report for the Planning Commission and Borough
Council.
(7) At the first regular meeting following receipt of the complete
submission to the Borough Manager, the Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission shall: [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No.
604]
(a) Review the applicant's submission.
(b) Receive and review the report by the Bucks County Planning
Commission and other applicable reviewing agencies.
[Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(c) Review the report of the submission by the Borough Engineer.
140. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
141. Editor's Note: Appendix D is available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
142. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4), regarding distribution of copies of the final plan
and application by the Borough Manager, as amended, was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
942.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 164-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-11
152:477
(d) Listen to the applicant's presentation.
(e) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(8) The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, following receipt by
the Borough Manager of the applicant's complete submission,
shall: [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and presentation and
discuss the County Planning Commission's report and the
Borough Engineer's report with the applicant.
(b) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Prepare a report on the project for use by the Borough Council.
(9) Following receipt of the report of the Borough Planning
Commission and within 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the
submission is filed, provided that should the said next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day period
shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed, the Borough Council shall:
(a) Receive and review the applicant's submission.
(b) Receive and review the reports by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Engineer, the Bucks County
Planning Commission and any other applicable reviewing
agency. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(c) Listen to the applicant's presentation, if requested.
(d) Discuss project with applicant.
(10) The Borough Council shall:
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission and presentation, its
discussion with the applicant and the Borough Planning
Commission's report.
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Communicate its decision regarding approval or disapproval of
the plan to the applicant in writing within 15 days following the
decision, but in no event later than 90 days from the beginning
of the review period. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
[1] An application may be granted final approval subject to
specific conditions. These conditions shall be included in
the written communication to the applicant and in
§ 164-11 PERKASIE CODE § 164-11
152:478
addition, a written notification stating that if the applicant
does not accept the conditions the application shall be
deemed denied.
[2] Within seven days of the receipt of the written
communication granting of the conditional approval by the
Borough Council, the applicant shall notify the Borough in
writing of his or her acceptance or rejection of the
conditions of approval. If the applicant does not so notify
the Borough within seven days of the receipt of the written
approval, the plan shall automatically be rescinded and the
rejection deemed effective as of the date of the conditional
final approval.
[3] When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the application
and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the chapter
relied upon.
(11) If the plan is approved:
(a) The Borough Council shall adopt a resolution approving the
final plan. At the request of the applicant, the municipality
shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution
indicating approval of the applicant's final plan contingent
upon the applicant obtaining a satisfactory financial security.
The final plan will not be signed by the Borough officials until a
satisfactory financial security is presented. The resolution of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked
if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90
days, unless a written extension is granted by the Borough
Council. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(b) Approval shall not be final until entry into contract and
production of completion guaranty as set forth in §§ 164-63 and
164-64.
(c) Eight exact copies of the approved final record plan(s), with
original signatures of the required agencies as specified in
§ 164-71C, shall be submitted to Borough Council for their
signature. Three of the exact copies with original signatures
shall be on linen or mylar and five of the exact copies with
original signatures shall be on paper. All plans shall be 24
inches by 36 inches maximum size. The plans shall be
distributed by the Borough as follows:
[1] One set on linen or mylar for the Borough.
[2] One set on paper for the Borough.
[3] One set on linen or mylar for the Recorder of Deeds.
§ 164-11 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-11
152:479
§ 164-12. Lot line adjustments or minor subdivision plans.
[4] One set on paper for the Board of Assessment (distributed
by the Recorder of Deeds).
[5] One set on paper for the Bucks County Planning
Commission.
[6] One set on paper for the Borough Engineer.
[7] One set on paper for the Borough Solicitor.
[8] One set on linen or mylar for the Applicant
(d) Five exact and complete sets of the improvement construction
plans. These shall be paper sets and prepared no larger than
24 inches by 36 inches. The plans shall be distributed as
follows:
[1] Two sets for the Borough (Borough Secretary and Public
Works).
[2] Three sets for the Borough Engineer
(e) Submission of final plans in digitized format: An exact copy of
the final subdivision or land development plans (record plan[s]
and improvement construction plans) shall be submitted to the
Borough on a computer disk, or other transferable media as
may be developed, in both pdf and AutoCAD DWG or DXF
format, as a condition of final plan approval.
(f) Submission of as-built plans in digitized format: An exact copy
of the final subdivision or land development plans (record
plan[s] and improvement construction plans) as-built shall be
submitted to the Borough on a computer disk, or other
transferable media as may be developed, in both pdf and
AutoCAD DWG or DXF format These should be provided prior
to dedication, after final approval of the as-built plans by the
Borough Engineer.144
E. In any case where the Borough Council disapproves a final plan, any
person aggrieved thereby may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal
therefrom by petition to the Court of Quarter Sessions of Bucks County,
which Court shall hear the matter de novo and, after hearing, enter a
decree affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the Borough
Council, as may appear just in the premises. The Court shall designate
the manner in which notices of the hearing of any such appeal shall be
given to all parties interested. The decision of the Court shall be final.
144. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(12), regarding distribution of plans on linen, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 942.
§ 164-11 PERKASIE CODE § 164-12
152:480
A. In the case of lot line adjustments or minor subdivisions, it is the
purpose of this section to provide a simplified procedure by which said
proposals may be submitted and approved. The Borough Planning
Commission is hereby authorized to approve or reject lot line
adjustments or minor subdivision plans. [Amended 11-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 897]
B. Applicability. [Amended 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 718; 11-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 897]
(1) A lot line adjustment involves relocation of one or more existing
boundary line(s) between two adjacent lots or the shifting of
boundary lines to increase the area of an existing lot; provided,
however, that the lot line adjustment results in the same number or
fewer lots than existed prior to the lot line adjustment and provided
that the area of each of the lots involved does not increase or
decrease by more than 20% of the original lot area.
(2) In the event that the proposed subdivision shall involve a change in
the location of streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains,
culverts and other municipal improvements, or in the event that the
lots in the subdivision do not front on a fully improved street, then
the provisions of this section on lot line adjustments or minor
subdivisions shall not be applicable, and the owner shall be
required to comply with the requirements of § 164-8 and Article IV
with respect to required improvements. For purposes of this
subsection, "fully improved streets" shall mean streets that have
curbs, sidewalks, storm sewers and road widening and
improvements as required by the Borough Code for that district.
C. Upon submission of the complete lot line adjustments or minor
subdivision plan to the Borough Manager, the applicant shall pay a
review fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by Borough
Council.145 [Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
D. Procedure.
(1) The applicant shall prepare a lot line adjustment or minor
subdivision plan and application. [Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 897]
(2) Submission and distribution.
(a) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the lot line adjustment
or minor subdivision plan and application to the Borough
Manager. Applications for a minor subdivision of land or a lot
realignment along the Borough boundary line shall submit one
additional set of plans which shall be forwarded to the adjacent
municipality for its comments. In addition, the applicant shall
145. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is adopted by resolution of the Borough Council. The
current schedule is available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-12 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-12
152:481
provide to the Borough Manager a digital copy (pdf format)
of the record plan sheets of the submission. This shall be
provided either on a compact disc or as an email attachment.
Copies may be distributed to: [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord.
No. 644; 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897; 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 942]
[1] Borough Secretary (file copy).
[2] Borough Planning Commission (7).
[3] County Planning Commission.
[4] Borough Engineer.
[5] Borough Solicitor.
[6] Regional Authority.146
[7] Electric Department.
[8] Public Works Department.
[9] Fire Company.
(b) Upon request of the Borough Manager, the applicant may be
required to submit additional copies of the preliminary plan.
(3) The Borough Manager shall check submission against the plan
checklist147 for completeness and, if submission is incomplete,
immediately return the submission to applicant and indicate the
deficiencies or, if the submission is complete, accept the lot line
adjustment or minor subdivision plan, application and fee.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
(4) (Reserved)148
(5) The Bucks County Planning Commission shall review the final plan
and prepare an analysis for review by the Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission.
(6) At the first regular meeting held 15 days following receipt of the
complete submission to the Borough Manager, the Perkasie
Borough Planning Commission shall: [Amended 5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 644]
(a) Receive and review the applicant's submission.
146. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
147. Editor's Note: Said check list is available and on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
148. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4), regarding distribution of copies of the plan and
application by the Borough Manager, as amended, was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
942.
§ 164-12 PERKASIE CODE § 164-12
152:482
§ 164-13. Recording of final plan; effect.
(b) Listen to the applicant's presentation.
(c) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(7) The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, at least within 90
days following the receipt by the Borough Manager of the
applicant's complete submission, shall: [Amended 5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 644]
(a) Evaluate the applicant's submission, presentation, discussion
with the applicant and the County Planning Commission's
report.
(b) Determine whether the final plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(c) Inform the applicant, in writing, of the approval or disapproval
of the plan in accordance with § 164-10D(10)(c).
E. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Borough Planning
Commission may appeal to the Borough Council within 10 days after
such decision shall have been made, and such appeal shall be
considered by the Council at its next regular meeting. In any case
where the Borough Council shall reject an appeal by a person aggrieved
by the decision of the Borough Planning Commission or in any case
where the Borough Council fails to act upon such an appeal at the next
regular meeting of the Borough Council, the application shall be
deemed to have been disapproved by the Borough Council and the
applicant shall have the right of appeal set forth in § 164-11E.
A. The action of Borough Council or the Planning Commission in the case
of lot line adjustments or minor subdivisions or of the court on appeal in
approving any subdivision or land development plan and an approved
duplicate copy of such plan shall, within 90 days of the date of approval,
be recorded by the owner in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Bucks County. The applicant shall notify the Borough Manager in
writing of the date of such recording and the plan book and page
wherein such lot line adjustment or minor subdivision or land
development plan is recorded. If the plan is not recorded within the
ninety-day period, the approval shall lapse and become void.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
B. Effect of recording.
(1) After a subdivision or land development plan has been duly
recorded, the streets, parks and other public improvements shown
thereon shall be considered to be a part of the official plan of the
Borough.
§ 164-12 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-13
152:483
§ 164-14. Acceptance of streets and improvements.
(2) Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a
subdivision or land development plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the Borough by formal notation thereof on
the plan or the owner may note on the plan that such improvements
have not been offered for dedication to the Borough.
(3) Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or
land development plan that is recorded, as provided herein, shall
be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such
time as the same has been offered for dedication to the Borough
and accepted, by ordinance, and recorded in the office of the Clerk
of the Court of Quarter Sessions of Bucks County or until it has
been condemned for use as a public street, park or other
improvement.
A. Preliminary inspection.
(1) The applicant shall notify the Borough Manager in writing when all
required improvements desired to be accepted by the Borough
have been constructed and installed in accordance with the
Borough specifications.
(2) The Borough Manager shall notify the Borough Engineer of the
completion of the required improvements.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall:
(a) Inspect the completed required improvements.
(b) Submit in writing a report to the Borough Council and the
applicant specifying those items of construction, material and
workmanship which do not comply with the Borough
specifications or the approved final plans.
(4) The applicant, upon notification from the Borough Engineer, shall:
(a) Proceed, at his own cost, to make such corrections as shall be
required to comply with the Borough specifications and
approved final plans.
(b) Notify the Borough Engineer and Borough Council upon
completion, requesting final inspection.
B. Final inspection.
(1) The Borough Council and Borough Engineer shall make a final
inspection with the applicant of all required improvements.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall:
(a) Run the finished center-line profile of the completed streets.
§ 164-13 PERKASIE CODE § 164-14
152:484
(b) Submit a report to the Borough Council indicating the final
elevations.
(c) Affix to the final profile plan such elevations.
C. Acceptance.
(1) The Borough Council shall notify the applicant of acceptance of the
required improvements if satisfied that the applicant has complied
with all specifications and ordinances of the Borough.
(2) The applicant shall furnish the Borough with one linen print of the
completed required improvements, including drainage, profiles and
utilities.
(3) The applicant shall also furnish the Borough with an exact copy of
the as-built final subdivision or land development improvement
construction plans in a digital format as per § 164-11D(11)(f).
[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 942]
§ 164-14 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-14
152:485

ARTICLE III
Design Standards and Specifications
§ 164-15. Interpretation.
§ 164-16. Basis for lot delineations.
§ 164-17. Natural features.
§ 164-18. Hazardous lands; flood-prone areas.149
A. The standards and requirements outlined in this article shall be
considered minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly
impractical, the Borough Council may modify or adjust the standards to
permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial
conformance with the objectives of this article.
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public
lands or adjacent private lands shall be prohibited unless their control
is definitely placed in the Borough under conditions approved by
Borough Council.
C. In general, lot lines shall follow Borough boundary lines, rather than
cross them.
A. Where trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots or other
community assets and landmarks are located within a proposed
subdivision or land development, every possible means to the fullest
extent shall be provided to preserve these features.
B. Subdivisions or land developments shall be properly designed in order
to prevent the necessity for excessive cut or fill.
A. Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or property and
land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be subdivided or
developed for residential occupancy or for such other uses as may
endanger health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazards
until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the final plans. Such
land within a subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the
plan for uses that will not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
149. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 94, Floodplain Management.
§ 164-15 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-18
152:487
§ 164-19. Streets: general planning regulations.
B. The one-hundred-year floodplain, as defined and delineated in Chapter
186, Zoning, shall be used as a guide for determining the occurrence of
flooding on the property. The Floodway Boundary and Floodway Map
and the flood profiles which accompany the said Zoning Chapter shall
be used for engineering purposes to determine the extent of flooding on
the property.
C. When reviewing any subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development within a flood-prone area, the Borough shall require
assurances that all public or private utilities and facilities, such as
sanitary sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
D. In the event any watercourse within a flood-prone area is to be altered
or relocated in conjunction with any form of land development, the
developer shall submit written assurances to the Borough of the
following:
(1) Notification by certified mail to all communities and the state
coordinating office of such intended activity prior to any such
alteration or relocation and the submission of copies of the
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) The flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion
of any watercourse is maintained.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Perkasie Borough Street Plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets.
B. Proposed streets shall further conform to such county and state street
and highway plans as have been prepared.
C. Where such is not in the Perkasie Borough Street Plan, the
arrangement of streets in a subdivision or land development shall either
provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plan for the
neighborhood approved or adopted by Borough Council to meet a
particular situation where topographical or other conditions make
continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
D. Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
E. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed expressway, arterial or collector street, the Borough Council,
with the advice of the Planning Commission, may require either
§ 164-18 PERKASIE CODE § 164-19
152:488
§ 164-20. Street standards and specifications.
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, extra
deep lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may
be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and so
afford separation of through and local traffic.
F. Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing
streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall
not be repeated, and all street names shall be subject to the approval of
Borough Council.
G. If the lots resulting from the original subdivision are large enough for
resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable
access to street openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
H. Stub streets shall only be permitted within a subdivision having phased
development in which the proposed street has been approved in its
entirety and where the proposed street is plotted in two or more
phases. No stub street shall be required when the subdivided parcel
adjoins unsubdivided acreage. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No.
604]
I. Private streets are prohibited; they will be approved only if they are
designed to meet public street standards.
A. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing
street of inadequate right-of-way width, a future right-of-way width
shall be indicated on the plan to conform to the standards listed below.
B. Provision for additional street width may be required by Borough
Council in specific cases for:
(1) Public safety and convenience.
(2) Parking in commercial or industrial areas and in areas of highdensity
residential development.
(3) Widening existing streets where the minimum width outlined below
does not meet with the specific requirements for the individual
street.
C. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the following
requirements: [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 589]
§ 164-19 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-20
152:489
Minimum Requirements
Street
Classification
Classification
of
Development*
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Cartway**
(feet) Curb Sidewalk***
Arterial A, B, C, D 100
minimum
48
minimum+
Yes Yes
Collector A, B, C, D 80 40+ Yes Yes
Primary A 60 34 Yes Yes
Primary B, C, D 60 36 Yes Yes
Secondary A 50 34 Yes Yes
Alleys B, C (1-side
service)
20 12 + ***
Alleys B, C (2-side
service)
25 22 + ***
Alleys D 25 22 + ***
Marginal
access
A 34 22 Yes Yes
Marginal
access
B 50 26 Yes Yes
Marginal
access
C, D 56 31 Yes Yes
NOTES: * The classifications of development used herein are as
follows:
A — residential: density up to five dwelling units per acre.
B — residential: density of six to 16 dwelling units per acre.
C — residential: density over 16 dwelling units per acre.
D — nonresidential (business, office or industrial).
** Dimension of pavement width alone where no curbs are used but
face to face where curbs are used.
*** Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets, except
in the opinion of the Borough Council with the advice of the Planning
Commission that they are unnecessary for the public safety and
convenience.
+ As determined by the Borough Council with the advice of the
Borough Engineer or the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
where state roads are involved.
D. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other
requirements of this chapter and where the Borough Council finds it
§ 164-20 PERKASIE CODE § 164-20
152:490
will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided or developed. Whenever a half street
is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided or developed, the other half of
the street shall be recorded within such tract.
E. Horizontal alignment.
(1) Horizontal curves shall be used when center lines are deflected in
excess of five degrees.
(2) Minimum radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
Street Classification
Radius
(feet)
Secondary 150
Primary 300
Collector 500
(3) Except for secondary streets, there shall be a tangent of at least
100 feet measured at the center line between reverse curves.
(4) Proper superelevation shall be provided for curves less than 600
feet in radius on collector and primary streets.
(5) A long radius curve shall be preferred in all cases to a series of
short curves and tangents.
F. Vertical alignment.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall be designed for maximum visibility. The length of the curve
shall approximate 50 feet on collector streets and 25 feet on
secondary and primary streets for each 1% of algebraic difference
in gradient.
(2) Low points on undercrests shall be clearly indicated.
(3) Vertical alignment shall conform as much as practical to the
existing contour of ground within the limitations hereinabove
stipulated.
G. Sight distance.
(1) Proper sight distances shall be provided for both horizontal and
vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, minimum sight
distances shall be: 500 feet for collector streets; 400 feet for
primary streets; and 250 feet for secondary streets.
(2) Clear-sight triangles of 50 feet measured along street right-of-way
lines from their points of junction shall be provided at all
intersections, and no building, structure, grade or planting higher
§ 164-20 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-20
152:491
§ 164-21. Street intersections.
§ 164-22. Culs-de-sac.
than two feet above the center line of the street shall be permitted
within such sight triangle.
H. Street grades.
(1) A minimum grade of 0.5% shall be established for all streets.
(2) A maximum grade of 6% on collector and primary streets and 10%
on secondary streets will be permitted for a maximum distance of
1,500 feet.
(3) A combination of minimum radius horizontal curves and maximum
grades will not be approved.
A. Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets shall
be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be
designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
B. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another street at an angle of less than
60º.
C. Primary and secondary residential streets shall not intersect on the
same side of a thoroughfare at an interval of less than 800 feet.
[Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
D. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all street intersections in
accordance with § 164-20E through G.
E. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 20 feet for secondary streets and 30 feet for
intersections, including primary and collector streets. Radius corners
or diagonal cutoffs shall be provided on the property lines substantially
concentric with or parallel to the chord of the curb radius corners.
F. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125 feet
between their center lines.
G. The approaches to an intersection shall follow a straight course for at
least 50 feet.
H. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas. Where
the grade exceeds 7%, such leveling areas shall have a minimum length
of 50 feet within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
A. A permanent cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length nor furnish
access to more than 20 dwelling units. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 604]
§ 164-20 PERKASIE CODE § 164-22
152:492
§ 164-23. Alleys.
§ 164-24. Driveways.
B. The minimum right-of-way shall be 50 feet, and the minimum cartway
shall be 34 feet. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 589]
C. The turnaround shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and
an outer paving radius of 40 feet.
D. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be designed the same as a permanent culde-
sac.
E. Drainage, where feasible, shall be toward the open end.
A. Alleys are prohibited in developments of single-family detached
residence but may be permitted in other types of residential
development.
B. For standards of alley widths, see § 164-20A through D.
C. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be rounded or cut back sufficiently
to permit safe vehicular circulation.
D. An alley terminating in a barrier or dead end will not be approved
unless provided with a paved turnaround having a radius of not less
than 40 feet. Where feasible and subject to the approval of the Borough
Engineer, a paved Y-turnaround may be substituted for the conventional
circular turnaround when provided with a cross-sectional area of
sufficient size.
E. Intersections of right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a tangential arc,
the minimum radius of which shall be 10 feet; and the edge of paving at
intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc, the minimum radius
of which shall be 15 feet.
A. Driveways shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide a
reasonable sight distance at intersections with streets. A stopping area,
measured 20 feet behind the right-of-way line, shall be provided not to
exceed a four-percent grade.
B. Driveways, where provided, shall be located not less than 40 feet from
the intersection corner of corner lots and shall provide access to the
street of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of
two different classifications as herein defined.
C. Driveway entrances for nonresidential and high-density residential
developments may be depressed in order to permit for a freer and safer
movement of vehicles.
D. Minimum design standards for the various types of development shall
be as follows:
§ 164-22 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-24
152:493
§ 164-25. Off-street parking. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
Driveway
Classification
of
Development*
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Radius at
Curb
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Maximum
Change of
Grade per
10 Feet
(percent)
A 8 3 to 5 8 10
B 12 (one-way) 10 8 10
B 24 (two-way) 10 8 10
C 12 (one-way) 10 5 7
C 24 (two-way) 15 5 7
D 12 (one-way) 15 5 7
D 24 (two-way) 15 5 7
NOTES: * The classifications of development used herein are as
follows:
A — residential: density up to five dwelling units per acre.
B — residential: density of six to 16 dwelling units per acre.
C — residential: density over 16 dwelling units per acre.
D — nonresidential (commercial, industrial).
A. Off-street parking facilities. The design standards specified below shall
be required for all off-street parking facilities with a capacity of three or
more vehicles. Refer to Figure 1.150
(1) Layout.
(a) No one row of off-street parking spaces shall exceed 12 spaces.
Raised planting beds shall be at intervals not to exceed 12
spaces, with beds offset on alternating sides of parking rows.
(b) Raised planting islands shall be located at each end of a
double-loaded parking row and shall be planted with two trees
(from an approved street tree list) per island.
(c) Raised planting beds shall be planted with one shade tree
(from an approved street tree list) per bed.
(d) Perimeter plantings shall be provided around all parking areas
and shall have a minimum width of five feet.
150. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of the chapter.
§ 164-24 PERKASIE CODE § 164-25
152:494
§ 164-26. Sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be laid out and constructed in accordance with current
regulations and specifications of the Borough relating to curbs and
sidewalks.151
(e) Perimeter planting strips shall have raised planting beds only
at each end of a parking row.
(f) The edge of any parking area or parking driveway shall not be
closer than 15 feet to the outside wall of the nearest building.
This area shall be used for foundation plantings and sidewalks
to entryways.
(g) Wherever possible, the layout of parking aisles shall be
perpendicular to building facades to guide pedestrian
movements.
(2) Landscaping.
(a) All parking areas shall have at least one tree of one-and-onehalf-
inch caliper, minimum, for every six parking spaces in
single rows and one tree of one-and-one-half-inch caliper,
minimum, for every 12 parking spaces in double-loaded rows of
parking spaces. Trees shall be planted in such a manner as to
afford maximum protection from the sun for parked vehicles.
Where applicable, requirements of Subsection A(1)(b) and (c)
and above may be used to fulfill this requirement.
(b) Surface treatment of raised planting beds, raised planting
islands and perimeter plantings shall be grass, groundcover or
low-maintenance shrubs.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARKING AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart
parking spaces.
PARKING AREA — Any land area designed, used and usually surfaced
for parking motor vehicles, including parking spaces, parking aisles and
perimeter plantings.
PARKING DRIVEWAY — A traveled way by which cars enter and depart
parking areas.
PERIMETER PLANTING — A landscaped area protected by curbs
intended to enhance the appearance and safety of parking areas along
their boundaries.
RAISED PLANTING BED — A landscaped area protected by curbs and
contained within the area of a parking space.
RAISED PLANTING ISLAND — A landscaped area protected by curbs
and contained within the area of two opposing parking spaces.
§ 164-25 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-27
152:495
§ 164-27. Street nameplates and traffic control signs. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 910]
A. Street nameplates.
(1) Street nameplates shall be of metal construction, all corners shall
be rounded and the lettering shall be on standard proportions and
spacing in accordance with one of the alphabets used by the United
States Bureau of Public Roads. The lettering shall be such as
required by Borough Council. The plates shall be horizontal. The
lower edge of the nameplate shall be seven feet above the ground
level or curb. The nameplate shall be attached to the standard by
rustproof metal fasteners.
(2) The size of the street sign nameplate and the letters thereon shall
meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT). This requires that the nameplate be a
minimum of eight inches in height with the lettering a minimum of
six inches in height.
(3) A detail of a typical street nameplate shall be included within the
land development plans.
B. Traffic control signs.
(1) All traffic control signs installed along any public or private street,
road, alley, driveway or parking area within Perkasie Borough shall
meet the requirements of the PennDOT Handbook of Approved
Signs, latest version.
(2) All traffic control signs installed along any public or private street,
road, alley, driveway or parking area within Perkasie Borough shall
be provided with PennDOT Type III or Type IV reflective sheeting
as detailed within PennDOT Publication 408, latest revision. This
requirement need not apply to signs designated R-7 or R-8 (parking
signs) within the PennDOT Handbook of Approved Signs, latest
version.
(3) Perkasie Borough reserves the right to require the placement of
any traffic control sign deemed necessary by the Borough Council,
Borough Manager or his/her designee due to site conditions. Any
such sign shall be in accordance with the standards of the
PennDOT Handbook of Approved Signs, latest version.
(4) The property owner(s) and developer(s) shall be responsible for
obtaining and installing any signs required by the Borough and/or
the Borough Engineer prior to dedication.
(5) Details of all proposed traffic control signs shall be provided within
the development plans.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Arts. I and II.
§ 164-27 PERKASIE CODE § 164-27
152:496
§ 164-28. Curbs.
All curbs shall be constructed in accordance with current specifications of
the Borough relating to curbs and sidewalks.152
§ 164-29. Blocks.
C. Sign installation standards.
(1) The standard shall be rustproof metal and shall be of sufficient
length to permit the same to be embedded in the ground a distance
of not less than three feet, as hereinafter provided, and to permit
the lower edge of the sign to be seven feet above the ground level
or curb, as hereinafter provided. This mounting height may be
altered upon approval of the Borough Engineer. Upon erection, the
standard shall be embedded in a concrete base for a depth of not
less than three feet below the surface of the ground. Suitable
backfill material shall be placed in the hole around the post in
successive layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth, measured and
loose. Each layer of backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to secure
maximum practical density so that the post will be plumb and rigid.
Posts shall not be installed in freezing or thawing weather. The
standard shall be of such metal construction as to hold the sign
rigidly in a proper and permanent position and prevent it from
swaying in the wind.
(2) The signs shall be located with a view to making them seen at all
times with a minimum of effort by both pedestrian and vehicular
traffic and as close to the side of the cartway or curb as practical,
but no part of the sign shall be permitted to overhang any part of
the cartway or curb.
(3) All signs, standards, installations and locations shall be subject to
the approval and inspection of the Borough Engineer.
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
regard to:
(1) The planned use of the land.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot size, dimension and minimum lot
area per dwelling unit.
(3) Need for convenient access.
(4) Control and safety of street traffic.
(5) The limitations and opportunities of the topography.
B. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum length of at
least 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,600 feet.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Arts. I and II.
§ 164-27 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-29
152:497
§ 164-30. Lot regulations.
§ 164-31. Grading.
C. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to provide two
tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the applicable zoning
classification, except in the case of lots along a major thoroughfare
where the lot fronts on an interior street.
D. Modifications of the above requirements are possible in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments.
E. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with a concrete
paving less than four feet wide shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 186,
Zoning.
C. All lots shall abut on a publicly maintained street. Lots where the front
and rear property lines abut a street shall be prohibited, except in the
case of reverse frontage along major thoroughfares.
D. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line.
E. The depth and width of lots reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial uses shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking.
F. Lots excessively deep in relation to width or lots excessively irregular in
shape are to be avoided. A proportion of 2 1/2 in depth to one width is
generally accepted as a proper maximum. Any dimension of a buildable
area of a lot shall not be less than 25 feet. The buildable area of the lot
is described as the lot area less the required front, side and rear lot
areas, except as may pertain to the plotting of lots for attached
dwellings.
G. House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with Borough
requirements.153
A. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
B. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface
waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural
watercourse.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 137, Property, Numbering of.
§ 164-29 PERKASIE CODE § 164-31
152:498
§ 164-32. Easements.
C. The owner shall construct and/or install such drainage structures and/
or pipes which are necessary to prevent erosion damage and to
satisfactorily carry off such surface waters.
D. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one
horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of one
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of the
cut face will be entirely inside of the property lines of the property
on which the excavation was made.
(2) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than one horizontal to one vertical, and
a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Borough Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified
hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or damage to
property.
(3) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed in accordance with
approved standards is provided to support the face of the
excavation.
E. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys or buildings.
(2) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth and experienced in erosion control, certifying that
he has inspected the site and that the proposed deviation from the
slope specified above will not endanger any property or result in
property damage is submitted to and approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(3) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed in accordance with
approved standards is provided to support the face of the
excavation.
F. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of five feet from
property or right-of-way lines of streets or alleys in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property.
§ 164-31 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-32
152:499
§ 164-33. Storm sewage and drainage.
A. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided as
necessary for utilities and drainage.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
C. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the
area of an easement. The area shall be kept as lawn; provided, however,
that Council may, in its discretion, approve the installation of a fence or
other similar structure upon the surface of an electric, drainage or
other similar easement running in favor of the Borough if such fence or
other structure will not interfere with the facilities located within the
easement. The terms and conditions of any such approval shall be set
forth in a written agreement between the property owner and the
Borough which shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
[Amended 8-28-2009 by Ord. No. 935]
D. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse,
there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will
be adequate to preserve natural drainage but not less than 20 feet or as
may be required or directed by the Department of Forests and Waters.
The owner shall properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open
ditches when it is deemed necessary by the Borough Council.
E. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within the
subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in volume
over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land
development, the applicant or owner shall reserve or obtain easements
over all lands affected thereby, which easements shall be adequate for
such discharge of drainage and for the carrying off of such water and
for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same, including
the right of passage over and upon the same by vehicles, machinery and
other equipment for such purposes and which shall be of sufficient
width for such passage and work. The owner shall convey, free of
charge or cost, such easements to the Borough upon demand.
A. Storm drains and appurtenances shall be required to be constructed by
the owner to take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to
lead water away from springs and to avoid excessive use of cross
gutters at street intersections and elsewhere.
B. Only natural watercourses which are of sufficient size to come under
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters
(i.e., draining 1/2 square mile or more) shall be permitted to enter or
flow through a developed subdivision within an open (nonconduit)
channel. All other drainage, watercourses, channels or ditches shall be
incorporated into a storm sewer system and shall flow through pipes
from a point of intersection with the exterior boundary lines of a
§ 164-32 PERKASIE CODE § 164-33
152:500
§ 164-34. Bridges and culverts.
§ 164-35. Planted buffers.
Buffering serves to soften the outline of buildings, to screen glare and noise
and to create a visual and/or physical barrier between conflicting land uses.
subdivision at its entrance to a point of intersection with the exterior
boundary of the subdivision or development at its exits.
C. Storm sewage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Borough standards and standards of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and be subject to approval by the Borough
Engineer.
D. In the design of storm sewerage systems, the future use of undeveloped
areas upstream shall be taken into account in calculating pipe sizes.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
State Highway Department standards to support expected loads and to
carry expected flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of the
right-of-way.
B. Approval of the Water and Power Resources Board of the
commonwealth is required when the area drained upstream of the point
under consideration exceeds an area of 1/2 square mile.
A. General regulations.
(1) Buffer yards are required between subdivisions and land
developments and along existing and proposed streets, except in
the case of a lot line adjustment. The extent of buffering required
shall be determined by the type of use proposed and the adjacent
uses or streets surrounding the proposed development. The impact
of the proposed use on adjoining properties is the basis for
establishing buffer yard standards. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 604; 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
(2) Trees in buffers along streets shall not be planted opposite each
other but shall alternate.
(3) At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 30 feet from
the intersection of the street right-of-way lines.
(4) Where the planting strip between the curb and sidewalk is less
than seven feet wide, the street trees shall be planted on the lots.
(5) All plant materials shall be of nursery stock grown under climate
conditions comparable to those of Perkasie Borough. They shall be
of symmetrical growth, free of insects, pests and disease and
suitable for street use and durable under the maintenance
contemplated.
§ 164-33 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-35
152:501
B. Determination of required buffer. To determine the required buffer yard
and planting schedule, a three-step procedure shall be followed:
(1) Step 1: site analysis and determination of buffer yard class.
(2) Step 2: selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(3) Step 3: selection of the plant materials from the plant materials list.
C. Step 1: site analysis and determination of buffer yard class.
(1) For each property boundary, the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land use or road classification. Land use information shall
be determined by an on-site survey, and the Perkasie Borough
Zoning Ordinance shall be utilized to determine road
classifications. Table 1 below154 specifies the buffer yard class for
each boundary.
(2) The applicant shall match his proposed land use with the
corresponding adjacent land use or road classification for each
property boundary. The letter indicates the buffer yard class.
D. Step 2: selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(1) After determining the buffer class, the applicant shall select a
planting option from Table 2 to meet the buffer yard requirement
for each boundary. The Borough may consider an alternative
planting option which shall have a screening capability equal to or
greater than any of the available options.
(2) Table 2: planting options. The options below indicate the amount of
plant material that is required per linear foot of property line.
Plantings aligned on property or right-of-way boundaries shall be
located one to five feet inside of the boundary line. Plantings are
not required to be aligned on property or right-of-way boundaries
and may be sited on any portion of the property for buffering
purposes. The Borough may permit staggering or grouping of plant
materials if a satisfactory buffer is achieved. [Amended
9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
Class Option
A 1 canopy tree per 40 feet of boundary
B Within a 15-foot buffer yard: 1 canopy tree per 40 feet and 1
flowering tree per 60 feet of boundary
C Within a 30-foot buffer yard: 1 evergreen per 20 feet and 1
flowering tree per 60 feet of boundary
154. Editor's Note: Table 1: Determination of Buffer Yard Class, may be found at the end of this
chapter.
§ 164-35 PERKASIE CODE § 164-35
152:502
Class Option
D A 100-foot-wide lawn with 1 canopy tree per 40 feet; or
within a 30-foot buffer yard; 1 evergreen per 10 feet and 1
flowering tree per 60 feet of boundary
E. Step 3: selection of plant materials from the plant materials list.
(1) Each planting option may utilize any of the plant materials outlined
in Table 3. Minimum plant size, given either in height or in caliper,
is indicated on this table. The Borough may permit other planting
types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight or
disease and are of the same general character and growth habit as
those listed in Table 3. All planting material shall meet the
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
(2) The applicant shall not be required to provide a buffer yard should
existing planting, topography or man-made structures be deemed
acceptable for screening purposes by the Borough.
(3) Table 3: Plant Materials List.
(a) Canopy trees (2 1/2 inches caliper).
Acer rubrum (red maple).
Acer saccharum (sugar maple).
Fraxinus americana (white ash).
Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata (green ash).
Ginkgo biloba [ginkgo (male only)].
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis (thornless honey locust).
Liquidambar styraciflua (sweet gum).
Phellondendron amurense (Amur cork tree).
Plantanus acerifolia (London plane tree).
Quercus alba (white oak).
Quercus borealis (red oak).
Quercus coccinea (scarlet oak).
Quercus palustris (pin oak).
Robina psuedo-acacia inermis (thornless black locust).
Sophora japonica (Japanese pagoda tree).
Tilia-Linden (all species hardy to the area).
Zelkova serrata (Japanese zelkova).
(b) Flowering trees.
§ 164-35 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-35
152:503
§ 164-36. Park, recreation, or other public facilities. [Amended
11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 979]
Amelanchier canadensis (shadblow serviceberry): five to six
feet.
Cornus florida (flowering dogwood): five to six feet.
Cornus kousa (kousa dogwood): five to six feet.
Cornus mas (Cornelian cherry): five to six feet.
Crataegus species (hawthorn): five to six feet.
Koelreuteria paniculata (goldenrain tree): eight to 10 feet.
Laburnam vossi (golden chain): 1/2 inch caliper.
Magnolia soulangeana (saucer magnolia): five to six feet.
Magnolia virginiana (sweetbay): five to six feet.
Malus baccata (Siberian crab): 1/2 inch caliper.
Malus floribunda (Japanese flowering crab): 1/2 inch caliper.
Malus hopa (hopa red-flowering crab): 1/2 inch caliper.
Oxydendrum arboreum (sourwood): five to six feet.
Prunus kwanzan (kwanzan cherry): 1/2 inch caliper.
Prunus subhertella pendula (weeping cherry): 1/2 inch
caliper.
Pyrus calleryana Bradford (callery pear): 1/2 inch caliper.
(c) Evergreens (four to five feet).
Ilex opaca (American holly).
Picea abies (Norway spruce).
Picea omorika (Serbian spruce).
Picea pungens (Colorado spruce).
Pinus strobus (white pine).
Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas fir).
Tsuga canadensis (Canada hemlock).
A. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision
or land development, the Borough Council may require the dedication
or reservation of such area within the subdivision or land development
in those cases in which Borough Council deems such requirements to
be reasonable.
B. Where deemed essential by Borough Council, upon consideration of the
particular type of development proposed, and especially in large-scale
planned unit developments, the Borough Council may require the
dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character,
§ 164-35 PERKASIE CODE § 164-36
152:504
extent and location suitable to the needs created by such development
for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes.
C. Where a proposed park, playground or other public use is indicated on
a proposed subdivision or land development plan, the Park and
Recreation Board shall review the plan and submit recommendations to
the Borough Council.
D. In residential subdivisions or land development applications, suitable
open areas shall be dedicated for recreation. Standards to be used by
Borough Council in testing the adequacy of space provided shall be as
follows:
(1) For each residential dwelling unit, a minimum of 1,500 feet of land
shall be dedicated for recreation space;
(2) The land dedicated shall be dedicated to the Borough or to another
suitable organization as approved by Borough Council;
(3) The land proposed for dedication shall be easily and safely
accessible, have adequate ingress and egress, and have access to
an external public road or a road to be dedicated as a public road to
which the public has access;
(4) The geometry of the land to be dedicated shall be as close to square
as reasonably possible. The area shall not include narrow or
irregular pieces of land that would limit the feasibility of using the
dedicated land for recreation activities;
(5) Playgrounds for active sports shall be of adequate size to provide
sufficient area for proposed uses;
(6) If the tract to be developed or subdivided abuts any existing
Borough park or recreation area or conservation easement, the
park and recreation land offered for dedication shall be adjacent to
the Borough park or recreation area or conservation easement or
be connected by public access easement and trail constructed by
the applicant;
(7) Recreation areas shall not be traversed by utility easements unless
said utilities are placed underground, and no part of them or their
supportive equipment protrudes above ground level;
(8) Onsite improvements on the dedicated park and recreation land
shall be commensurate with the adjacent onsite development
improvements, including but not limited to grading, curbing,
utilities, and walking path.
E. Where the requirements of § 164-36D are not met, the Borough may
assess a park and recreation fee in lieu of dedication as follows:
§ 164-36 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-36
152:505
§ 164-37. Multifamily developments.
(1) A fee of $1,500 per dwelling unit payable at the time of building
permit, less any credit under Subsection E(2), for any residential
subdivision or land development application.
(2) The applicant may receive a credit of up to $500 per unit for
documented expenditures made toward recreation improvements
within the subdivision or land development including dedicated
recreation areas, playground equipment, or other similar
improvements. The credit shall be calculated by dividing the total
expenditures made for recreation improvements by the number of
units.
A. The density, parking and area and building requirements shall in all
respects conform to Chapter 186, Zoning, for multifamily
developments.
B. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed multifamily development. Final approval may be obtained
section by section, but such development sections shall be specified on
the preliminary plan and must be numbered in the proposed order that
they are to be developed. Such order of development must be adhered
to, and if changes are required, plans must be refiled and reviewed and
approved.
C. Bonding procedures shall be required before final approval of the land
development plan and shall guarantee the improvements by the builder
of streets, sidewalks, curbs, streetlighting, street trees, drainage
facilities, utilities and other facilities that Borough Council may deem
necessary.
D. Arrangement of buildings and facilities.
(1) All of the elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and
efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and shape of
the plot, the character of the adjoining property and the type and
size of the buildings in order to produce a livable and economical
land use pattern.
(2) Arrangement of buildings shall be in favorable relation to the
natural topography, existing desirable trees, views within and
beyond the site and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the
site.
E. Access and circulation.
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and
other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the occupants.
§ 164-36 PERKASIE CODE § 164-37
152:506
(2) Access and circulation for fire-fighting equipment, furnituremoving
vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries and snow
removal shall be planned for efficient operation and convenience.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building to a street,
driveway or parking area shall usually be less than 100 feet; an
exception to this standard should be reasonably justified by
compensating advantages, such as desirable views and site
preservation through adaptation to topography. In no case shall the
distance exceed 250 feet.
F. Yards shall assure adequate privacy, desirable outlook, adequate
natural light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the
dwellings and other essential uses.
G. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved areas and
other facilities to assure adequate surface drainage, safe and
convenient access to and around the buildings and for the
conservation of desirable existing vegetation and natural ground
forms.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with
natural topography and to minimize earthwork and the need for
deep footings.
H. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish
principal trafficways for convenient access to the living units and
other important facilities on the property.
(2) Streets proposed to be dedicated for public use and maintenance
shall conform to the design requirements and specifications of this
chapter.
I. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to the living units, garage compounds, parking
areas, service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse and all
other necessary services. Driveways shall enter public streets at
safe locations.
(2) Driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation suitable for
traffic needs and safety.
(3) Driveways shall conform to those standards to § 164-24 of this
chapter.
(4) All driveways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with
Borough specifications.
§ 164-37 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-37
152:507
§ 164-38. Nonresidential developments.
J. Parking areas.
(1) Paved parking areas shall be provided to meet the needs of the
residents and their guests without interference with normal traffic.
(2) Parking areas shall conform to the standards and requirements of
§ 164-25 and Chapter 186, Zoning.
(3) Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with Borough
specifications.
K. Sidewalks.
(1) Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be provided for
convenience and safe access to all living units from streets,
driveways, parking areas or garages and for convenient circulation
and access to all project facilities.
(2) Width, alignment and the gradient of walks shall provide safety,
convenience and appearance for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in
the alignment shall be avoided.
(3) The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water
on or across the walk and to prevent the pocketing of surface water
by walks.
(4) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with § 164-26 of this
chapter.
L. Refuse collection.155
(1) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage
is not provided.
(2) Collection stations shall be located to avoid being offensive and
shall be convenient for both collectors and tenants.
M. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced
by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features, and
additional new plant material shall be added for privacy, shade, beauty
of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable features.
A. Developing individual lots for commercial purposes shall be avoided in
favor of a comprehensive design of the land, in which individual lots for
commercial purposes are related to each other so as to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
155. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 96, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 164-37 PERKASIE CODE § 164-38
152:508
§ 164-39. Open space requirements.
B. Additional widths of streets adjacent to areas proposed for
nonresidential use may be required as deemed necessary by Borough
Council to assure the free flow of through traffic from vehicles entering
or leaving parking areas.
C. When adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on a collector
or arterial street, the owner may be required to provide a service road
for ingress and egress or, in lieu thereof, the owner may be required to
provide an area adjacent to the proposed lots for off-street parking
purposes.
D. Alleys shall be required in commercial and industrial districts, except
where other adequate provision is made for off-street loading and
parking consistent with the use proposed. Where required, alleys in
commercial and industrial districts shall conform to those standards of
§ 164-23 of this chapter.
E. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but where this proves impossible,
they shall be terminated with a paved turnaround of adequate
dimensions.
F. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisance of the proposed nonresidential developments,
including the provisions of extra depths in parcels backing up on
existing or potential residential developments and provisions for a
permanently landscaped evergreen buffer strip.
G. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic shall not normally be extended to
the boundaries of the adjacent existing or potential residential areas or
connected to streets intended for predominantly residential traffic.
H. Parking areas shall be located or designed in such a manner that they
are visibly secluded from eye level of the surrounding area. Grading to
depress the parking area, raised berms, landscaping or fencing are
satisfactory methods to create such seclusion.
I. All area, design and parking requirements shall conform to Chapter
186, Zoning.
A. All performance standard subdivisions shall meet the open space
requirements as set forth in Chapter 186, Zoning. The subdivision plan
shall contain or be supplemented by such material as required to
establish a method by which such open space shall be perpetuated,
maintained or policed.
B. All land held for open space shall be so designated on the plans as open
space. The plans shall contain the following statement: "Open space
lands may not be separately sold, nor shall such land be further
developed or subdivided."
§ 164-38 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-39
152:509
C. The subdivision plans shall designate the use of open space, the type of
maintenance to be provided, and a planting plan or schedule. In
designating use and maintenance, the following classes may be used:
(1) Lawn: a grass area, with or without trees, which may be used by
the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed
regularly to ensure a neat and tidy appearance.
(2) Natural area: an area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction or replanted. Such area may contain pathways but
shall otherwise be maintained only to prevent the spread of weeds,
undesirable plants, such as poison ivy, the maintenance of freeflowing
streams and to prevent the accumulation of trash or litter.
(3) Recreation area: an area designated for a specific recreation use,
including, but not limited to, tennis, swimming, shuffleboard,
playfield and tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained in such manner
as not to create a hazard or nuisance and shall perpetuate the
proposed use.
D. Planting and recreation facilities within the open space areas shall be
subject to the provisions for securities to cover costs of installation in
accordance with §§ 164-61 and 164-62 of this chapter.
E. Any of the following methods may be used to preserve, own or maintain
open space: condominium, homeowners association, dedication in fee
simple or dedication of development rights. The following specific
requirements are associated with each of the various methods:
(1) Condominium. The open space may be controlled through the use
of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in
conformance with the Unit Property Act of 1963. All open space
land shall be held as common element. Such land shall not be
eligible for sale to another party, except for transfer to another
method of ownership permitted under this section, and then only
where there is no change in the open space ratio.
(2) Homeowners association. The open space may be held in common
ownership by a homeowners' association. This method shall be
subject to all of the provisions for homeowners' associations set
forth in Article VII of Act 247 and the Perkasie Borough PRD
Ordinance of 1970.156
(3) Fee simple dedication. The Borough may, but shall not be required
to, accept any portion or portions of the open space. Provided that
such land is freely accessible to the public, there is no cost involved
and the Borough agrees to and has access to maintain such lands.
156. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough PRD Ordinance was repealed 4-11-1983 by Ord. No.
540.
§ 164-39 PERKASIE CODE § 164-39
152:510
§ 164-40. Determining site capacity.
Each site is unique. It has physical features which are rarely precisely
duplicated on another site. Portions of some sites may not be usable and
a minimum amount of buildable land should be retained for recreation.
The purpose of this section is to determine the appropriate intensity of use
to which a specific tract may be put. For each tract that is five acres or
larger in R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts, the developer shall include
the following calculation with the initial plan submission:
(4) Dedication of development rights. The Borough or county may
accept, but shall not be required to accept, title to the development
rights to any portion or portions of the open space. In such cases,
the land remains in the ownership of the individual while the
development rights are held in public ownership. The county shall
accept ownership only in accordance with the provisions of Act 442
and county plans; the Borough may accept such lands as it sees fit.
In either case, there shall be no cost for acquisition or maintenance
to county or Borough.
A. Base site area. Certain portions of a tract may not be usable for the
activities proposed for the site; these shall therefore be subtracted from
the site area to determine base site area:
(1) Site area as determined by actual on-site survey (acres).
(2) Subtract: land within ultimate rights-of-way of existing roads or
utility rights-of-way or easements (acres).
(3) Subtract: land which is not contiguous, i.e., a separate parcel which
does not abut or adjoin nor share common boundaries with the rest
of the development and/or land which is cut off from the main
parcel by a road, railroad, existing land uses or major stream so as
to serve as a major barrier to common use or so that it is isolated
and unavailable for building purposes (acres).
(4) Subtract: land which in a previously approved subdivision was
reserved for resource reasons, such as flooding or recreation
(acres).
(5) Subtract: land used or zoned for another use, i.e., land which is
used or to be used for commercial or industrial uses in a residential
development or land in a different zoning district than the primary
use (acres).
(6) Equals base site area (acres).
B. Resource protection land.
(1) All land within the base site area shall be mapped and measured for
the purpose of determining the amount of open space needed to
protect it.
§ 164-39 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-40
152:511
§ 164-41. Environmental protection.
The developer shall determine the presence of environmental or natural
features on the site and shall meet the following standards of environmental
protection. Site alterations, regrading, filling or clearing of vegetation prior
to submission of the plans for development shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(2) The resource protection land equals, for each resource, the acres of
land in the resource multiplied by the open space ratio for that
resource. The open space ratios are as follows:
Resource Open Space Ratio
Floodplain district 1.00
Floodplain soils 1.00
Lakes or ponds 1.00
Natural retention area .90
Steep slope (25% or more) .85
Steep slope (15% to 25%) .70
Steep slope (8% to 15%) .60
(3) The total land with resource restrictions equals the total of the
acres of land in each resource.
(4) The total resource protection land equals the total of all of the
lands resulting from the calculation in § 164-40B(2) above.
C. Determination of site capacity. Individual site capacity is found by
calculating net buildable site area. For single-family or performance
standard subdivisions, the number of allowable dwelling units is
determined by multiplying the density by net buildable site area. The
calculations are as follows:
(1) The base site area (acres) multiplied by the open space ratio
(Chapter 186, Zoning, § 186-44) (acres) equals the minimum
required open space (acres).
(2) The base site area (acres) minus the total resource protection land
or minimum required open space, whichever is greater (acres),
equals the net buildable site area (acres).
(3) The net buildable site area (acres) multiplied by the density
(Chapter 186, Zoning, § 186-44) (acres) equals the number of
dwelling units (do not round up).
A. Floodplains.157 All such lands shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads and utilities may cross the floodplain where design
approval is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
157. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 94, Floodplain Management.
§ 164-40 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41
152:512
Environmental Protection and where other applicable ordinances,
regulations and statutes are complied with.
B. Floodplain soils. All such lands shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads may cross these soils where design approval is
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and that recreational, conservation or agricultural open
space uses shall be permitted. Where floodplains are defined, they shall
be used rather than floodplain soils.
C. Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, i.e., those above 8%, the
following standards shall apply:
(1) Eight percent to 15%: No more than 40% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(2) Fifteen percent to 25%: No more than 30% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(3) Twenty-five percent or more: No more than 15% of such areas shall
be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(4) Notwithstanding any standards established herein, any slopes
having a grade of 15% or greater and being part of a woodland area
shall be preserved so that 80% of such slope shall remain in natural
cover and as permanent open space. [Added 9-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 604]
D. Lakes and ponds. These areas shall be left as permanent open space.
No development, filling, piping or diverting shall be permitted.
[Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
E. Natural retention areas. Such areas shall be 100% open space.
[Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
F. Wetlands. Such areas shall be left as permanent open space. No
development, filling, piping or diverting shall be permitted. In addition,
a buffer of 100 feet shall be maintained from the limits of the wetland
vegetation or the limit of the wetland soils, whichever is less, in order to
minimize hydrologic modifications and potential for pollution. Within
the buffer area, an 80% natural cover must be maintained as permanent
open space. The remaining 20% of the buffer area may be developed.
[Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604; amended 2-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 615]
G. Woodlands. Such areas shall remain in at least 50% open space,
provided further that such open space area shall permanently retain the
original natural cover. [Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
H. Topsoil standards. [Added 10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 770]
(1) After final grading, there shall be a minimum of six inches of topsoil
on the entire site other than that portion of the site where there are
§ 164-41 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41
152:513
§ 164-41.1. Tree protection standards. 158 [Added 8-7-1989 by Ord.
No. 621]
buildings or other impervious surface coverage. There shall be no
removal of excess topsoil permitted from the site until inspection
and approval of compliance with this section by the Borough
Engineer.
(2) The developer is not required to import topsoil to the site if a sixinch
final depth cannot be achieved. In cases where the original
site has less than six inches of topsoil at the start of the grading
activities, as determined by the Borough Engineer, the total amount
available on the site at that time will become the minimum topsoil
requirement. No topsoil will be allowed to be removed from the site
in that instance.
A. General requirements.
(1) Grade changes and excavations shall not encroach upon the tree
protection zone (TPZ).
(2) No toxic materials shall be stored within 100 feet of a tree
protection zone, including petroleum based and/or derived
products.
(3) The area within the TPZ shall not be built upon, nor shall any
materials be stored there, either temporarily or permanently.
Vehicles and equipment shall not be parked in the TPZ.
(4) When tree stumps are located within 10 feet of the tree protection
zone, the stumps shall be removed by means of a stump grinder to
minimize the effect on surrounding root systems.
(5) Tree roots which must be severed shall be cut by a backhoe or
similar equipment aligned radially to the tree. This method reduces
the lateral movement of the roots during excavation which, if done
by other methods, could damage the intertwined roots of adjacent
trees.
(6) Within four hours of any severance of roots, all tree roots that have
been exposed and/or damaged shall be trimmed cleanly and
covered temporarily with moist peat moss, moist burlap or other
moist biodegradable material to keep them from drying out until
permanent cover can be installed.
(7) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not discharge into
the tree protection zone.
(8) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not be located
within the tree protection zone.
158. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Trees.
§ 164-41 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41.1
152:514
B. The tree protection zone. Prior to construction, the tree protection zone
shall be delineated by the following methods:
(1) The tree protection zone that is delineated on the site prior to
construction shall conform to the approved development plans.
(2) All trees scheduled to remain shall be marked; where groups of
trees exist, only the trees on the edge need to be marked.
(3) A forty-eight-inch-high wooden snowfence mounted on steel posts,
located eight feet on center, shall be placed along the boundary of
the tree protection zone.
(4) In addition to the tree protection zone, trees may be left standing
as protection between the trunks of the trees to be retained and the
limits of grading. When additional trees are used as protection, the
tree protection zone on the approved plan shall be marked in the
field so that the additional buffer area is delineated. When this
method of protection is used, these additional trees shall be
removed at the time of completion of the project.
(5) When the wooden snowfence has been installed, it shall be
inspected and approved by the Borough Arborist prior to
commencing clearing and further construction; the fencing along
the tree protection zone shall be maintained until all work/
construction has been completed; and damages to the protective
fencing shall be replaced and repaired before further construction
shall begin.
(6) Trees being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a
tree protection zone or into trees that are to be retained.
C. Retaining walls.
(1) When the original grade cannot be retained at the tree protection
zone line, a retaining wall shall be constructed outside of the tree
protection zone.
(2) The retaining wall shall be designed to comply with the municipal
standards for retaining walls.
(3) In addition, the following methods shall be used to ensure survival
of the tree:
(a) The top of the wall shall be four inches above the finished
grade line.
(b) The wall shall be constructed of large stones, brick, building
tile, concrete blocks or treated woodbeams not less than six by
six inches; a means for drainage through the wall shall be
provided so water will not accumulate on either side of the
wall. Weep holes shall be required with any wall.
§ 164-41.1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41.1
152:515
(c) Any severed roots as a result of excavation shall be trimmed so
that their edges are smooth and are cut back to a lateral root if
exposed.
(d) A layer of clean stone (sized 3/4 inch to one inch) shall be
placed one foot out from the wall to aid in drainage.
D. Pruning methods. All final cuts shall be made sufficiently close to the
trunk or parent limb but without cutting into the branch collar or
leaving a protruding stub, according to the National Arborist
Association standards. All necessary pruning cuts must be made to
prevent bark from being torn from the tree and to facilitate rapid
healing. Flush cuts are unacceptable.
E. Fertilization methods.
(1) All trees which have experienced any disturbance or have had
damages to the roots or branches shall be fertilized.
(2) Trees shall be fertilized in early fall (September to October) or
midspring (April to May). Fall applications are preferred.
(3) Fertilizer shall be broadcast over the soil surface in an area twice
the size of the tree protection zone at the rates given in Subsection
E(5) below. A minimum of 1,000 square feet per tree will receive
fertilization.
(4) Fertilizer grade shall have approximately three parts nitrogen to
one part phosphorus and potassium (3:1:1 ratio).
(5) Fertilizer shall be applied at a rate equivalent to one pound
nitrogen per 1,000 square feet.
Example: How much 20:8:8 fertilizer needed to apply one
pound nitrogen over 1,000 square feet.
Need 1 pound nitrogen
.20 x = 1
x = 1
§ 164-41.1 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41.1
152:516
§ 164-41.2. Transportation Impact Study. [Added 11-17-2008 by
Ord. No. 929]
___
20
x = 5 pounds
5 pounds 20:8:8 should be broadcast over an area of
1,000 square feet.
F. Trenching and tunneling.
(1) If there is no alternative but to locate a utility line through a TPZ,
tunneling shall be used instead of trenching, except where, in the
opinion of the Borough Arborist, survival of the tree would not be
affected by either method. The Borough Arborist shall determine
the most desirable location for the utility line.
(2) Trenches shall be filled as soon as possible and tamped lightly to
avoid air spaces.
A. Requirement for Transportation Impact Study. A Transportation Impact
Study shall be required for all major subdivisions and land
developments to enable the Borough to assess the impact of a proposed
development on the local transportation systems, both highways and
public transportation. The purpose of the study is to ensure that
proposed developments do not adversely affect the transportation
network and to identify any traffic problems that are created in the
existing highway network as a result of the development and to
delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements
to be incorporated into the proposed development or to the highway
and/or public transportation systems within the designated study area.
The study shall assist in the protection of air quality, the conservation of
energy and the encouragement of public transportation use.
B. Conduct of the Transportation Impact Study. The Transportation Impact
Study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or
transportation planner with previous traffic study experience in
accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section.
C. Applicability. A Transportation Impact Study shall be submitted as part
of the preliminary plan application for all subdivision and land
development proposals that have the potential of generating 250 or
more trips per day. The number of trips per day are determined through
the use of the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation publication. The proposed
development shall be identified using the ITE land use code that best
describes the use of the proposed development. Where doubt exists, the
applicant shall seek guidance from the Borough Engineer or his/her
designee. The application shall not be considered complete until the
Transportation Impact Study is submitted to the Borough in accordance
§ 164-41.1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41.2
152:517
with the provisions of this section. Council may, at its discretion,
require any other application to be accompanied by a Transportation
Impact Study, provided that Council notifies the applicant immediately
following Council's first meeting to consider the proposal. Such
notification shall specify the reason for the requirement, citing the
proposal's particular location or existing problems or type of use (e.g.,
generation of heavy truck traffic).
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CAPACITY ANALYSIS — The analysis compares the actual or projected
traffic volume to the intersection capacity and results in a volume/
capacity (v/c) ratio. Intersection approach capacity is the maximum rate
of vehicular flow that can pass through an intersection under prevailing
roadway, traffic and signalization conditions.
LANE GROUPS — Each individual vehicular movement that may be
completed from an existing lane, such as a left turn, right turn, or
through movement.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — Level of service (LOS) as described in the
Highway Capacity Manual 2000, Transportation Research Board, is
a qualitative measure of the operational conditions within a traffic
stream and their perceptions by motorists. Levels of service are defined
in terms of delay for signalized intersections and reserve capacity
for unsignalized intersections. Six levels of service (A through F) are
defined for a transportation facility. LOS A represents ideal operation
conditions with no congestion, and LOS F represents a breakdown in
operating conditions with severe congestion.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection, either signalized or
unsignalized, where traffic generated by the proposal may have an
impact on the operation of the intersection. The transportation
engineer shall seek guidance from the Borough Engineer prior to the
initiation of the Transportation Impact Study to ensure agreement on
the location of major intersections.
OFF-SITE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS — Other
transportation improvements that are generally not contiguous with the
property being developed and not required as an on-site improvement,
but found to be necessary as a result of the proposed development.
ON-SITE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS — All improvements on
or adjacent to the development site in the public right-of-way required
to be constricted by the developer pursuant to any ordinance,
resolution or requirement of the Borough and/or directly related to the
transportation needs of the subdivision and/or land development.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Transportation services for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally, but not
necessarily on a regular route basis, by the Southeastern Pennsylvania
§ 164-41.2 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41.2
152:518
Transportation Authority or a private operator operating service to the
public.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend along the adjacent roadways in all
directions approximately 1/2 mile from the site access points. The study
area will include all major intersections in the vicinity of the proposed
development. The transportation engineer will seek guidance from the
Borough Engineer prior to initiation of the Transportation Impact Study
to ensure agreement on the study area boundaries.
TRAFFIC SIGNAL WARRANTS — A series of tests that detail the
minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes or other criteria necessary for
the installation of a traffic signal. These warrants are outlined in the
then-current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration.
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of vehicular trips to and
from the study site per unit of land use, as measured by parameters
such as square footage or dwelling units. The latest edition of Trip
Generation by the ITE shall be referenced to determine trip generation
rates.
E. General requirements and standards.
(1) General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, proposed land use(s), construction staging, and
completion date of the proposed development. If the development
is residential, a description of the types and number of dwelling
units shall also be included. The general site description shall also
include probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential site
users to the extent that they may affect the transportation needs of
the site (e.g., number of senior citizens). A brief description of
other major existing and proposed land developments within the
study area shall also be provided.
(2) Transportation facilities description.
(a) The description shall contain a full documentation of the
proposed internal and existing external transportation system.
This description shall include proposed internal vehicular,
bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and
egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way,
parking conditions, traffic channelizations, and any traffic
signals or other intersection control devices at all intersections
within the site. The site design shall be shown to maximize
potential public transportation usage to and from the
development, such as providing adequate turning radii at all
access points to allow a bus to enter the development and
designating bus shelters and sign locations where appropriate.
(b) The report shall describe the entire external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study area
§ 164-41.2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41.2
152:519
shall be identified and illustrated. All existing and proposed
public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile
radius of the site shall also be documented. All regional rail
stations within a three-mile radius of the site shall also be
documented. All future highway improvements, including
proposed constriction and intersection signalization, shall be
noted. This information shall be obtained from the latest
Regional Transportation Improvement Program maintained by
the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission. Any
roadway improvements to be conducted in conjunction with
surrounding land developments shall be recorded.
(3) Existing traffic conditions.
(a) Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented
for all roadways and intersections in the study area, and shall
include current average daily traffic volumes, peak highway
hour(s) traffic volumes, and peak development-generated
hours(s) traffic volumes. Traffic counts date shall not be more
than one year old. Traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday of a nonholiday week. Additional
counts (Saturday for a commercial or tourist attraction) may
also be required in some cases. The individual or firm
performing the Transportation Impact Study shall obtain the
traffic counts during average volume conditions during fair
weather, and in consideration of any construction activities or
special events which may otherwise affect traffic volumes of
the roadway.
(b) Roadway characteristics shall be described and illustrated.
Features to be addressed shall include lane configurations,
geometry, signal timing, traffic control devices, posted speed
limits, and sight distance limitations. Existing levels of service
shall be calculated for all intersections and turning movements
within the study area.
(c) This analysis will determine the adequacy of the existing
roadway system to serve the existing traffic demand.
Roadways, signalized intersections, or individual movements
experiencing levels of service below C, and v/c rations greater
than or equal to 1.0 shall be noted as deficient. Unsignalized
intersections with levels of service below D shall also be
indicated.
(4) Transportation impact of development.
(a) Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall
be completed for the average daily trips, average daily peak
highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s).
Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation
shall be obtained from the latest edition of Trip Generation. For
§ 164-41.2 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41.2
152:520
land uses not listed in the document, the transportation
engineer shall seek guidance from the Borough Zoning Officer
and Borough Engineer.
(b) All turning movements shall be calculated. These generated
volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to
the existing roadways and intersections throughout the study
area. Documentation of all assumptions used in the
distribution and assignment phases shall be provided. Traffic
volumes shall be assigned to individual access points.
Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If
school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be
assigned for each crossing. Any characteristics of the site that
will cause particular trip generation or distribution problems
shall be noted.
(5) Analysis of transportation impact.
(a) The total future traffic shall be calculated, and shall consist of
the existing traffic volume expanded to the project completion
year using an annual background growth factor plus the
development-generated traffic and the traffic generated by
other developments in the study area. The annual background
growth factor shall be determined using the projected rates of
population and employment growth as determined by the
Bucks County Planning Commission, the average annual traffic
growth of the area's roadways as determined from the
Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission's "Highway
Network Coverage Traffic Counts" or the Bucks County
Planning Commission's traffic count database, and current
twenty-four-hour traffic counts.
(b) The delay analysis shall be conducted using the total future
demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging of the
proposed development is anticipated, calculations for each
stage of development shall be made.
(c) The analysis shall be performed for the peak highway hour(s)
and peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and
intersections in the study area. Delay calculations shall be
made for all intersections in the study area as well as for all
access points into the development. It is usually at these
locations that capacity is most restricted. A volume/capacity
analysis shall be conducted for all intersections having a future
level of service below C.
(d) All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined
as to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation
shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to
the warrants for traffic signal installation.
(6) Conclusions and recommended improvements.
§ 164-41.2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41.2
152:521
(a) Levels of service and volume/capacity ratios shall be listed for
all roadways and intersection lane groups. All roadways,
signalized intersections, and/or lane groups showing levels of
service below C and volume/capacity ratios greater than or
equal to 1.0 shall be considered deficient. Specific
recommendations for the elimination of all deficiencies shall be
listed, and shall include but not be limited to the following
elements: internal circulation design, site access location and
design, external roadway intersection design and
improvements, traffic signal installation and operation
including signal timing, and transit design improvements. All
physical roadway improvements shall be illustrated. Signal
timing should be evaluated for any intersection with a level of
service below C but a volume/capacity ratio less than 1.0.
Warrants for signalization shall be examined for all
unsignalized intersections operating at deficient levels of
service.
(b) The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate
any changes to the level of service achieved by these
measures. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of
improvements shall be described. The mitigation measures
may include recommendations such as roadway widening,
turning lanes, deceleration lanes/tapers, changes to
signalization, use of access management techniques or a
reduction in the proposed intensity of use. The responsibility
and timing of all recommended roadway improvements shall
be described within the Transportation Impact Study.
(c) Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also
be addressed. Listings of all actions to be taken to encourage
public transportation usage for development-generated trips
and/or improve existing service, if applicable, shall be
included.
F. Submission procedures and implementation.
(1) Time of Submission.
(a) The Transportation Impact Study shall be submitted to the
Borough of Perkasie and the Bucks County Planning
Commission with the preliminary plan application. If a sketch
plan is submitted for the proposed development, it would be
advantageous to the applicant to submit a Transportation
Impact Study at this time. However, the Transportation Impact
Study shall be resubmitted at the preliminary plan stage.
Furthermore, if a preliminary plan is revised, the
Transportation Impact Study may also need to be revised,
depending upon the revisions to the plan.
§ 164-41.2 PERKASIE CODE § 164-41.2
152:522
(b) Improvement plans shall not be submitted to Penn DOT until
the plans have been reviewed by the Perkasie Borough
Planning Commission, the Perkasie Borough Engineer, the
Bucks County Planning Commission and the Perkasie Borough
Council. The submittal to Penn DOT shall be accompanied by
the comments of the Borough, Borough Engineer and the
Bucks County Planning Commission.
(2) Implementation. The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, the
Bucks County Planning Commission, the Perkasie Borough
Engineer and the Perkasie Borough Council shall review the
Transportation Impact Study to analyze its adequacy in identifying
solutions to traffic problems that may occur either totally, or in part
as a result of the subdivision or land development. Transportation
improvements required in order to eliminate deficient conditions
on or adjacent to the site, that result from the development, may be
mandatory for plan approval. These necessary improvements may
be attached to the conditions of approval set forth by the Borough
prior to plan approval. If the Borough determines that additional
off-site improvements are necessary prior to plan approval, the
developer shall have the opportunity to resubmit alternative
improvement designs.
§ 164-41.2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-41.2
152:523

ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
§ 164-42. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be constructed by the applicant as
condition for final plan approval.
§ 164-43. Compliance required.
All construction shall be completed in accordance with the specific
conditions of the commitment and the accepted drawings and specifications
and in the manner acceptable to Borough Council.
§ 164-44. Interpretation; modification.
§ 164-45. Revision of plans. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
When changes from the accepted drawings and specifications become
necessary during construction, the Borough Engineer may approve such
changes which do not conflict with or violate any ordinance of Perkasie
Borough. All other changes shall be approved by the Borough Council with
advice from the Borough Engineer before the execution of such changes.
§ 164-46. Provision for maintenance of streets.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all streets shall be
made by dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the Borough or
by other acceptable means.
§ 164-47. Conformity of streets to standards and specifications.
A. The improvements included in this article are minimum requirements.
However, Borough Council reserves the right in any case to increase
the same if conditions so warrant.
B. Where literal compliance with the improvements hereinafter specified
is clearly impractical, the Borough Council may modify or adjust the
improvements and standards to permit reasonable utilization of
property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of
the regulations.
A. The construction of streets, roads, lanes, driveways and alleys, as
shown upon final plans and as contained in contract agreements, shall
in every respect conform to current Borough specifications.
B. Materials and construction specifications must be in accord with
current specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
C. All streets shall be graded to:
§ 164-42 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-47
152:525
§ 164-48. Street signs.
§ 164-49. Streetlights.
The owner shall install or cause to be installed, at the owner's expense,
metal pole streetlights serviced by underground conduit in accordance with
the Perkasie Electric Department and approved by the Borough Council
in conformity to a general standard of streetlighting established by the
Borough Council. The equipment of metal poles may be waived in such
instances as provided by the Borough Manager due to the existence of
wooden poles already in place. Provision shall be made for energizing said
lighting after 50% or more of the dwellings in a given subdivision or land
development or section of a subdivision or land development have been
occupied. The owner shall be responsible for all charges or rates of the
streets lighted until such time that the streets are accepted or condemned
as public streets by the Borough Council.
§ 164-50. Boundary monuments.
§ 164-51. Sidewalks.
(1) The grades shown on the street profiles and cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the final plan.
(2) The full width of the right-of-way.
A. The owner shall erect at every street intersection a street sign or street
signs having thereon the names of the intersecting streets. At
intersections where streets cross, there shall be at least two such street
signs and at the intersections where one street ends or joins with
another street, there shall be at least one such street sign.
B. All street signs shall conform to those standards of § 164-27.
A. Monuments shall be placed at each change in direction of boundary,
two to be placed at each street intersection and one on one side of each
street at angle points and at the beginning and at their end and areas to
be conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented at their external
boundaries.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is
completed, at a time specified by the Borough Engineer. The monument
shall be concrete, the size and length as may be approved by the
Borough Engineer.
C. All monuments shall be checked for accuracy by the Borough Engineer
or their accuracy certified by the owner's engineer. Accuracy of the
monument shall be within 3/100 of a foot.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed on one side of all frontage streets and
both sides of all other streets within the subdivision or land
development, unless in the opinion of Borough Council with the advice
§ 164-47 PERKASIE CODE § 164-51
152:526
§ 164-52. Curbs.
§ 164-53. Storm sewerage and drainage.161
The owner shall construct stormwater drainage facilities, including curbs,
catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels in
order to prevent erosion, flooding and other hazards to life and property.
All such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow and size, type, and
installation of all stormwater drains and sewers shall be constructed in
accordance with the plans and standard specifications of Perkasie Borough.
§ 164-54. Public water supply.
of the Planning Commission they are unnecessary for public safety and
convenience.
B. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with § 164-26 of this
chapter and current Borough specifications.159
A. Curbs shall be provided along both side of all streets, unless in the
opinion of Borough Council with the advice of the Borough Engineer
they are unnecessary.
B. Along the existing street on which a subdivision or land development
abuts (hereinafter called "boundary streets"), curbs shall be
constructed and the existing paved cartway shall be widened to the
curb. The location of curbing along a boundary street shall be
determined by the width of the existing or future right-of-way of the
road as established by the Borough Council and in accordance with
those specified in § 164-20A through D of this chapter.
C. All curbs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Borough specifications.160
A. The owner shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivision or land development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the municipal
authority and shall be subject to their approval.
B. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
appropriately spaced fire hydrants for fire-fighting purposes. Review
and approval by the Fire Marshal shall be required in order to ensure
that fire protection is provided.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Arts. I and II.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Arts. I and II.
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Stormwater Management.
§ 164-51 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-55
152:527
§ 164-55. Private water supply.
Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished by the owner
on an individual-lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot and the lot also
contains its own sewage disposal facilities, the well shall be of the drilled
type, cased and grout-sealed into the bedrock. Each well shall produce not
less than six gallons per minute as established by bailer tests and certified
by the well driller.
§ 164-56. Public sanitary sewer.
§ 164-57. Private sewage disposal systems.
If public sewer facilities are not available, the owner shall provide for
sewage disposal on an individual basis according to the rules, regulations,
terms, definitions and conditions of the Individual Sewage Disposal System
Code for Bucks County, Pennsylvania, adopted by the Bucks County Board
of Health on November 12, 1955, and any amendments thereto made.
§ 164-58. Capped sewers for future connection to public system.
If, at the time of final approval, public sanitary sewer facilities are not
available to the subdivision or land development, but will become available
within a period of five years or a period determined by Borough Council
from the date of recording, the owner shall be required to install or cause to
be installed, at his expense, sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street
line in accordance with the requirements and standards of the Municipal
Authority and shall cap all laterals. Review and approval by the Municipal
Authority shall be required.
§ 164-59. Public utilities.
A. The owner shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to make
adequate sanitary sewage service available to each lot within the
subdivision.
B. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements and standards of the Municipal Authority and shall be
subject to its approval.
C. The applicant shall provide to the Borough a certification from the
Perkasie Regional Authority162 setting forth that sewage service and
capacity are available for the proposed lots or buildings. [Added
9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
A. The owner shall cause gas, electric power and telephone facilities to be
installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to
each lot or dwelling unit in the subdivision or land development.
162. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
§ 164-55 PERKASIE CODE § 164-59
152:528
§ 164-60. Grading.
Grading shall conform in all respects to the final plan and the requirements
and standards of this chapter.
§ 164-61. Plantings.
§ 164-62. Additional community facilities.
Additional community facilities may be required to serve the proposed lots
or dwellings in a subdivision or land development. Where a proposed park,
playground or other public facility is shown in the Comprehensive Plan or
community facilities plan or parts thereof is located in whole or in part of a
subdivision or land development, the dedication or reservation of such area
may be required by the Borough Council in those cases which it deems such
requirements to be reasonable.
B. All public utilities required to service subdivisions and land
developments shall be placed underground except for minor exceptions
necessary to permit the overall installation of utilities.
C. All proposed gas mains shall be located within the pavement area of the
roadway. Where practicable, all other utilities shall be located within
the street right-of-way, otherwise, easements or rights-of-way of
sufficient width for installation and maintenance shall be provided.
[Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 910]
D. Final plans shall show locations of all utilities and shall be coordinated
with required street tree planting.
A. Street trees and other required plantings shall be in accordance with
§ 164-35 of this chapter.
B. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until
the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been
completed.
C. Plans of proposed street tree planting shall be reviewed and approved
by the Perkasie Borough Planning Commission.
§ 164-59 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-62
152:529

ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 164-63. Contracts to be entered into before endorsement.
Before the Borough Council shall cause its approval to be endorsed upon
the final plans of any subdivision or land development (except in the case of
minor subdivision, wherein the Council imposes no condition or conditions
for the approval of the plan) and as a requirement for the approval thereof,
the owners shall enter into a written agreement with the Borough in the
manner and form set forth by the Borough Solicitor, where they shall agree:
A. To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all streets,
curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, streetlights, drainage facilities, street
signs, monuments, capped sewers, parks and other improvements
shown on said final plan, when required to do so by the Borough
Council in accordance with the final plans, as finally approved, and in
strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Borough.
B. To maintain, at his own cost, the said streets, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage facilities, street signs, parks, monuments, fire hydrants,
streetlighting, capped sewers and other improvements until the same
are accepted or condemned by the Borough for public use and for a
period of one year thereafter to repair and reconstruct the same or any
part of one of them when such repair or reconstruction shall be
specified by the Borough Council as necessary by reason of faulty
construction, workmanship or materials and at or before acceptance of
such improvements by the Borough.
C. To remove or cause to be removed, at his own expense and without any
cost to the Borough, from all said streets all snow and/or ice fallen or
formed thereon within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to
have fallen or formed.
D. To install or cause to be installed, at his own expense and without any
cost to the Borough for any part of such installation, streetlighting
facilities on all streets within and abutting the subdivision, if proposed
to be dedicated to the Borough, as required by this chapter.
E. To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric service
for the lighting of the streets on or abutting said subdivision from the
lights installed by the owner, until such time as the streets shown on the
subdivision plans shall be accepted as public streets of the Borough by
ordinance and to indemnify and save harmless the Borough from and
against all suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service to the
streets shown on said plans or any part thereof to the time that the said
streets shall be accepted as public streets of the Borough in the manner
hereinabove set forth.
F. To pay the inspection fees required by § 164-76.
§ 164-63 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-63
152:531
§ 164-64. Performance bond; security; escrow funds.
G. To obtain the easements and releases required when any street,
drainage facility or other improvement wherein a subdivision abuts or
traverses lands of persons other than the person holding legal title to
the lands of the subdivision at his own cost and obtain from the owner
of the lands so abutted or traversed full releases from all damages
which may result from change in grade, construction or otherwise of
the street, drainage facility or other improvement, and such releases
shall inure to the benefit not only of the owner of the subdivision but to
the Borough as well.
H. To promptly reimburse to the Borough reasonable attorneys' and
engineers' fees as specified in § 164-75.
A. In order to assure the Borough that the streets, drainage facilities,
curbs, sidewalks, street signs, fire hydrants, streetlighting facilities,
monuments, parks and capped sewers shown on said final plans and
other improvements shown on said final plans, which the Borough
Council shall require the owner to install at his own expense, will be
constructed and installed in strict accordance with the plans, as finally
approved, and with the standards, regulations and specifications of the
Borough and will be maintained until accepted or condemned by the
Borough; the owner shall furnish to the Borough a bond with such
surety as the Borough Council shall approve or, in lieu thereof, when
deemed adequate by the Borough Council, shall deposit with the
Borough securities, in either case, in an amount sufficient to cover cost,
as estimated by the Borough Engineer or Borough Council, of the
construction and installation of the aforesaid improvements, of lighting
the streets and removing any and all snow and/or ice from the streets,
until the same shall be accepted by the Borough.
B. In lieu of posting bond or depositing securities as above provided, the
owner may elect to deposit with the Borough funds in an equivalent
amount to be held in escrow in accordance with the terms of a written
escrow agreement prepared by the Borough Solicitor, which shall be
entered into by the owner, the Borough and the escrow agent, if any.
Such escrow agreement shall provide that as the the work of
constructing the required public improvements progresses, the
Borough or escrow agent holding said funds will release and refund to
the order of the owner from the funds deposited sums equivalent to the
estimated value of work completed, less a ten-per-centum retainer,
upon delivery of a certificate of completion signed by the owner, the
subcontractor performing the work, the Borough Engineer and the
Borough Manager; otherwise said funds to be held by the Borough or
escrow agent to the benefit and use of the Borough in the event the
owner fails or neglects to perform the terms provided for under
§ 164-63.
C. After the owner shall have completed all of the improvements required
by said escrow agreement and has received the final payment provided
§ 164-63 PERKASIE CODE § 164-64
152:532
under the aforementioned escrow agreement and after the Borough
Council shall have accepted the streets, facilities and other
improvements in the manner provided in § 164-14C, the 10% remaining
in the fund shall serve to guarantee the maintenance, repair or
reconstruction of the said improvements and the removal of any and
all snow and/or ice from the said streets, by the owner, for a period
of one year thereafter, required under the provisions of § 164-63B and
§ 164-64B, and the said remaining fund will, upon faithful compliance
with those provisions, be released and refunded to the owner upon
the signatures of the President and Secretary of the Borough Council.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the owner from substituting a
maintenance bond, and in such case, the 10% remaining in the fund
shall be released and refunded at the same time maintenance bond is
accepted by the Borough Council.
D. The improvement guaranty, whether in the form of bond or deposit
agreement, shall be conditioned upon:
(1) The owner constructing and installing or causing to be constructed
or installed, in strict accordance with the final plans, as finally
approved, and with the Borough standards and specifications, the
streets, drainage facilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs, lighting
facilities, monuments and parks, capped sewers shown on said
plans and such other improvements shown on said plans, as the
Borough Council may require the owner to construct or install.
(2) The owner maintaining, at his own cost, the said streets, curbs,
drainage facilities, sidewalks, street signs, parks, monuments,
capped sewers and other improvements until the same are
accepted or condemned by the Borough for public use and for a
period of one year thereafter repairing and reconstructing the
same or any part of one of them when such repair or reconstruction
shall be specified as necessary, by reason of faulty construction, by
the Borough Council.
(3) The payment by the owner of the cost of lighting the streets in the
subdivision until such time as the same are accepted as Borough
streets by ordinance of the Council or by condemnation
proceedings.
(4) The payment by the owner of the cost of removing from the said
streets any and all snow and/or ice fallen or formed thereon.
(5) The payment of the inspection fees required by this chapter.
(6) The faithful performance by the owner of the contract provided for
in this chapter.
§ 164-64 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-65
152:533
§ 164-65. Plans required. [Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
Plans are required for all lot line adjustments subdivisions or land
developments in accordance with the procedures, plan requirements and
design standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 164-66. Proper plan to be submitted for approval. [Amended
11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
For the purpose of having a subdivision or land development reviewed and
approved by the Borough Council or by the Borough Planning Commission
in the case of a lot line adjustment or minor subdivision, the applicant shall
file with the Borough Manager the respective plans and applications (See
Appendix A.163) in accordance with Article II of this chapter.
§ 164-67. Application for tentative sketch plan.
A. A tentative sketch plan may be submitted by the applicant as a basis for
informal discussion with the Planning Commission.
B. Data furnished in the tentative sketch plan shall include the following
information:
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect.
(4) Tract boundaries.
(5) North point and date.
(6) Location map.
(7) Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(8) Significant topographical and physical features.
(9) Proposed general street layout.
(10) Proposed general lot layout or building layout.
(11) Contours based on United States Geological Survey topography.
(12) Site plan, showing soil conditions, drainageways, vegetative cover
and slopes.
(13) Indication of size and placement of buildings, number of units and
their size, length and width of sidewalks and drives.
163. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file and available in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-65 PERKASIE CODE § 164-67
152:534
§ 164-68. Information on preliminary plan.
The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(14) Detailed plan indicating adjacent properties, types of land use and
natural features, including forested areas, floodplains, drainage
swales, etc.
(15) Method of managing and controlling open space area.
(16) The one-hundred-year flood line.
(17) Estimated average and peak volumes of water needed to serve the
proposed subdivision or land development; an indication of the
available water volume for fire flow and the water volume required
to satisfy the Insurance Services Office (ISO) standards for fire
protection. [Added 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or one
inch equals 100 feet, or larger, of a standard engineering scale.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof; and bearings
in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(4) Where any revision is made or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show
features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to shown the
presently proposed features.
(5) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to
indicate clearly which features are existing and which are
proposed.
B. Information to be shown: general.
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan.
(4) Present zoning classification.
(5) Date, North point and scale.
(6) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
or developed at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch,
§ 164-67 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-68
152:535
showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all
streets, roads and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet
of any part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
C. Existing features.
(1) A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed, showing all courses, distances and area and tie-ins to all
adjacent street intersections.
(2) The location, names and widths of streets, the location and name of
railroads, the location of property lines and name of owners, the
location of watercourses, sanitary sewers, storm drains and similar
features within 400 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided or
developed.
(3) The location of all existing monuments with references to them.
(4) The location, size and ownership of all underground utilities and
any rights-of-way within the property.
(5) Appropriate contours at two- to five-foot intervals with sufficient
details to show the course, structure and capacity of all drainage
facilities and the method of drainage of the adjacent or contiguous
territory. All ground contours shall be taken from United States
Coast and Geodetic benchmarks and run direct to the degree that
the actual elevations of the spot points or contours shall be the
exact elevations above United States Coast and Geodetic data.
(6) The location, character of existing buildings, species and size of
large trees standing alone, the outline of all wooded areas,
quarries, marshy areas, areas subject to inundation and other data
which may serve to affect the street or building layout.
(7) The one-hundred-year flood line.
(8) Aerial photograph of the site and the area within a minimum of
approximately 400 feet of the site, at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or larger, of the most recent DVRPC aerials. [Added
11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
D. Proposed layout. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604; 8-7-1989
by Ord. No. 621]
(1) The layout of streets, including name and width of streets, alleys
and crosswalks.
(2) The layout and approximate dimensions of lots.
(3) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial and
multifamily developments, with all necessary dimensions noted on
the plan.
§ 164-68 PERKASIE CODE § 164-68
152:536
(4) Applicable zoning requirements and the location of zoning district
boundary lines affecting the subdivision.
(5) A reference to any land dedicated for public use or offered for
dedication for parks, recreation areas, schools, widening of streets
or other public uses.
(6) For multifamily developments, the total area, total dwelling units,
number of buildings, proposed density, total parking spaces,
building coverage and the bedroom ratio shall be on the plan.
(7) For subdivisions, the total area, number of lots, average and
minimum lot size and proposed length of new streets shall be noted
on the plan.
(8) The location and size of storm drains, sanitary sewers, culverts,
watercourses and all appurtenances thereof, on-site sewage
disposal facilities, gas mains, water mains, fire hydrants,
streetlights, planting, special structures and other underground
conduits or structures.
(9) Building setback lines, established by zoning or other ordinances or
deed restrictions, with distances from the right-of-way line.
(10) An indication of any lots in which other than a residential use is
intended.
(11) Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all
drainage purposes, utilities or other pertinent reasons.
(12) Tentative typical cross sections and center-line profiles for each
proposed street shown on the preliminary plan. These plans may be
submitted as separate sheets.
(13) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the owner's entire
holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective street layout
for the remainder.
(14) The words "preliminary plan — not to be recorded" shall be shown
on the plan.
(15) All open spaces shall be so identified and their proposed use and
level of maintenance specified in all performance standard
subdivisions.
(16) A plan for planting is required for open space subdivision; this plan
shall show the location of all existing trees greater than three
inches in caliper. All new plantings shall indicate species and size.
(17) The location of all trees to be saved, including their trunk and
dripline locations. Driplines should be plotted accurately, to scale.
When groups of trees are to be saved, only the locations of the trees
on the perimeter must be shown.
§ 164-68 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-68
152:537
§ 164-69. Information on lot line adjustment or minor subdivision
plan. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604; 8-7-1989 by Ord. No.
621; 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
The lot line adjustment or minor subdivision plan shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
(18) The tree protection zone shall be indicated on the plan.
(19) The location of proposed retaining walls around trees shall be
shown.
(20) Construction details of all retaining walls shall be provided,
including special soil and fill mediums where applicable. Any grade
changes which would alter surface and/or subsurface water
movement either to or from the tree protection zone must also be
indicated.
(21) A table showing open space ratio, density and impervious surface
ratio.
(22) A planning module for land development as required under the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act No. 537).164
(23) Estimated average and peak volumes of water needed to serve the
proposed subdivision or land development; an indication of the
available water volume for fire flow and the water volume required
to satisfy the Insurance Services Office (ISO) standards for fire
protection.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or one
inch equals 100 feet, or larger, of a standard engineering scale.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings
in degrees, minutes and seconds.
B. Information to be shown: general.
(1) Name of the subdivision.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Name and address of the engineer or surveyor responsible for the
plan.
(4) Zoning classification and requirements.
(5) Date, North point and scale.
164. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 164-68 PERKASIE CODE § 164-69
152:538
§ 164-70. Information on final plan.
The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(6) A location map for the purpose of locating the site at a scale of not
less than 800 feet to the inch.
C. Existing features.
(1) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided, showing
all courses, distances and areas and tie-ins to all adjacent street
intersections.
(2) The location, names and widths of streets, the location of property
lines and names of owners and the location of watercourses,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, easements and similar features.
(3) The location and character of existing buildings, wooded areas and
other features.
(4) The one-hundred-year flood line.
(5) Aerial photograph showing the site in relation to the surrounding
properties, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger, of the
most recent DVRPC aerials. This is not required for a lot line
adjustment.
D. Proposed layout.
(1) Proposed layout of lots.
(2) Lots numbered.
(3) Building and setback lines.
(4) Total area and minimum lot size.
(5) A planning module for land development as required under the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act No. 537).165 This is not
required for a lot line adjustment.
(6) Estimated average and peak volumes of water needed to serve the
proposed subdivision; an indication of the available water volume
for fire flow and the water volume required to satisfy the Insurance
Services Office (ISO) standards for fire protection. This is not
required for a lot line adjustment.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or one
inch equals 100 feet, or larger, of a standard engineering scale.
[Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
165. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 164-69 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-70
152:539
(2) The plan shall be a clear and legible white paper print.
(3) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals to the nearest hundredth
of a foot; and the bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(4) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(5) Final plans shall be on sheets either 18 inches by 22 inches or 36
inches by 44 inches, and all lettering shall be so drawn as to be
legible if the plan should be reduced to half size.
B. Information to be shown: general.
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plan.
(4) Date, North point and scale.
(5) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
or developed at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch,
showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all
streets, roads and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet
of any part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
C. Existing features.
(1) Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed, showing all courses, distances and area and tie-ins to all
adjacent street intersections.
(2) The location, names and widths of streets, the location and names
of railroads, the location of property lines and names of owners, the
location of watercourses, sanitary sewers, storm drains and similar
features within 400 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided or
developed.
(3) The location, size and ownership of all underground utilities and
any rights-of-way within the property.
(4) The location and character of existing buildings, the location and
size of trees, the outline of all wooded areas, quarries, marshy
areas, areas subject to inundation and other data.
(5) The one-hundred-year flood line.
(6) Aerial photograph of the site at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
or larger, of the most recent DVRPC aerials. [Added 11-21-2005
by Ord. No. 897]
D. Proposed layout. [Amended 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 621]
§ 164-70 PERKASIE CODE § 164-70
152:540
(1) The lot layout, including dimensions and bearings and consecutive
numbering of lots.
(2) The proposed names, cartway width and right-of-way width of all
proposed streets.
(3) The arrangement of buildings and parking areas in commercial and
multifamily developments with all necessary dimensions noted on
the plan.
(4) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot and boundary line.
(5) The proposed building setback line for each street or the proposed
location of each building.
(6) Accurate locations of all monuments, one to be placed at each
change in direction of boundary, two to be placed at each street
intersection and one on one side of each street at angle points and
at the beginning and end of curves. Utility easements shall be
monumented at their beginning and at their end and areas to be
conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented at their external
boundaries.
(7) The location, width and purpose of all easements or rights-of-way
and boundaries by bearings and dimensions.
(8) For multifamily developments, the total area, total dwelling units,
number of buildings and proposed length of new streets shall be
noted on the plan.
(9) For subdivisions, the total area, number of lots, average and
minimum lot size and proposed length of new streets shall be noted
on the plan.
(10) The location, size and inverted elevations of all sanitary sewers,
storm sewers and locations of all manholes, inlets and culverts and
design calculations of same, along with the plan and profile of same
and any appurtenances.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed fire hydrants and utilities.
(12) Typical cross sections and street profiles for all streets. Such
profiles shall show the existing and proposed grades along the
proposed street center lines.
(13) Estimated average and peak volumes of water needed to serve the
proposed subdivision or land development; an indication of the
available water volume for fire flow and the water volume required
to satisfy the Insurance Services Office (ISO) standards for fire
protection.
§ 164-70 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-70
152:541
§ 164-71. Form of record plan.
The record plan shall be clear and legible blue- or black-line print on white
opaque linen and shall be an exact copy of the approved final plan on a sheet
of the size required for final plans. The following information shall appear
on the record plan, in addition to the information required in § 164-70:
(14) Certification of water and sewer facilities as from the municipal
authority.
(15) All open spaces shall be so identified and their proposed use and
level of maintenance specified in all performance standard
subdivisions.
(16) A plan for planting is required for open space subdivisions; this
plan shall show the location of all existing trees greater than three
inches in caliper. All new planting shall indicate species and size.
(17) A table showing open space ratio, density and impervious surface
ratio.
A. Seals.
(1) The impressed seal of the licensed engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(2) The impressed corporation seal, if the applicant is a corporation.
(3) The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
B. Acknowledgments.
(1) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be developed and that the subdivision or land
development shown on the final plan is made with his or their
consent and that it is desired to record the same.
(2) Acknowledgment of said statement before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgments.
C. The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in black
India ink:
(1) The signatures of the owner or owners of the land. If the owner of
the land is a corporation, the signatures of the president and
secretary of the corporation shall appear.
(2) The signature of the notary public or other qualified officer,
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
(3) The signature of the licensed engineer or surveyor who prepared
the plan.
§ 164-70 PERKASIE CODE § 164-71
152:542
(4) The signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Borough
Planning Commission.
(5) The signatures of the Chairman and Executive Director of the
Bucks County Planning Commission, acknowledging that the plan
has been approved or reviewed by the Commission.
(6) The signature of the Borough Engineer.
(7) The signature of the President and Secretary of the Borough
Council.
(8) The signature of an agent for the Bucks County Department of
Health on either of the following title blocks as appropriate:
[Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 604]
(a) Individual lot subsurface absorption systems: Evaluation of
deep test holes, the recording of limiting zones and the
witnessing of percolation tests have been observed on all lots
by the Bucks County Department of Health and it has been
determined that Lot Nos. _________ are suitable for individual
sewage disposal systems, provided that no change in the
physical conditions in the land occurs and the individual
sewage disposal system design meets the additional
requirements of Chapter 73. Permits for the construction of
each individual sewage disposal system on each lot must be
obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the
system and/or building.
Date
(Signature of Bucks County Department of
Health Agent)
Title
(b) Community subsurface absorption systems. The Bucks County
Department of Health has reviewed the design of the proposed
community on-site subsurface absorption system along with
the required deep test hole and percolation tests. For
community on-site subsurface systems involving flows greater
than 10,000 gallons per day, the Bucks County Department of
Health has also obtained review of the system by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. It has
been determined that the system is suitable for treating
_________ gallons per day or _________ dwelling units under the
current rules and regulations. Permits for construction of the
community on-site subsurface absorption system must be
obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the
system and/or dwelling units.
§ 164-71 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-71
152:543
§ 164-72. Modification of information requirements; waiver of
contour requirements.
§ 164-73. Modifications. [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644166]
Date
(Signature of Bucks County Department of
Health Agent)
Title
D. Miscellaneous information: [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 942]
(1) Tax Map Parcel (TMP) number.
(2) Owner's name.
(3) Subdivision or land development name.
A. The above requirements for preliminary and final plans and for the
supporting data may be modified by the Borough Council as warranted
by special circumstances.
B. In subdivisions requiring no new streets and in the case of
resubdivision, the requirements for the contours may be waived at the
discretion of the Planning Commission.
A. If any mandatory provisions of these regulations are shown by the
applicant, to the satisfaction of the Borough Council to be
unreasonable, to cause undue hardship or that an alternate standard
can provide equal or better results, the Borough Council may grant a
modification to that provision. A modification may be granted, provided
that it will not be contrary to public interest and the purpose and intent
of this chapter is maintained.
B. All requests for modification shall be in writing and signed by the
applicant. The request shall state the reasons and grounds for why the
provision is unreasonable or the hardship imposed, and shall discuss
the minimum modification necessary.
C. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would
result if the modification were granted. Furthermore, hardship
complained of cannot be claimed by one who purchases with or without
knowledge of restrictions; it must be from the application of this
chapter; it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and
evidence of a modification granted under similar circumstances shall
not be considered.
166. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 164-73, Variances for hardships.
§ 164-71 PERKASIE CODE § 164-73
152:544
§ 164-74. (Reserved)167
§ 164-75. Payment of engineering and legal fees; deposit.
D. The Borough Council shall request an advisory opinion on the
modification request from the Borough Planning Commission.
E. In granting modifications, the Borough Council may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements so modified.
F. The Borough shall keep a written record of all requests for
modifications.
G. If a modification is granted, it shall be referenced in the conditions of
approval of the plan, and shall apply only to that plan.
A. The owner shall pay to the Borough reasonable engineering fees
incurred by the Borough for the services of the Borough Engineer
incidental to the examination and other work incidental to the approval
of each subdivision or development, or section thereof, and shall also
pay to the Borough reasonable legal fees incurred by the Borough for
legal services incidental to the preliminary discussions and negotiations
with respect to the approval of such plans of each subdivision or
development, or section thereof, the approval thereof and the drafting
of the contracts and bonds required by §§ 164-63 and 164-64 and for
legal services required by the Borough which may arise by reason of the
approval of such plans of each subdivision or development, or section
thereof, inclusive of the cost of legal services incidental to the final
acceptance by the Borough of the streets laid out on the subdivision.
B. The engineering and legal fees required to be paid by this chapter shall
be promptly paid to the Borough by the owner upon the submission of
bills thereof to the owner by the Borough, from time to time, as such
fees are billed to the Borough or Authority by its engineers or attorneys.
C. To the engineering and legal fees required to be paid to the Borough by
this chapter, there shall be added the sum of 3%, which the owner shall
pay to the Borough as reimbursement to the Borough of the costs
incurred by the Borough for the collection of such fees and the
disbursement of the same to the Borough Engineer and Borough
Solicitor.
D. A deposit in accordance with § 164-10C of this chapter shall be required
at the time of submission of the preliminary plans in order to cover
engineering and legal fees incurred during review and approval of
subdivision or land development plans.
167. Editor's Note: Former § 164-74, Additional conditions on variances, was repealed
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644.
§ 164-73 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-75
152:545
§ 164-76. Inspection by Borough Engineer.
E. In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the review of a plan or the inspection of
improvements: [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 644]
(1) Within 10 working days of the date of billing, the applicant shall
notify the Borough that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not
delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If within 20 days from the date of billing, the municipality and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review said expenses and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County (or if at the time there
is no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting)
shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Municipal Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been
retained by or performed services for the municipality or the
applicant within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. Three days prior to the commencement of any operation in the
construction or installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
facilities, street signs, monuments and capped sewers, the owner shall
notify the Borough Engineer, who shall inspect the work, materials,
§ 164-75 PERKASIE CODE § 164-76
152:546
§ 164-77. Application for construction permit.
construction and installation to assure that the same are in accordance
with Borough requirements.
B. The Borough Engineer shall be authorized to have such tests of
materials made in order to have proper control of materials. The owner
shall pay to the Borough the cost of such tests, plus 3%, to reimburse
the Borough for the collection of such fees and disbursement of same to
the Borough Engineer.
A. Applications for construction permits for streets, highways, culverts,
bridges, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, dams or other
structures shall be filed with the Borough Secretary on the form
supplied by the Borough and shall be accompanied by four sets of plans
and specifications prepared by a registered engineer, setting forth the
location and nature of work, together with all engineering data
necessary for completion of work and shall be verified by an affidavit
made by or on behalf of the owner or owners. A fee of $10 shall
accompany each application for construction permit.
B. Upon approval of the construction permit applications plans and
specifications by the Borough Engineer, the Secretary shall issue a
construction permit to the owner of the property. The said owner shall
pay the cost of any necessary material tests made and shall reimburse
the Borough for the necessary inspection at the rate of $3 per hour for
each hour that a Borough inspector is on the project; provided,
however, that if the owner shall employ a registered professional
engineer to supervise and inspect construction, who shall file with the
Borough Engineer a certificate that the construction has been carried
out in compliance with the approved plans and Borough specifications,
the foregoing inspection charge at the rate of $3 per hour shall not be
made.
§ 164-76 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 164-77
152:547
Chapter 170
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector commissions — See Ch. 46, Art.
III.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 142.
§ 164-77 PERKASIE CODE § 164-77
152:548
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 170, Art. I, of the 1985 Code168]
§ 170-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation of joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied; provided,
however, that as used herein, "current year shall during 1966 refer only to
the period beginning July 1, 1966, and ending December 31, 1966.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily a "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home,
until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent
home. In the case of businesses or associations, the "domicile" is that
place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips an other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period off sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old-age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
168. Editor's Note: Originally enacted by Ord. No. 345.
§ 170-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-1
152:549
salary supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Perkasie.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by governing body to collect and administer the tax on
earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXING DISTRICT or TAXING JURISDICTION — The Borough of Perkasie.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 170-2. Imposition and applicability of tax.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed at the rate of 1%
on the following:
(1) Earned income received in the current year by residents of the
taxing district.
(2) Earned income received in the current year within the taxing
district by nonresidents thereof.
(3) Net profits earned during the current year by residents of the
taxing district.
(4) Net profits earned during the current year within the taxing district
by nonresidents thereof.
§ 170-1 PERKASIE CODE § 170-2
152:550
§ 170-3. Declarations, payments and returns for net profits tax.
B. The tax levied under this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned in the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year or for
taxpayer fiscal years beginning in the current year, except that taxes
imposed for 1966 shall become effective July 1, 1966, and the tax shall
continue in force on a calendar-year or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis,
without annual reenactment, unless the rate of tax is subsequently
changed. Regardless of the fiscal year of any taxpayer, such taxpayer,
shall be liable for payment of the tax hereby imposed from July 1, 1966.
As used herein, the term "current year" shall, during 1966, refer only to
the period beginning July 1, 1966, and ending December 31, 1966.
A. Except during 1966, every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or
before April 15 of the current year, make and file with the Officer on a
form prescribed or approved by the officer a declaration of his
estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the current year and pay to the officer, in four equal
quarterly installments, the tax due thereon as follows: the first
installment at the time of filing the declaration and the other
installments on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
B. Except during 1966, any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit
after April 15 of the current year shall make and file the declaration
hereinabove required on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year or December 31 of the current year,
whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer
first anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment
dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
C. For the year 1966 on or before September 15, every taxpayer making
net profits shall make and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during
the period beginning July 1 and ending December 31, 1966, and pay the
officer in two equal installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first
installment on or before September 15, 1966, and the second
installment on or before January 15, 1967.
D. For the year 1966, any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits
after September 15, 1966, shall make and file the declaration
hereinabove required on or before January 15, 1967, and pay to the
officer the tax due thereon on or before January 15, 1967.
E. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make
and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the officer,
a final return showing the amount of net profits earned during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year (July 1 in the year 1966)
and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
§ 170-2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-3
152:551
§ 170-4. Returns and payment of earned income tax.
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the balance
of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
F. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of
his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the officer, on or before
January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove
required.
G. The officer is hereby authorized to provide, by regulation, for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and
for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who
has filed the declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional
net profits not previously declared or finds that he has overestimated
his anticipated net profits.
H. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
A. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make
and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the officer,
a final return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year (July 1 in the year 1966)
and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the
final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
B. Except during 1966, every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation and who received any earned
income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at source
shall make and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer, a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year,
July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January
31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned
income not subject to withholding by him during the three-month
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year,
respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of
tax shown as due thereon.
C. For the short year beginning July 1, 1966 and ending December 31,
1966, the aforesaid requirements pertaining to the filing of quarterly
§ 170-3 PERKASIE CODE § 170-4
152:552
§ 170-5. Collection at source; withholding for taxes.
returns and to the payment of tax due thereon, the filing and payment
dates shall be October 31, 1966, and January 31, 1967.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation and who has not previously
registered shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer or within
15 days after the effective date of this article, whichever shall first
occur, register with the officer his name and address and such other
information as the officer may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before October 31, 1966,
January 31, 1967, and thereafter on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer
the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month
periods ending September 30, 1966, December 31, 1966, and
thereafter ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between
the officer and the employer, shall show the name and social security
number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom,
the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
C. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority may be required
by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
(July 1 in the year 1966) and ending December 31 of the current
year.
§ 170-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-5
152:553
§ 170-6. Powers and duties of officer; refunds.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year (July 1 in the year 1966) and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and
social security number, the amount of earned income paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the officer. Every employer shall furnish two
copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, Act
No. 511 of 1965, Section 9, every employer who willfully or negligently
fails or omits to make the deductions required by this section shall be
liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold to the
extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
H. If an employer makes a deduction of tax as required by this article, the
amount deducted shall constitute, in the hands of such employer, a trust
fund held for the account of the governing body as beneficial owner and
the employee from whose earned income such tax was deducted shall
be deemed to have paid such tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and, if paid by such taxpayer or employer in
respect of another taxpayer, the name of such other taxpayer and the
date of such receipt.
B. The officer is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the Article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which any overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, to make refunds in cases of overpayment for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
§ 170-5 PERKASIE CODE § 170-6
152:554
§ 170-7. Recovery of due and unpaid taxes.
of the Article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the governing body. A copy
of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for
public inspection.
C. The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
D. The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer or to any agent designated
by him the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations, as are hereby authorized.
E. Any information gained by the officer, his agents or by an other official
or agent of the taxing district as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
F. The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The officer may sue in the name of the taxing district for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
§ 170-6 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-7
152:555
§ 170-8. Interest and liability for late taxes.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of one-half
of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month
or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person
liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 170-9. Violations and penalties.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this
article.
C. The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the
refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction in the county, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of
payment of said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 170-7 PERKASIE CODE § 170-9
152:556
§ 170-10. Failure to receive or procure forms.
The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for making
the declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse him from
making such declaration or return.
§ 170-11. Collection from employers of delinquent earned income
taxes.
The Tax Collector shall demand, receive and collect all delinquent taxes
from all corporations, political subdivisions, associations, companies, firms
or individuals employing persons owing delinquent earned income taxes or
whose wife owes delinquent earned income taxes or having in possession
unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to any person or persons owing
delinquent earned income taxes or whose wife owes delinquent earned
income taxes upon the presentation of a written notice and demand under
oath or affirmation, containing the name of the taxable or the husband
thereof and the amount of tax due. Upon the presentation of such written
notice and demand, it shall be the duty of any such corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct from the
wages, commissions or earnings of such individual employees then owning
or that shall within 60 days thereafter become due or from any unpaid
commissions or earnings of any such taxable in its or his possession or
that shall within 60 days thereafter come into its or his possession a sum
sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent earned income
taxes and costs, shown upon the written notice or demand, and to pay the
same to the Tax Collector within 60 days after such notice shall have been
given. Such corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual
shall be entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee
the costs incurred from the extra bookkeeping necessary to record such
transactions, not exceeding 2% of the amount of money so collected and
paid over to the Tax Collector. Upon the failure of any such corporation,
political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct the
amount of such taxes or to pay the same over to the Tax Collector, less the
cost of bookkeeping involved in such transaction, as herein provided, within
the time required, such corporation, political subdivision, association,
company, firm or individual shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax for
each such taxable whose taxes are not withheld and paid over or that are
withheld and not paid over, together with a penalty of 10% added thereto,
to be recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the
Tax Collector or by the proper authorities of the taxing district as debts of
like amount are now by law recoverable, except that such person shall not
have the benefit of any stay of execution or exemption law.
§ 170-12. Deductions for payment of other taxes.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 170-9 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-12
152:557
A. Payment of any tax to any other political subdivision pursuant to an
ordinance or resolution passed or adopted prior to the effective date of
the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, Act No. 511 of 1965, shall be
credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of taxpayers for
any tax imposed under this article.
B. Payment of any tax on salaries, wages, commission, other compensation
or net profits of businesses, professions or other activities to any other
political subdivision by residents thereof pursuant to any ordinance or
resolution passed or adopted under the authority of the Local Tax
Enabling Act of 1965, Act No. 511 of 1965, shall be credited to and
allowed as a deduction from the liability of such persons for any tax
imposed under this article.
C. Payment of any tax on income to any other political subdivision by
residents thereof pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or
adopted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, Act.
No. 511 of 1965, shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities, but in such proportion as hereinafter set
forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of
such persons for any tax imposed under this article.
D. Payment of tax on income to any state or to any other political
subdivision thereof by residents thereof, pursuant to any state or local
law, shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries, wages,
commissions or other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter
set forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of
such person for any tax imposed under this chapter, if residents of the
political subdivision in Pennsylvania receive credits and deductions of a
similar kind to a like degree from the tax on income imposed by the
other state or political subdivision thereof.
E. Payment of any tax on income to any state other than Pennsylvania or to
any political subdivision located outside the boundaries of this
Commonwealth by residents of a political subdivision located in
Pennsylvania shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commission or other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter
set forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of
such person for any tax imposed under this article.
F. Where a credit or a deduction is allowable in any of the several cases
hereinabove provided, it shall be allowed in proportion to the
concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed by the other state or
respective political subdivisions, but not in excess of the amount
previously paid for a concurrent period.
§ 170-12 PERKASIE CODE § 170-13
152:558
§ 170-13. Incorporation of Local Tax Enabling Act by reference.
All provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, Act No. 511 of 1965,169
are incorporated herein by reference.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 170-13 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-13
152:559

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)170
§ 170-14. (Reserved)
§ 170-15. (Reserved)
§ 170-16. (Reserved)
§ 170-17. (Reserved)
§ 170-18. (Reserved)
§ 170-19. (Reserved)
§ 170-20. (Reserved)
170. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Per Capita Tax, adopted 12-29-1966 by Ord. No. 350, as
amended, was repealed as a result of the Borough Council's deletion of such tax from the
1989 budget.
§ 170-14 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-20
152:561

ARTICLE III
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 585]
§ 170-21. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough."
§ 170-22. Imposition of tax; statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S.
§ 8101-D et seq.
§ 170-23. Definitions.171
As used in this article, the words and phrases defined in 72 P.S. § 8101-C,
as amended from time to time, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
said section.
§ 170-24. Rate and payment of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough under the authority of that
Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as
hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such one-half
rate shall become effective without any action on the part of the
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-21 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-24
152:563
§ 170-25. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 170-26. Excluded transactions.
Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other political
subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may
agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate
herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total
of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 170-24 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property-line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passes by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
§ 170-24 PERKASIE CODE § 170-26
152:564
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of
a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by
the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
§ 170-26 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-26
152:565
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona-fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona-fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 170-26 PERKASIE CODE § 170-27
152:566
§ 170-27. Documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 170-26, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 170-28. Acquired companies.
§ 170-29. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 170-27 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-29
152:567
§ 170-29.1. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 170-29.2. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 170-29.3. Recorder of Deeds.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater then the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
§ 170-29 PERKASIE CODE § 170-29.3
152:568
§ 170-29.4. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 170-29.5. Civil penalties.
§ 170-29.6. Unpaid tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, of any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County,
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 170-29.3 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-29.6
152:569
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 170-29.7. Recovery of unpaid taxes, interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 170-29.8. Enforcement.
The Borough Manager of the Borough is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 170-29.9. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on January 12, 1987.
§ 170-29.6 PERKASIE CODE § 170-29.9
152:570
ARTICLE IV
Tax Discount and Late Payment Penalty
[Adopted 12-16-1985 as Ch. 170, Art. IV, of the 1985 Code172]
§ 170-30. Discount for prompt payment.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes assessed by the Borough
pursuant to the Act of February 1, 1966, § 1302 (1965), and its amendments,
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of
the tax notice.
§ 170-31. Penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged
against them for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be
charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the
Tax Collector and be collected by him.
172. Editor's Note: Originally enacted by Ord. No. 471.
§ 170-30 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-31
152:571

ARTICLE V
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 2-15-1999 by Ord. No. 816]
§ 170-32. Rules and regulations.
The Rules and Regulations attached hereto as Schedule I and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.173
§ 170-33. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.174
§ 170-34. Form of petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.175
§ 170-35. Authority to administer appeal procedures.
The governing body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR) shall be
undertaken by the Hearing Officer.
§ 170-36. Hearing Officer.
The governing body hereby appoints the Borough Manager or his/her
designee as approved by Borough Council as Hearing Officer.
§ 170-37. Administrative appeal procedures.
The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4, attached hereto and
incorporated herein, are hereby approved and adopted.176
§ 170-38. Effective date; applicability.
This article shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of law
and shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
173. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
174. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
175. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
176. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-32 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-38
152:573

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 917177; amended in its entirety
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 924]
§ 170-39. Short title.
This Article VI shall be known and may be cited as "The Borough of Perkasie
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 170-40. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF PERKASIE or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Perkasie, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Perkasie to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Perkasie.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Perkasie for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
177. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Article VI, Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax, adopted 1-16-2006 by Ord. No. 900.
§ 170-39 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-40
152:575
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 170-41 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 170-41. Levy of tax.
§ 170-42. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Perkasie during the tax year.
B. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time
during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $47,
assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
C. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Borough Council from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
D. The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services.
E. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Borough of Perkasie.
F. The tax shall be no more than $47 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
§ 170-40 PERKASIE CODE § 170-42
152:576
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
shall annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall
have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Borough that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to
or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax
from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
§ 170-42 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-42
152:577
§ 170-43. Duty of employers to collect.
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough may pursue
collection under this act.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from a local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
(NOTE: With respect to refunds, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425; with respect
to interest, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426.) Refunds made within 75 days of a
refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to
remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is
later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for
amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for
refunds to exempt persons and provide refunds.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Perkasie, as well as those
employers situated outside the Borough of Perkasie but who engage in
business within the Borough of Perkasie, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Perkasie and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough of
Perkasie.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
§ 170-42 PERKASIE CODE § 170-43
152:578
§ 170-44. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of
a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 140-42B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 170-43 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-45
152:579
§ 170-45. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 170-46. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Perkasie shall be required to comply
with this part and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on
or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 170-47. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 170-48. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Perkasie but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Perkasie do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Borough of Perkasie. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Perkasie and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 170-45 PERKASIE CODE § 170-48
152:580
option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the
collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 170-49. Administration and enforcement of tax.
§ 170-50. Suits for collection; interest and penalties on unpaid tax.
§ 170-51. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this part, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this part, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
pan, the examination and correction of any return made in compliance
with this part and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland County as in other cases
provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this part remains due or unpaid 30 days
after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this part, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 170-48 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 170-51
152:581
any return required by this part shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the
penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of
the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this part.
§ 170-52. Interpretation.
A. Nothing contained in this part shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Perkasie to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this part shall be held
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 170-51 PERKASIE CODE § 170-52
152:582
Chapter 175
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Parks — See Ch. 124.
Public property — See Ch. 128, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
§ 175-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 175-2. Willow and poplar trees restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain, upon any property
owned by him, any willow tree or poplar tree so located that the roots
thereof are likely to interfere with or obstruct any sewer line or water
line under the control of the Borough of Perkasie or the Perkasie Regional
Authority.178
§ 175-3. Requirements for trimming trees.
It shall be the duty of the owners of real estate in the Borough of Perkasie
to trim and keep trimmed all trees located upon such property and along or
near to any street in the Borough, so that:
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The limbs and/or branches thereof shall in no way interfere with
electric wires and other wires lawfully suspended along such street.
There shall be a clearance of at least 10 feet from all electrical wires
and utility poles to all branches, limbs, or trunks and any other portion
of the tree which may be overhanging any electric wires or utility poles.
[Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1003]
B. The limbs and/or branches thereof shall not obscure or obstruct the
light from any streetlight.
178. Editor's Note: The Perkasie Borough Authority was renamed the Perkasie Regional
Authority 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 950.
§ 170-52 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 175-3
152:583
§ 175-4. Owners required to correct; action by Borough.
C. No part of such tree or the limbs and/or branches and foliage thereof
shall obstruct the view of the said street and/or traffic thereon by
persons operating vehicles upon such street or any intersecting street.
D. There shall be a clearance of at least 14 feet from the surface of the
street and at least eight feet from the surface of the sidewalk to the
lowest branch or limb of such tree or any other overhanging part
thereof.
E. No portion of the trunk of any tree shall encroach horizontally over the
roadway of the street or over the paved portion of the sidewalk.
F. Any tree upon a property which is dead or substantially diseased shall
be removed by the owner of the property on or in front of which the
same is located in instances where damage to neighboring property
and/or Borough property is imminent. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No.
1003]
A. Any person owning property in the Borough of Perkasie, upon which
any tree shall be growing or maintained contrary to any provision of
this chapter, shall, within 30 days' notice from the Borough Manager or
his or her designee, be required to remove such tree or to trim the
same, as the case may be, so as to be in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter, and every day after the end of such thirtyday
period on which such notice shall not be obeyed shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
B. In the case of the failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to
trim or remove any tree or part thereof, growing in violation of any
provision of this chapter, within such thirty-day period, the Borough
may remove or trim the same, either by Borough personnel or by
contract with another person, and shall then collect the cost of such
removal or trimming, with an additional amount of 10% from such
property owner in default.
C. The Borough of Perkasie or its contractors may, without notice to the
property owner, trim any shade tree or part thereof which interferes
with the electrical transmission wires and related infrastructure of the
Borough of Perkasie and/or the proper lighting of public highways by
streetlights, traffic control signs and/or devices. It shall be within the
sole discretion of the Borough of Perkasie and/or its contractors as to
whether any shade tree requires trimming for the purposes stated
herein. The trimming shall substantially conform to the diagram
included below: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1003]
§ 175-3 PERKASIE CODE § 175-4
152:584
§ 175-4 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 175-4
152:585
§ 175-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No.
835]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail
to remove or trim any tree as required by any notice given to him under this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 175-4 PERKASIE CODE § 175-5
152:586
Chapter 180
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transport of explosives — See Ch. 88.
Parades — See Ch. 115.
Vehicular speed and parking in parks — See
Ch. 124.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 152.
Streets — See Ch. 160.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 184.
§ 175-5 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 175-5
152:587

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 180-1. Definitions and interpretation. [Amended 2-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 660]
§ 180-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Perkasie, except where the law specifically authorizes less
formal action.
§ 180-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (Title 75 of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes), as now in force or as hereafter
amended, enacted and reenacted, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed for
carrying freight or merchandise with a gross weight of registered gross
weight of 10,000 pounds or over, or which is designed as a mobile home
for travel or camping.[Amended 7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 811]
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Include New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or
days celebrated as such.
LOADING ZONE — Unless specifically indicated differently, a space
adjacent to the edge or curb of a street designated by posted sign as a
"loading zone." The stopping of a vehicle in a space so designated shall
be limited to the temporary stopping of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers;
provided, however, that said posted sign may establish the days and
hours during which time said space shall be a "loading zone."
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
§ 180-1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-3
152:589
§ 180-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 180-5. Street closings.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the Vehicle Code or elsewhere in this chapter for
a violation of such nature.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Council, the Mayor or the Borough Manager shall have authority to
close any street or any specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to
place barriers or to station police officers at each end of the closed
portion while construction or maintenance work is under way or a
special event is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon any such closed
portion.
B. The Council, the Mayor or the Borough Manager shall have authority to
establish a restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when a flagman
is displaying a sign directing the vehicle to stop or is signaling that
vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 180-3 PERKASIE CODE § 180-6
152:590
§ 180-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Borough of
Perkasie who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 180-6 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-6
152:591

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 180-7. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 180-35), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 180-8. Speed limits.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 180-36), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. A maximum speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all
streets, roads and lanes within public parks.179
C. The Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, lower any
maximum speed limit to 15 miles per hour, when it determines that an
emergency exists or any street described in § 180-8A is under
construction or being repaired. Any time a maximum speed is altered in
accordance with these provisions, the change of maximum speeds
should be posted by appropriate signs and markings designating such
alteration. All such alterations of speed limits shall be deemed
temporary and may be terminated at any time by resolution of the
Borough Council, but in no event shall any such alteration be in effect
for a period of more than six months. Nothing contained in this section
shall prevent the Council from continuing an alteration beyond the
original six-month period for successive six-month periods; provided,
however, that the Council shall effect each such six-month continuation
by resolution and only after it has determined that the conditions which
existed originally and which formed the basis for the alteration of the
maximum speed continue to exist at the time that each such resolution
is adopted for each successive six-month period.
D. The Police Department of the Borough of Perkasie is hereby empowered
to use any and all mechanical or electrical speed timing devices which
have been approved by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the purpose of timing the rate of
speed of any vehicle on any of the public highways, streets and
roadways of the Borough of Perkasie. The type of mechanical or
electrical speed timing device hereby approved shall relate to any such
device currently approved by the Department of Transportation as of
the date of enactment of this chapter, together with those to be
developed and approved by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the future.
179. Editor's Note: See also § 124-19 of Ch. 124, Parks and Recreation, Art. I, Rules and
Regulations.
§ 180-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-9
152:593
§ 180-9. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 180-37), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 180-10. U-turns.
U-turns are hereby prohibited on all streets except on the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 180-38), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 180-11. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 180-39),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-12. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VI (§ 180-40), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 180-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VII (§ 180-41), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections.
Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 180-14. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 180-42), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 180-14.1. Trucks excluded from certain streets. [Added
4-18-1994 by Ord. No. 747]
Trucks are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule VIIIA (§ 180-42.1), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials to residences on such
streets. For purposes of this chapter and § 180-42.1 only, a "truck" shall be
defined to be a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property. It shall not include a pickup truck or any truck
owned by a resident whose property is on such street.
§ 180-9 PERKASIE CODE § 180-15
152:594
§ 180-15. Play highways.
The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he deems
that action advisable and for whatever period of time directed by him, any
portion of any street or alley in the Borough; every such play highway shall
be set apart and marked off for the purpose on orders of the Mayor and shall
be clearly designated by appropriate signs, specifying the hours between
which that play highway shall be closed to general traffic. No person shall
drive a motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle upon a play highway at any
time when that street or alley is so designated, except in case of emergency,
with special permission of the Mayor or police officer in charge, who shall
first clear that play highway of all persons using it for the purpose for which
it was set aside. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 180-15 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-15
152:595

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 180-16. General regulations.
Whenever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for
any person to park a vehicle otherwise.
§ 180-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule IX (§ 180-43), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 180-17.1. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited. [Added
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 706; amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 824]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 180-48), at any time or at such times
as indicated by signage on said streets.
§ 180-18. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule X
(§ 180-44) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule X, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 180-18.1. Snow restricted parking. [Added 1-16-1989 by Ord. No.
613; amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 785; 12-19-1996 by Ord. No.
787]
A. It shall be unlawful to park or abandon any motor vehicle on any public
street or highway in the Borough at any time within 12 hours after a
snowfall of three inches or more has occurred.
B. Any motor vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own
power or left unattended upon any public street or highway of the
Borough at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of three inches or
more has occurred may be removed or towed away to another location
by the Police Department or any person or firm authorized by the Police
Department. Such vehicles may be recovered by the owners thereof
upon payment of towing and storage costs incurred by the Borough for
the removal thereof.
C. The schedule of streets regulated by this section are as set forth in
Schedule XA (§ 180-44.1), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-16 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-18.2
152:597
§ 180-18.2. Snow emergency routes. [Added 12-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 787]
§ 180-19. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XI (§ 180-45) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XI of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XI, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 180-20. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XII (§ 180-46), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 180-21. Special purpose parking zones.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 180-47) except for the purposes indicated in
said Schedule XIII, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-22. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles and trailers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked, on
any street or alley ordained, opened or under Borough maintenance, at any
time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., any commercial
motor vehicle or any bus, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or truck camper.
§ 180-23. Handicapped parking.
A. It shall be unlawful to park or abandon any motor vehicle on any public
street or highway in the Borough at any time within 12 hours after a
snowfall of three inches or more has occurred.
B. Any motor vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own
power or left unattended upon any public street or highway of the
Borough at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of three inches or
more has occurred may be removed or towed away to another location
by the Police Department or any person or firm authorized by the Police
Department. Such vehicles may be recovered by the owners thereof
upon payment of towing and storage costs incurred by the Borough for
the removal thereof.
C. The schedule of streets regulated by this section are as set forth in
Schedule XB (§ 180-44.2), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-18.2 PERKASIE CODE § 180-23
152:598
§ 180-24. Parking violations: reports, ticketing.
A. Upon request in writing by any handicapped person or disabled
veteran, the Borough Council may, by resolution, establish on the
street, as close as possible to that individual's place of residence, a
parking space reserved for that handicapped person or disabled
veteran. Further, the Borough Council may, by resolution, establish on
the streets or Borough parking lots additional parking spaces reserved
for handicapped persons or disabled veterans. [Amended 3-16-1992
by Ord. No. 691]
B. In order to qualify for the reservation of a parking space, a handicapped
person or disabled veteran shall have first applied for and received a
special registration plate as issued by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the space so
reserved shall at no time be occupied by any motor vehicle not so
equipped with a special registration plate.
C. Upon the reservation of a parking space for a handicapped person or
disabled veteran, a sign or signs and other appropriate markings shall
be erected so designating that parking space.
D. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to park
any vehicle, other than a vehicle designated as provided in Subsection
B of this section and for which a parking space is reserved under this
section, in any such space.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough, acting in
accordance with instructions issued by the Mayor, to report:
(1) The location where a violation of any provision of this article was
committed.
(2) The license number of the vehicle parked in violation of a provision
of this article.
(3) The time when the vehicle was parked in violation of a provision of
this article.
(4) Any other facts of which a knowledge is needed for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. Every such police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a parking
ticket, giving notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle that the
vehicle was parked in violation of a provision of this article and
instructing that owner or operator to report to the Borough office in
regard to the violation. The owner or operator may, within 48 hours of
the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle, sign and mail to
or present that parking ticket or notice of violation at the Borough
office, indicating a desire to plead guilty of the offense charged and pay
the sum of $10 which shall be for the use of the Borough, to the
Borough Secretary, and in that case, no prosecution shall be brought;
§ 180-23 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-24
152:599
§ 180-25. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, any person who violates any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
otherwise, prosecution shall be brought in the regular way and the
violator shall be liable for the penalty prescribed.
§ 180-24 PERKASIE CODE § 180-25
152:600
ARTICLE IIIA
Off-Street Parking180
§ 180-25.1. Municipal parking lot time limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any of the designated
parking spaces in the following municipal parking lots and allow the same
to remain parked for a time exceeding the designated limits:
§ 180-25.2. Parking within marked spaces.
All vehicles parked in any municipally operated parking lot shall be parked
wholly within the lines bounding an individual parking space, and it shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle elsewhere than in any such space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access or exit drives and
turning spaces.
§ 180-25.3. Limitation of size; weight of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or to park in any municipally
operated parking lot any vehicle determined by the Borough to be too long
or too wide to be accommodated in an individual parking space, not readily
maneuverable in or upon the access or exit drives or turning spaces or of
such weight as is likely to damage or destroy the surface or the foundation
of the lot, where the Borough has installed at or near the entrance to the
lot or at one or more other prominent locations in the lot one or more signs
giving notice of any such prohibition in effect.
§ 180-25.4. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles and trailers.
A. Municipal parking lot at Sixth and Chestnut Streets:
(1) For longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Saturday.
(2) For longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Friday.
B. Municipal parking lot on the west side of Seventh Street between
Chestnut Street and Walnut Street for longer than 48 hours at any time.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked,
in any municipally operated parking lot, at any time between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., any commercial motor vehicle or any
bus, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or truck camper.
B. Nothing in this section shall authorize the parking in any such lot at any
time of any vehicle not permitted in or on that lot under the provisions
of § 180-25.3 of this chapter.
180. Editor's Note: This article was originally codified as Ch. 120 of the 1985 Code. It has been
moved back to this Vehicles and Traffic Chapter since it was adopted as part of the
original ordinance (No. 528) which enacted this chapter.
§ 180-25.1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-25.5
152:601
§ 180-25.5. Official use parking spaces.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, other than a vehicle
entitled to park there, in any space in any municipally operated parking lot,
where that space is conspicuously marked to the effect that it is for official
use.
§ 180-25.6. Parking violations: reports; ticketing; satisfaction.
§ 180-25.7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $15 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
five days.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough, acting in
accordance with the instructions issued by the Mayor, to report:
(1) The location where a violation of any provision of this chapter was
committed.
(2) The license number of the vehicle parked in violation of a provision
of this article.
(3) The time when the vehicle was parked in violation of a provision of
this article.
(4) Any other facts of which a knowledge is needed for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. Every such police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a parking
ticket, giving notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle that the
vehicle was parked in violation of a provision of this article and
instructing that owner or operator to report to the Borough office in
regard to the violation. The owner or operator may, within 48 hours of
the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle, sign and mail to
or present that parking ticket or notice of violation at the Borough
office indicating a desire to plead guilty of the offense charged and pay
the sum of $10 which shall be for the use of the Borough, to the
Borough Secretary, and in that case, no prosecution shall be brought;
otherwise prosecution shall be brought in the regular way and the
violator shall be liable for the penalty prescribed in § 180-25.7 of this
article.
§ 180-25.5 PERKASIE CODE § 180-25.7
152:602
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 180-26. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Mayor or any member of the Borough Police Department is hereby
authorized to remove and impound or to order the removal and impounding
of any vehicle parked on any of the streets, highways or public property in
the Borough in violation of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of
the Borough; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or
impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 180-27. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 180-28. Payment of charges; protests.
§ 180-29. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 180-30. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a District Justice or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice
as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 180-26 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-31
152:603
§ 180-31. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 180-31 PERKASIE CODE § 180-31
152:604
ARTICLE V
Interpretation and Repeal; Penalties
§ 180-32. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 180-33. Repealer; continuation of prior provisions.
§ 180-34. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code or except as herein specified, every person convicted of a violation of
a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $25 and the cost of prosecution.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Perkasie pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
§ 180-32 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-34
152:605

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 180-35. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-7, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Constitution Avenue and Perkasie Square [Added 3-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 855]
Constitution Avenue and Walnut Street
East Walnut Street and South Main Street [Added 3-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 855]
Fifth Street and Market Street
Fifth Street and Walnut Street
North Fifth Street and Callowhill Street [Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No.
855]
North Fifth Street and West Blooming Glen Drive [Added 3-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 855]
South Ridge Road and Park Avenue [Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
§ 180-36. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-8A, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Amherst Circle [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No. 679]
25 Entire length
Arch Street [Added
1-15-2001 by Ord. No. 841]
25 Entire length from Third
Street to Seventh Street
Arthur Avenue 25 Entire length
Bramble Lane [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Brandford Terrace [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Buttonwood Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Callowhill Street 35 Entire length in Borough
Cedar Avenue [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
§ 180-35 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-36
152:607
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Chelsea Court [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No. 679]
25 Entire length
Chestnut Court [Added
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 761]
25 Entire length
Chestnut Street [Added
11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
786]
25 Between Eighth Street and
Ninth Street
Chestnut Street [Added
11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
786]
25 Between Second Street and
Seventh Street
Clover Lane [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 Entire length
Concord Place [Added
12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 600]
25 Entire length
Constitution Avenue [Added
3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 740]
35 Entire length
Constitution Avenue 45 Entire length in Borough
Country Point Circle [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Coventry Way [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
711]
25 Entire length
Dill Avenue [Added
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 761]
25 Between East Walnut
Street and East Market
Street
Dorchester Lane [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No. 679]
25 Entire length
East Chestnut Street [Added
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 761]
25 From Dill Avenue to
Chestnut Court
East Market Street [Added
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 761]
25 Between Fairview Avenue
and North Main Street
East Spruce Street [Added
6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 748]
25 Entire length
East Union Street [Added
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728]
25 Entire length
Elm Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Essex Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
§ 180-36 PERKASIE CODE § 180-36
152:608
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Fairview Avenue [Added
4-17-1994 by Ord. No. 760]
25 Entire length
Fern Lane [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 Entire length
Fifth Street 35 From Market Street to
north Borough boundary
Fifth Street 25 From Market Street to
south Borough boundary
Fourth Street 25 From Elm Street to south
Borough boundary
Fourth Street [Added
10-20-1997 by Ord. No.
797]
25 From Park Avenue to Vine
Street
Grandview Avenue [Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 643]
25 From Spring Lane to East
Spruce Lane
Hampton Circle [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Haven Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Highland Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Highland Drive [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Highwood Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Hillcrest Drive [Added
6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 906]
25 Entire length
Hunters Run Road [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Hyde Street [Added
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728]
25 Entire length
Jefferson Drive [Added
12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 600]
25 Entire length
Kent Lane [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
711]
25 Entire length
Lexington Way [Added
12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 600]
25 Entire length
§ 180-36 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-36
152:609
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Lombard Street [Added
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728]
25 Entire length
Main Street 35 From Walnut Street to
north Borough boundary
Main Street 25 From Walnut Street to
south Borough boundary
Market Street [Added
12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
684]
25 Fifth Street west to
railroad tracks
Marshall Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Milliken Court [Added
4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 779]
25 From Stonycrest Drive to
Borough boundary
Neighbors Way [Added
2-20-2006 by Ord. No. 902]
25 Entire length from
Callowhill Street to the culde-
sac
Ninth Street 35 Entire length in Borough
Nob Hill Drive [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
North Eighth Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
North Lane [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
North Sixth Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
North Tenth Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Oak Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Old Post Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Old Post Road [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 From Shadywood Drive to
Highland Drive
Park Avenue [Added
3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 587]
25 Entire length
Parkridge Court [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Parkridge Drive [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
§ 180-36 PERKASIE CODE § 180-36
152:610
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Penn Alley [Added 7-19-1993
by Ord. No. 727]
15 Entire length
Penny Lane [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Pine Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Pleasant Run Place [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Race Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Revere Way [Added
12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 600]
25 Entire length
Ridge Avenue [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 Entire length
Rustic Drive [Added
12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 600]
25 Entire length
Second Street 15 From Market Street to
Walnut Street
Seventh Street [Amended
2-16-1998 by Ord. No. 802]
35 From Callowhill Street to
West Blooming Glen Drive
Seventh Street 25 From Callowhill Street to
Park Avenue
Shadywood Drive [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631; amended 5-21-2001 by
Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Shadywood Place [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Souder Lane [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
South Eighth Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
South Main Street [Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 643]
35 From Walnut Street to the
Borough line with
Sellerville
South Sixth Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
§ 180-36 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-36
152:611
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Spring Court [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 Entire length
Spring Lane [Added
12-18-1989 by Ord. No.
631]
25 Entire length
Stonycrest Drive [Added
4-15-1995 by Ord. No. 779]
25 From East Walnut to
Borough boundary
Strassburger Road [Added
4-15-1995 by Ord. No. 779;
amended 5-21-2001 by Ord.
No. 844]
25 Entire length
Strawberry Lane [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Summit Avenue [Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 643]
25 From Spring Lane to East
Spruce Street
Third Street [Added
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 792]
25 From Park Avenue to
Callowhill Street
Vine Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Virginia Avenue [Added
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 761]
25 East Walnut Street to East
Market Street
Walker Way [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Walnut Street 35 From Constitution Avenue
to east Borough line
Walnut Street 25 From Seventh Street to
Constitution Avenue
Waltham Lane [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No. 679]
25 Entire length
West Blooming Glen Drive
[Added 5-21-2001 by Ord.
No. 844]
25 Between SR 563 and
Borough Line
West Market Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Railroad tracks to South
Second Street
West Spruce Street [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
West Union Street [Added
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728]
25 Entire length
§ 180-36 PERKASIE CODE § 180-36
152:612
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Wyckford Road [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire length
Wyckford Way [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
25 Entire Length
§ 180-37. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-9, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Chestnut Street West From Eighth Street to Ninth
Street
Eighth Street South From Market Street to
Chestnut Street
Elm Street [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No.
679]
West From Sixth Street for 1 block
Penn Alley [Added
12-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 714]
North From West Walnut Street to
West Chestnut Street
Sixth Street North From Arch Street to
Buttonwood Street
Walnut Street [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 708]
West From Fifth Street to Seventh
Street
§ 180-38. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-10, U-turns are prohibited on
all streets within the Borough, except on the streets or parts of streets
indicated below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-39. Schedule V: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-11, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
§ 180-36 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-39
152:613
Name of Street Direction of Travel
East Walnut Street and South Main Street
[Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
All
North Fifth Street and Callowhill Street
[Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
All
Park Avenue at South Ridge Road [Added
3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
Both
West Market Street at North Fifth Street
[Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
Eastbound
§ 180-40. Schedule VI: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Amherst Circle [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
West Dorchester Lane
Arch Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East Eighth Street
Arch Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East Third Street
Arch Street East/West Fifth Street
Arch Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East/West Ninth Street
Arch Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]181
West Seventh Street
Branford Terrace
[Added 3-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 818]
South Wyckford Drive
Branford Terrace
[Added 3-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 818]
West Essex Court
Buttonwood Street East Fifth Street
Buttonwood Street West Seventh Street
181. Editor's Note: The entries for former Blooming Glen Road, which immediately followed
this entry, were renamed and consequently moved. See now "West Blooming Glen Drive."
§ 180-39 PERKASIE CODE § 180-40
152:614
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Callowhill Street [Repealed 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
Callowhill Street [Added
5-19-2008 by Ord. No.
927]
East Main Street
Callowhill Street East/West Seventh Street
Callowhill Street West Ridge Road
Cedar Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
West Fifth Street
Chelsea Court [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
West Dorchester Lane
Chestnut Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East Dill Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No.
665]
East Virginia Avenue
Chestnut Street East/West Fifth Street
Chestnut Street East/West Fourth Street
Chestnut Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East/West Virginia Avenue
Chestnut Street West Ninth Street
Chestnut Street [Added
4-14-1986 by Ord. No.
573]
West Seventh Street
Clover Lane [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East South Main Street
Clover Lane [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Spring Lane
Dill Avenue [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North East Market Street
Dill Avenue South Walnut Street
Dorchester Lane [Added
5-20-1991 by Ord. No.
669]
South Callowhill Street
§ 180-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-40
152:615
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Dorchester Lane [Added
5-20-1991 by Ord. No.
669]
South Callowhill Street
East Union Street
[Added 11-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 814]
West Hyde Lane
Eighth Street [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North Callowhill Street
Eighth Street [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North Vine Street
Eighth Street [Amended
11-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 756]
North/South Callowhill Street
Eighth Street South Market Street
Elm Street East/West Fifth Street
Essex Court [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
North Wyckford Drive
Essex Court [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
South Wyckford Drive
Fairview Avenue [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North East Market Street
Fairview Avenue South Walnut Street
Fern Drive [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North Clover Lane
Fern Drive [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Spring Lane
Fifth Street North Arthur Avenue
Fifth Street North Market Street
Fourth Street North/South Arch Street
Fourth Street [Added
8-15-2011 by Ord. No.
952]
North/South Chestnut Street
Fourth Street North/South Market Street
Fourth Street North/South Race Street
§ 180-40 PERKASIE CODE § 180-40
152:616
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Fourth Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
North/South Vine Street
Fourth Street North/South Walnut Street
Fourth Street South Park Avenue
Grandview Avenue
[Added 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 622]
North Spruce Street
Hampton Circle [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
East Wyckford Drive
Hampton Circle [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
West Wyckford Drive
Highland Court [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
South Highland Drive
Highland Drive East Fifth Street
Highland Drive [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
East Old Post Road
Highwood Court [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
North Highland Drive
Hillcrest Drive [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No.
665]
West South Main Street
Hyde Lane [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Lombard Street
Hyde Lane [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
South Nob Hill Drive
Kent Lane [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 711]
East Coventry Way
Kent Lane [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 711]
East Coventry Way
Lombard Street [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No.
665]
West Main Street
§ 180-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-40
152:617
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Main Street [Repealed
3-18-2002 by Ord. No.
855]
Main Street [Added
5-19-2008 by Ord. No.
927]
North Callowhill Street
Market Street East Main Street
Marshall Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
North Buttonwood Street
Marshall Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
North/South Callowhill Street
Marshall Street [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Race Street
Ninth Street North/South Market Street
Ninth Street North/South Park Avenue
North Lane [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
South Parkridge Drive
North Ninth Street
[Added 11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 823]
South Island at North Eighth
Street
North Seventh Street
[Adopted 1-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 1018]
North/South Callowhill Street
North Tenth Street
[Added 11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 823]
South Arch Street
Oak Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East Fourth Street
Oak Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
West Fifth Street
Old Post Road South Highland Drive
Old Post Road [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
South Shadywood Drive
§ 180-40 PERKASIE CODE § 180-40
152:618
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Park Avenue [Added
10-16-1989 by Ord.
No. 629]
East South Third Street
Park Avenue East/West Fifth Street
Park Avenue [Repealed
3-18-2002 by Ord. No.
855]
Parkridge Court [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
South Parkridge Drive
Parkridge Drive [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
West Parkridge Drive
(southbound)
Penn Alley [Added
12-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 714]
North West Chestnut Street
Penny Lane [Added
4-20-1992 by Ord. No.
694]
East North Fifth Street
Pine Street [Added
12-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 800]
West Ninth Street
Pleasant Run Place
[Added 11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 823]
West East Spruce Street
Race Street East/West Fifth Street
Race Street [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
East/West Sixth Street
Race Street East/West Ninth Street
Race Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East/West Third Street
Race Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
West Ridge Avenue
Race Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
West Seventh Street
Ridge Avenue North Ridge Road
§ 180-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-40
152:619
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Ridge Avenue [Added
11-20-1995 by Ord.
No. 771]
South Ninth Street
Second Street North/South Chestnut Street
Second Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
North/South Market Street
Second Street South Walnut Street
Seventh Street
[Amended 2-16-1998
by Ord. No. 802]
North West Blooming Glen
Drive
Seventh Street North/South Market Street
Seventh Street South Park Avenue
Shadywood Drive
[Added 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 622]
North Highland Drive
Shadywood Place
[Added 11-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 814]
South Shadywood Drive
Sixth Street [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No.
665]
East Spruce Street
Sixth Street North Arch Street
Sixth Street North Buttonwood Street
Sixth Street North Callowhill Street
Sixth Street North/South Chestnut Street
Sixth Street North/South Market Street
Sixth Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
South Elm Street
Sixth Street [Added
4-14-1986 by Ord. No.
573; amended
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Walnut Street
Spring Court [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North Spring Lane
Spring Lane East Main Street
§ 180-40 PERKASIE CODE § 180-40
152:620
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Spring Lane [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
East South Main Street
Spring Lane [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
West Grandview Avenue
Spruce Street East Third Street
Spruce Street East/West Fifth Street
Spruce Street East/West Fourth Street
Spruce Street East/West Main Street
Spruce Street West Constitution Avenue
Spruce Street West Seventh Street
Spruce Street, East West Main Street, South
Strassburger [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North Stonycrest
Strassburger [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Milliken
Summit Avenue [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
North Spruce Street
Summit Avenue [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Spring Lane
Third Street North Callowhill Street
Third Street North/South Chestnut Street
Third Street North/South Market Street
Third Street North/South Walnut Street
Third Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
South Park Avenue
Tunnel Road [Added
7-15-1991 by Ord. No.
671]
South Ridge Avenue
Tunnel Road West Ridge Road
Vine Street East Seventh Street
Vine Street East/West Fifth Street
§ 180-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-40
152:621
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Vine Street [Added
10-5-1987 by Ord. No.
597]
East/West Third Street
Vine Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
622]
West Ridge Avenue
Vine Street [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
West Sixth Street
Virginia Avenue [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
North East Market Street
Virginia Avenue South Walnut Street
Walnut Street East/West Fifth Street
Walnut Street West Seventh Street
Waltham Lane [Added
11-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 814]
South Dorchester Lane
West Blooming Glen Drive [Amended 2-16-1998 by Ord. No. 802;
repealed 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
West Blooming Glen
Drive [Amended
2-16-1998 by Ord. No.
802]
West Ridge Road
West Race Street
[Added 11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 823]
West Ridge Avenue
West Union Street
[Added 11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 823]
East Hyde Lane
West Vine Street [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
East Island at North Eighth
Street
West Vine Street [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 823]
West Ridge Avenue
Wyckford Drive [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
East Essex Court
Wyckford Drive [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
West Esses Court
§ 180-40 PERKASIE CODE § 180-40
152:622
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Wyckford Way [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
East South Main Street
Wyckford Way [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
818]
West Wyckford Drive
§ 180-41. Schedule VII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Amherst Circle [Added 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 669; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Chelsea Court [Added 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 669; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Clover Lane [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Dill Avenue [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
East Union Street [Added 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Eighth Street [Repealed 11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Eighth Street [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Fairview Avenue [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Fern Drive [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Fern Drive [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Highland Drive [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Hyde Lane [Added 3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 665; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Marshall Street [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Ninth Street South Bridge Street
Pleasant Run Place [Repealed 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 823]
§ 180-40 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-41
152:623
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Race Street [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Ridge Avenue [Repealed 11-20-1995 by Ord. No. 771]
Sixth Street [Repealed 11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Spring Court [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Spring Lane [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Summit Avenue [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Tenth Street [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622]
South Arch Street
Various cul-de-sac roads
[Added 8-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 622]
North/South Highland Drive
Vine Street East Bridge Street
Vine Street [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 814]
Virginia Avenue [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 622; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
Waltham Lane [Added 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 669; repealed
11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 814]
West Union Street [Added 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728; repealed
11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 823]
§ 180-42. Schedule VIII: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-14, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Hunter's Run [Added
3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 636]
5 (10,000
pounds)
Entire length,
between Fifth
Callowhill Street
Street and
§ 180-41 PERKASIE CODE § 180-42.1
152:624
§ 180-42.1. Schedule VIIIA: Trucks Excluded. [Added 4-18-1994 by
Ord. No. 747; amended 2-16-1998 by Ord. No. 802]
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-14.1, trucks, as defined therein,
are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of streets, except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Race Street [Added 7-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 871]
Between 9th Street and Ridge
Avenue
Vine Street [Added 7-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 871]
Between 9th Street and Ridge
Avenue
West Blooming Glen Drive Between Seventh Street and
Ridge Road (S.R. 563)
§ 180-43. Schedule IX: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Circle [Added
5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 669]
East Entire length of
Amherst Circle on the
east side from
Dorchester Lane
Arthur Avenue West From Fifth Street to
Elm Street
Callowhill Street [Added
12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1008]
North From the northeast
intersection with Fifth
Street for 70 feet.
Callowhill Street [Added
6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 699]
North West from Fifth Street
for 25 feet
Callowhill Street [Added
3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 617]
North/South Between Third Street
and Fifth Street
Chestnut Court [Added
1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 584]
East and cul-desac
From Virginia Avenue
to dead end
Dorchester Lane [Repealed 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 726]
Fairview Avenue [Amended
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 775]
East From Walnut Street to
Market Street
Fairview Avenue [Amended
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 775]
West From Walnut Street
north for 202 feet
Fifth Street East North from Arch
Street for 150 feet
Fifth Street [Added 7-6-1987
by Ord. No. 592]
East North from Callowhill
Street for 100 feet
§ 180-42.1 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-43
152:625
Name of Street Side Location
Fifth Street [Added 7-6-1987
by Ord. No. 592]
East South from Callowhill
Street for 100 feet
Fifth Street East South from north
Borough boundary for
950 feet
Fifth Street [Added 8-17-1992
by Ord. No. 703]
East South from Park
Avenue 155 feet
Fifth Street [Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 806]
East South from West
Spruce Street for 50
feet
Fifth Street West From north Borough
boundary to Callowhill
Street
Fifth Street [Added 2-17-1997
by Ord. No. 788]
West From Callowhill Street
to Arch Street
Hunters Run [Added 6-20-1994
by Ord. No. 746]
East/North Entire length from
Callowhill Street to
Fifth Street
Lombard Street [Added
8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 728]
North Between Hyde Lane
and South Main Street
Main Street [Added 2-19-1996
by Ord. No. 776]
East North from East
Walnut Street for a
distance of 56 feet
Main Street [Added 2-19-1996
by Ord. No. 776]
East South from East
Walnut Street for a
distance of 114 feet
Main Street [Added 2-19-1996
by Ord. No. 776]
West North from East
Walnut Street for a
distance of 93 feet
Main Street [Added 2-19-1996
by Ord. No. 776; amended
8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1014]
West South from East
Walnut Street for a
distance of 30 feet
Market Street [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 817]
North From North Ninth
Street east for 60 feet
Market Street [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 817]
North From North Ninth
Street west for 50 feet
Market Street [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 817]
South From North Ninth
Street east for 60 feet
Market Street [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 817]
South From North Ninth
Street west for 50 feet
Marshall Street [Amended
8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 836]
West Between Race Street
and Callowhill Street
§ 180-43 PERKASIE CODE § 180-43
152:626
Name of Street Side Location
North Fifth Street [Added
10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 769;
amended 1-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 853]
East/West From Arch Street for
75 feet
North Lane [Added 2-16-2009
by Ord. No. 933; amended
9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 964]
North Prohibited except for a
100-foot section
beginning 40 feet west
of the intersection of
Parkridge Drive and
North Lane and ending
140 feet from the same
intersection
North Ninth Street [Added
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 817]
West For 50 feet north of
the intersection with
Market Street
North Seventh Street [Added
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 826]
West 161 feet north of West
Market Street and
continuing for a
distance of 22 feet
north
Park Avenue North East from Ninth Street
for 100 feet
Park Avenue [Added
11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 839]
North From South Seventh
Street east for a
distance of 72 feet
Park Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 730]
South East from Ninth Street
for 100 feet
Parkridge Court [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Both Entire length
Parkridge Drive [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Left (inside of
circle)
Moving southwardly
beginning 345 feet
from Parkridge Drive
(west) for a distance of
204 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Left (inside of
circle)
Moving southwardly
beginning 1,017 feet
from Parkridge Drive
(west) for a distance of
528 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
§ 180-43 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-43
152:627
Name of Street Side Location
Parkridge Drive [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Left (inside of
circle)
Moving southwardly
beginning 2,104 feet
from Parkridge Drive
(west) for a distance of
270 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Left (inside of
circle)
Moving southwardly
from West Park Avenue
for a distance of 138
feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive [Added
2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 933]
Right (outside
of circle)
Moving southwardly
beginning 1,944 feet
from Parkridge Drive
(west) for a distance of
91 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Penn Alley [Repealed
9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 838]
Penn Alley [Added 11-16-1992
by Ord. No. 712; amended
4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 721;
repealed 9-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 838]
Penn Alley [Added 9-18-2000
by Ord. No. 838]
East From West Walnut
Street north for a
distance of 25 feet
Penn Alley [Added 9-18-2000
by Ord. No. 838]
East For a distance
beginning 74 feet
north from West
Walnut Street and
continuing north to
Chestnut Street
Penn Alley [Added 9-18-2000
by Ord. No. 838]
West From West Walnut
Street north for a
distance of 27 feet
Penn Alley [Added 9-18-2000
by Ord. No. 838]
West For a distance
beginning 68 feet
north from West
Walnut Street and
continuing north to
Chestnut Street
Ridge Avenue West North from Ninth
Street for 500 feet
§ 180-43 PERKASIE CODE § 180-43
152:628
Name of Street Side Location
Second Street East From Walnut Street to
Market Street
Seventh Street [Added
7-18-1988 by Ord. No. 603]
East From Callowhill Street
north for a distance of
78.6 feet
Seventh Street East South from Spruce
Street for 60 feet
Seventh Street East North from Spruce
Street for 80 feet
Seventh Street East South from driveway
at 219 South Seventh
Street for 50 feet
Seventh Street East From Walnut Street to
Chestnut Street
Sixth Street [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 712;
amended 4-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 721]
East North from Walnut
Street 70 feet
Sixth Street East/West From Chestnut Street
to Market Street
South Fifth Street [Added
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 820]
East From Park Avenue
north for 122 feet
Spruce Street North West from Fifth Street
for 150 feet
Spruce Street [Added
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 827]
North/South From South Main
Street to Constitution
Avenue
Spruce Street South From Fifth Street to
Seventh Street
Walnut Street [Added
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776]
North East from Main Street
for a distance of 82
feet
Walnut Street [Added
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776]
North West from Main Street
for a distance of 60
feet
Walnut Street [Added
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776;
amended 8-6-2018 by Ord.
No. 1014]
South East from Main Street
for a distance of 29
feet
Walnut Street [Added
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776]
South West from Main Street
for a distance of 61
feet
§ 180-43 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-43
152:629
Name of Street Side Location
Walnut Street [Repealed
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776]
Walnut Street [Repealed
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 776]
Waltham Lane [Added
5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 669]
Outside of circle Entire length of
Waltham Lane from
Dorchester Lane to
Dorchester Lane
West Chestnut Street [Added
8-15-2011 by Ord. No. 953]
North From center line of the
alley between Eighth
and Ninth Streets,
west for 25 feet toward
Ninth Street
West Market Street [Added
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 857;
amended 7-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 858]
North/South Between Second
Street and Third Street
§ 180-44. Schedule X: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-18, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Street North 2:00 a.m. to
6:00
a.m./daily
when posted
From Fifth Street to Seventh
Street
Fifth Street
[Amended
2-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 775;
repealed
2-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 788]
Fifth Street West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./except
Sundays
North from south Borough
boundary for 200 feet
Fifth Street West School hours/
school days
North from south Borough
boundary for 200 feet
§ 180-43 PERKASIE CODE § 180-44
152:630
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fourth Street
[Repealed
5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 640]
Market Street
[Repealed
2-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 788]
Parkridge Drive
[Added
2-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 933]
Left
(inside of
circle)
10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Moving southwardly
beginning 114 feet from
Parkridge Drive (west) for
157 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive
[Added
2-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 933]
Left
(inside of
circle)
10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Moving southwardly
beginning 617 feet from
Parkridge Drive (west) for
338 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive
[Added
2-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 933]
Left
(inside of
circle)
10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Moving southwardly
beginning 1,646 feet from
Parkridge Drive (west) for
216 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive
[Added
2-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 933]
Left
(inside of
circle)
10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Moving southwardly
beginning 2,057 feet from
Parkridge Drive (west) for 47
feet in a counter-clockwise
direction
Parkridge Drive
[Added
2-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 933]
Left
(inside of
circle)
10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Moving southwardly
beginning 2,452 feet from
Parkridge Drive (west) for
220 feet in a counterclockwise
direction
Seventh Street West 2:00 a.m. to
6:00
a.m./daily
when posted
From Chestnut Street to
Arch Street
Walnut Street
[Amended
5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 640;
repealed
2-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 788]
§ 180-44 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-44
152:631
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
West Market
Street [Added
10-1-2018 by
Ord. No. 1015]
North 6:30 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
1 parking stall measuring 22
feet in length, located 80
feet from the intersection
with North Seventh Street
§ 180-44.1. Schedule XA: Snow Restricted Parking. [Added
1-16-1989 by Ord. No. 613; amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 639;
2-21-1994 by Ord. No. 738; 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 785; 12-19-1996
by Ord. No. 787]
The schedule of streets regulated by § 180-18.1 is as follows:
Name of Street Location
Hunters Run East side, entire length
Parkridge Both sides, entire length
South Seventh Street [Added
1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 887]
East side, from Borough Hall
parking lot entrance to West
Chestnut Street
West Chestnut Street [Added
1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 887]
South side, from South Seventh
Street to Borough Hall parking lot
exit
§ 180-44.2. Schedule XB: Snow Emergency Parking. [Added
12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 787]
The schedule of streets regulated by § 180-18.2 is as follows:
Name of Street Location
Arthur Avenue [Added 2-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 788]
Both sides, from Elm Street to
South Fifth Street
Callowhill Street Both sides, entire length (except
south side only from Fifth Street
to Seventh Street)
Constitution Avenue Both sides, entire length
Fifth Street West side, entire length
Main Street West side, entire length
Market Street [Added 2-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 788]
South side only, from Fourth
Street to Fifth Street
South Fourth Street [Added
2-17-1997 by Ord. No. 788]
Both sides, from Cedar Avenue to
Elm Street
West Blooming Glen Drive [Amended
2-16-1998 by Ord. No. 802]
Both sides, entire length
§ 180-44 PERKASIE CODE § 180-44.2
152:632
Name of Street Location
West Park Avenue Both sides, from Fifth Street to
Ridge Road (except south side
only from Fifth Street to Ninth
Street)
West Walnut Street North side only, from Seventh
Street to Constitution Avenue
West Market Street South side, from Ridge Road to
Fifth Street
§ 180-45. Schedule XI: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-19, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
All other Borough-owned
parking lots [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
N/A Overnight parking
permitted except
commercial
vehicles; no longterm
storage of
vehicles; all
vehicles must be
tagged and licensed
as required by state
law and disabled
vehicles removed
within 72 hours
Entire lot
Arch Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
North 15 minutes; 6:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Daily
Starting 70 feet
east of North
Seventh Street
to a point 122
feet east of
North Seventh
Street
Arch Street [Amended
5-18-1998 by Ord. No.
805; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Arch Street [Added
4-18-1994 by Ord. No.
745; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
§ 180-44.2 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-45
152:633
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Arch Street [Added
4-18-1994 by Ord. No.
745; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Arch Street [Added
4-18-1994 by Ord. No.
745; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Arch Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
East from
Seventh Street
for 100 feet
Arch Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
East from
Seventh Street
for 100 feet
Chestnut Street North/
South
2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
From Sixth
Street to
Seventh Street
Chestnut Street North/
South
2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Sixth
Street to
Seventh Street
Dill Avenue West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
From Walnut
Street to
Chestnut Street
Dill Avenue West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Walnut
Street to
Chestnut Street
Fourth Street [Added
7-18-1994 by Ord. No.
750]
East 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
Starting 136 feet
South of
Chestnut Street,
south unto a
point 192 feet
south of
Chestnut Street
(at the alley
entrance)
Fourth Street [Added
4-18-1994 by Ord. No.
745]
West 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
Starting 32 feet
from Market
Street west for
50 feet
§ 180-45 PERKASIE CODE § 180-45
152:634
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Market Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs.
From Sixth
Street to
railroad tracks
Market Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Sixth
Street to
railroad tracks
Market Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
From Sixth
Street to
Seventh Street
Market Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Sixth
Street to
Seventh Street
Market Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs.
From railroad
tracks to a point
150 feet east of
Sixth Street
Market Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From railroad
tracks to a point
150 feet east of
Sixth Street
Market Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
From Seventh
Street to a point
150 feet east of
Sixth Street
Market Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Seventh
Street to a point
150 feet east of
Sixth Street
Ninth Street East 30 minutes; 7:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
North from Pine
Street for 250
feet
North Seventh Street
[Added 2-20-1995 by
Ord. No. 761; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Quakertown National
Bank parking lot at Sixth
Street and Chestnut
Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
N/A 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs.;
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Fri.; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon/Sat.
Entire lot
§ 180-45 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-45
152:635
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Seventh Street
[Repealed 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1005]
Seventh Street
[Repealed 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1005]
Seventh Street
[Repealed 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1005]
Seventh Street [Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No.
642]
East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs., Sat.
From Market
Street to Arch
Street
Seventh Street [Added
5-21-1990 by Ord. No.
642]
East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Fri.
From Market
Street to Arch
Street
Seventh Street
[Amended 5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 642; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Seventh Street
[Amended 5-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 642]
East/
West
2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
From Walnut
Street to Market
Street
Seventh Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
East/
West
2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
South from
Market Street
for 150 feet
Seventh Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
From Market
Street to Arch
Street
Sixth Street [Repealed
6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
768]
§ 180-45 PERKASIE CODE § 180-45
152:636
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
South Sixth Street
[Added 4-18-1988 by
Ord. No. 601; amended
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
Walnut Street
and Chestnut
Street
South Sixth Street
[Added 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1005]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
Walnut Street
and Chestnut
Street
Spruce Street [Repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Walnut Street [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
12; repealed 4-19-1993
by Ord. No. 721]
Walnut Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
Starting 14 feet
east of South
Sixth Street for
55 feet; starting
18 feet west of
Penn Alley for 49
feet
Walnut Street [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
712; amended
3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
831]
North 15 minutes; 9:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
Mon. through Sun.
Starting 72 feet
east of South
Sixth Street,
east for 38 feet
Walnut Street [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No.
665; amended
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
712; 4-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 721]
North 2 hours; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
Starting 14 feet
east of South
Sixth Street for
55 feet; starting
18 feet west of
Penn Alley for 49
feet
Walnut Street [Amended
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
712; 4-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 721]
South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
Between Fifth
Street and Sixth
Street
§ 180-45 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-45
152:637
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Walnut Street [Added
11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
712; amended
4-19-1993 by Ord. No.
721; repealed
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
Walnut Street Parking Lot
at Seventh Street and
Walnut Street [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1005]
N/A Overnight parking
permitted except
commercial
vehicles; no longterm
storage of
vehicles; all
vehicles must be
tagged and licensed
as required by state
law and disabled
vehicles removed
within 72 hours
Entire lot
Walnut Street and Penn
Street 8-car parking lot
[Added 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 1005]
N/A 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./Mon.
through Thurs. and
Sat.; 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00
p.m./Fri.
Entire lot
West Walnut Street
[Added 10-1-2018 by
Ord. No. 1016]
South 15 minutes; 7:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./daily
1 parking stall
measuring 22
feet in length
that begins 20
feet 3 inches in
an easterly
direction from
the intersection
of an alley with
West Walnut
Street
§ 180-46. Schedule XII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-20, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
§ 180-45 PERKASIE CODE § 180-46
152:638
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Seventh Street East 53 North from Market Street
to alley south of Arch
Street
§ 180-47. Schedule XIII: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-21, the following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated special purpose parking zones, and parking
shall be prohibited thereon except for the purposes indicated:
Name of Street Side Location Purpose
East Market Street [Added
12-15-1997 by Ord. No.
799]
South 40 feet east of
intersection of
Fairview Avenue
No parking
zone
Fairview Avenue [Added
2-19-1996 by Ord. No.
775]
West In front of
Southgate
Apartments
from Market
Street south for
a space 1,174
feet in length as
marked
Loading zone
Race Street [Added
10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
989]
South 20 feet east of
North Fifth
Street and
continuing for
25 feet
Loading zone,
9:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Sunday only
Seventh Street [Added
2-18-1991 by Ord. No.
660]
West In front of 106
North Seventh
Street, a space
20 feet in length
as marked
Loading zone
Seventh Street [Added
11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
682]
West In front of 120
North Seventh
Street, a space
120 feet in
length as
marked
Loading zone,
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Friday
South Fifth Street [Added
11-20-1995 by Ord. No.
773]
East Beginning 176
feet north of
Spruce Street
and continuing
for 60 feet
Loading zone,
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
§ 180-46 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 180-48
152:639
§ 180-48. Schedule XIV: Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibited.
[Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 706; amended 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 824]
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-17.1, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle at any time or during such times as indicated upon any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Time Location
Buttonwood Street North 3:00 to 4:00 p.m.,
school days
East from North
Sixth Street for 50
feet
Buttonwood Street North 3:00 to 4:00 p.m.,
school days
West from North
Sixth Street for 65
feet
Chestnut Street South All West from Fourth
Street for 50 feet
Highland Drive
[Added 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 912]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m., school days
West from Old Post
Road for 750 feet
North Seventh
Street [Added
8-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 912]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m., school days
South from West
Blooming Glen
Drive for 750 feet
Old Post Road
[Added 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 912]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m., school days
Entire length
Shadywood Drive
[Added 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 912]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m., school days
West from North
Fifth Street to 750
feet west of
Shadywood Place
Shadywood Place
[Added 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 912]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m., school days
Entire length
West Blooming Glen
Drive [Added
8-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 912; amended
9-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 914]
Both 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., school days
West from North
Fifth Street to
North Seventh
Street
§ 180-48 PERKASIE CODE § 180-48
152:640
Chapter 182
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 182-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 182-2. Storage to comply with provisions.
Except for licensed motor vehicles with valid Pennsylvania inspection
stickers, used motor vehicles, junked or otherwise, shall be stored on
private premises in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership and
association as well as the individual or other legal entity.
(4) The term "shall" is always mandatory.
(5) The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
C. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purpose of this chapter, the meanings given
in the following clauses:
LESSEE — The owner, for the purpose of this chapter, when the lessor
holds the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a
motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon public
street or highways, including trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Perkasie.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on
which motor vehicles are stored, whether an individual or a
partnership, association or corporation.
§ 180-48 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 182-3
182:641
§ 182-3. Regulations for storage.
Any person desiring to store or to continue to store motor vehicle(s) on
private grounds, except those mentioned in § 182-2, shall comply with the
following:
§ 182-4. Inspection; notice to comply.
A. All gasoline and oil shall be drained from the vehicle.
B. All glass shall be removed from any broken windshield, window or
mirror.
C. All upholstery shall be removed.
D. All wheels shall be removed so that the vehicle is rendered incapable of
movement.
E. All trunk lids shall be removed or shall have their locks removed.
F. All such stored motor vehicles shall be at least 25 feet from any river or
stream or any other natural watercourse.
G. All such stored motor vehicles shall at all times be kept free of vermin
infestation.
H. All such stored motor vehicles shall be stored within a garage or other
enclosed building.
I. The total area of storage of such motor vehicles shall not exceed 400
square feet.
J. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicles contrary to the provisions of the Perkasie Borough Zoning
Ordinance of 1969.182
A. The Chief of Police or his appointee is hereby empowered to inspect
grounds on which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If any condition,
structure or improvement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the public, a written notice shall be served, by registered or certified
mail, upon the owner of the said premises or, if the owner's
whereabouts or identity is unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice and,
thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a
reasonable time.
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 186, Zoning.
§ 182-3 PERKASIE CODE § 182-5
182:642
§ 182-5. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of grounds on which motor vehicles are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the conditions within the time prescribed, the
Borough shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions
and collect the cost of corrections plus 10% of all costs. The Borough, in
such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police
powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises
to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 182-6. Violations and penalties.183
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 182-7. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter or any
remedy provided by law shall not be deemed mutually exclusive, rather
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough Council.
Chapter 184
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 150. Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
§ 184-1. Operation off roadways prohibited.
No person shall operate and no owner shall give permission for the
operation of any all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, trail bike or any other
unlicensed motor vehicle within the Borough of Perkasie, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, on Borough property while not on a roadway.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled except one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes, but shall not be limited to,
any all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or trail bike.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 182-5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 184-3
184:643
§ 184-3. Operation in reckless manner prohibited.
No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, trail bike or
any other unlicensed motor vehicle in the Borough of Perkasie, Bucks
County, Pennsylvania, in any reckless manner so as to endanger the person
or property of another.
§ 184-4. Liability.
Every owner of a motor vehicle of the type described in §§ 184-1, 184-2 and
184-3 who shall knowingly permit any person, minor or adult, to operate
such motor vehicle in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be jointly
and severally liable with such person for any damages caused by such
person in operating the vehicle.
§ 184-5. Violations and penalties.184
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 185
WATER
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 184-3 PERKASIE CODE § 184-5
185:644
ARTICLE I
Conservation
[Adopted 10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 700]
§ 185-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Perkasie Borough Water Conservation
Ordinance."
§ 185-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of Perkasie Borough.
§ 185-3. Requirements.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and
in which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed,
extended or altered in any way and for which construction a permit is
required to be obtained from the Borough of Perkasie, or for which a
permit would be required but for an exemption from the permit requirement
for public or governmental agencies, unless the new, extended or altered
plumbing, water piping and other water-using fixtures therein conform to
the requirements and standards of §§ 185-4 through 185-9 of this article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any such building or structure
for which such a building permit is issued, or would otherwise be required
to be issued but for such an exemption, on or after the effective date of
this article. This article shall not apply to repairs made to or replacements
of existing urinals and associated flushing mechanisms, water closets and
associated flushing mechanisms, shower heads and faucets, provided that
said repair or replacement does not require installation of new subfloor
plumbing, including but not limited to water-, waste and vent lines.
§ 185-4. Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms.
The water consumption of water closets operated by flush tanks shall not
exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test
pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge read (hereinafter
"psig"). The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of the American National Standards Institute (hereinafter "ANSI")
A122.19.2M.
§ 185-5. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms.
Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.5 gallons per
flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psig. The fixtures
shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A122.19.2M
and ANSI A112.19.6M.
§ 185-1 WATER § 185-6
185:645
§ 185-6. Shower heads.
Shower head discharge rate shall not exceed 3.0 gallons of water per
minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psig. The fixture shall
perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A122.18.1M.
§ 185-7. Faucets.
Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0 gallons of
water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psig. The
fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI
A112.18.1M.
§ 185-8. Pressure-reducing valves.
Where the service water pressure to a building is expected to exceed 60
psig, a water-pressure-reducing valve with strainer shall be installed just
downstream of the building's main valve, so as to be accessible. The valve
shall provide for pressure adjustment within the range of 50 to 60 psig. The
valve shall conform to the requirements of product standard ASSE 1003.
Exemptions to this section are service lines to sill cocks, outside hydrants
and main supply risers to buildings where pressure from mains does not
exceed 60 psig at the fixture branches or at individual fixtures.
§ 185-9. Use and occupancy permit.
The Borough Manager or his designee shall, within his discretion, require
proof of compliance with all of the provisions of this article, prior to issuing
a use and occupancy permit to an applicant.
§ 185-10. Special-purpose equipment.
The performance standards of §§ 185-2 through 185-9 shall not apply to
fixtures and fittings such as emergency showers, aspirator faucets and
blowout fixtures that, in order to perform a specialized function, cannot
meet the specified standards.
§ 185-11. Exemptions.
Any person or persons may apply to the Borough of Perkasie for an
exemption to the terms of this article, which may be granted by the Borough
Manager, or his designee, upon proof that some other device, system or
procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth herein or that
those set forth herein cannot, without undue hardship, be complied with.
§ 185-12. Violations and penalties.185
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-6 PERKASIE CODE § 185-12
185:646
Chapter 186
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 35.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 94.
Light fixtures on private property — See Ch.
106, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 135.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 137.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
164.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 182.
§ 185-12 WATER § 185-12
185:647

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Jurisdiction
§ 186-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Perkasie Borough
Zoning Ordinance of 2012."
§ 186-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, protect and facilitate the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare by:
A. Encouraging coordinated and practical community development.
B. Providing for proper density of population.
C. Securing public safety by providing for airports, civil defense, national
defense facilities, disaster evacuation and police protection.
D. Providing for adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy and
a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural and industrial use.
E. Facilitating the adequate provision of sewerage, schools, public
grounds, transportation, parking and loading space and other public
requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and historic
values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands,
aquifers and floodplains.
F. Preventing blight and the overcrowding of land.
G. Avoiding danger and congestion in travel and transportation.
H. Avoiding loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other
dangers.
I. Giving reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character
of the Borough as a whole and of each district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses and structures. To accommodate
reasonable overall community growth, including population and
employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of
residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
J. Giving effect to the policies, proposals and overall program of the
comprehensive or development plan for Perkasie Borough of current
adoption.
K. Providing for the use of land within the Borough for residential housing
of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing,
including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable
range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes
and mobile home parks; provided, however, that this chapter shall not
§ 186-1 WATER § 186-2
185:649
§ 186-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, ordinance
or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where
the provisions of any statute, ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this ordinance, the provisions of such statute, chapter or
regulation shall be controlling.
§ 186-4. Comprehensive Plan.
This chapter is designed to carry out the community development objectives
as stated in the Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of Perkasie, which is
hereby incorporated herein by reference.
§ 186-4.1. Severability.
be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any other specific
dwelling type.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this
chapter to be invalid in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall
be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision
to be invalid, and all other provisions of this chapter shall continue to be
separately and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction should find the application of any
provision or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building, tract of land,
or other structure to be invalid in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation
immediately involved in the decision, and the application of any such
provision to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
§ 186-2 PERKASIE CODE § 186-4.1
185:650
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 186-5. Word usage and definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The term "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
(4) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, and
association as well as an individual.
(5) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
(6) The words "used or occupied" as applied to any land or structure
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be occupied."
(7) The words "Planning Commission" always refer to the Perkasie
Borough Planning Commission.
(8) The words "Borough Council," "Council," or "governing body"
always refer to the Perkasie Borough Council.
(9) The words "municipality" or "Borough" always mean the Borough
of Perkasie.
(10) The words "Zoning Hearing Board" always refer to the Zoning
Hearing Board of Perkasie Borough.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
C. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purpose of this chapter, the meanings given
in the following clauses:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure subordinate to the principal
use or structure on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to those of the principal use or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the principal use of land
or a building on the same lot with the principal building or use and
customarily incidental thereto.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 53 P.S. (Act 247, as amended).186
186. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:651
ADJACENT — Adjacent properties shall mean properties that are
contiguous, as defined herein, as well as properties that are separated
only by a street or alley and not by intervening properties.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place in which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration,
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motionpicture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE — An establishment
having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in, or
an establishment which as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for sale, books, films, videocassettes or magazines and other periodicals
or items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and, in conjunction therewith, has facilities
for the presentation of adult entertainment for observation by patrons.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT USE OR FACILITY —
A use including live entertainment involving persons (which may
include, but is not limited to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks,
contractors or others) displaying uncovered male or female
genitals or nude or nearly nude female breasts (including but not
limited to the wearing of only pasties) or engaging in simulated or
actual specified sexual activities related to some form of monetary
compensation paid to a person, company or organization operating
the use or to persons involved in such activity.
(1)
A use including live entertainment involving persons (which may
include, but is not limited to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks,
contractors or others), which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by specified sexual activities; provided, however,
that it shall be unlawful to appear in a state of nudity in any such
facility.
(2)
"Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genital,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or
covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals,
pubic hair, anal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or
the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/
or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives
the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. The prohibition
against nudity set forth herein shall not apply to:
(3)
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:652
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the presentation typically
to three or more persons at one time of motion pictures, video tapes
or similarly reproduced images distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depiction of specified sexual activities for observation
by patrons therein and that is related to some form of monetary
compensation by the persons viewing such matter.
ADULT USE — This shall include only the following: adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult novelty store, adult movie theater, massage parlor or
adult live entertainment use.
ALLEY — A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary
means of access to the rear or side of two or more abutting properties.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — See "soils on floodplain."[Amended 3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 985]
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, any change in use from
one use classification to another, or the moving from one location or
position to another.
ANTENNA — A device used to collect or transmit telecommunications
or radio signals. Examples are panels, microwave dishes and single
poles known as "whips."
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945 (P.O. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945." (See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.)
AWNING or CANOPY — A roof-like cover which extends over doors,
entrances, windows, or outdoor service areas. Any part of a structure
which forms an integral part of the building design or structure shall
not, for purposes of this chapter, be considered an "awning" or
"canopy."
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under this chapter or under
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended
(see 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.) to render final adjudications.
BOARDER — A person occupying a room or rooms used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes,
and paying compensation for lodging or board and lodging by
prearrangement for a week or more at a time to the owner of the room
or rooms.
BUFFER YARD — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the
boundary of a property, district, or road of a width not less than that
designated by this chapter, and on which is placed shrubbery, hedges,
evergreens, or other suitable plantings of sufficient height and density
(a) Any child under 10 years of age; or
Any individual exposing a breast in the process of
breastfeeding an infant under two years of age.
(b)
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:653
to meet the requirements of Borough ordinances and to constitute an
effective screen and give maximum protection and immediate screening
to an abutting property or district. Structures, parking, stormwater
detention facilities, and storage or display of materials are not
permitted within buffer yards.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof which is used for the shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall
include any part thereof.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building located on the same
lot as a principal building and devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended
to be devoted to an accessory use is not an "accessory building."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted or is
intended to be conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
BUILDING, SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum required
front yards measured from the right-of-way line. In the event no rightof-
way line exists, said line shall be measured from the front property
line.
BUILDING SPACING — The minimum distance between buildings
measured from the outermost wall or projection to the nearest point on
another building.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A cellular
telecommunications facility consists of the equipment and structures
involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from a mobile
radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a
central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the
land-based telephone lines.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of § 186-128.
CONDOMINIUM — An ownership arrangement and not a land use;
therefore, it is allowed in any district under the same restrictions of the
residential land use that comprises it. A condominium shall not negate
lot or other requirements intended to provide adequate light, air and
privacy. A "condominium" is a dwelling unit having all of the following
characteristics:
The unit, the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan, is owned by the occupant.
(1)
(2) The unit may be any permitted dwelling type.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with
Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., and in
accordance with the provisions for open space, roads or other
(3)
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:654
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under this chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended (see 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.) to do
so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason
of appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the
Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County and the judicial court wherein
the Borough lies.
DECK — An exterior floor system supported on at least two opposing
sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers, or other
independent supports.
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwelling units per unit area.
The unit area for the R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts is the net
buildable site area. The unit area for all other districts is the base site
area. "Density" shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre.
DETERMINATION —
DWELLING — A building designed and occupied for residential
purposes containing one or more dwelling units and not including a
hotel, motel, boarding house, tourist home, institutional or nursing
home, personal care facility, guesthouse, bed and breakfast, or
residential club. See § 186-18B for definitions of specific dwelling types.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
building and forming a single habitable unit with sanitary and other
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating by one family.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for limited use of land or a
restriction placed on land for specific purposes. Easement areas will
affect the use of land and calculation of land available for development
under the terms of this chapter.
EAVES — The lowest horizontal line of a sloping (e.g., gable, hip,
gambrel) roof.
EMPLOYEE — An employee, assistant or associate, agent, contractor,
or representative who acts in interest or profits from a business,
industry, home office or occupation, or other enterprise.
development features as specified in this chapter and Chapter 164,
Subdivision and Land Development.
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of this chapter or applications thereunder, except
the following:
(a) The governing body.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board.
(1)
"Determinations" shall be appealable only to the boards designated
as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
(2)
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:655
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The zoning officer, building inspector,
or other individual appointed by the Borough to enforce this chapter
within the jurisdiction of the Borough.
EXPANSION — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of any other structure, or an increase in that portion of
a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
FACADE — The exterior wall, face, or plane of a building.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or
marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit,
or a number of persons living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption, or marriage.
FENCE — A man-made construction of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land, including a wall.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.187
FLOODPLAIN, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The area of land which is
likely to be inundated during a one-hundred-year flood.
FLOODPLAIN (AREA OR DISTRICT) — A relatively flat or low land area
which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining
or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to
the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any
source.188[Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985]
FOREST — See "woodlands" definition.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by the Borough
Council or the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary use
conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building that is clearly incidental and secondary to
the principal residential use. See § 186-18H, Accessory uses.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces that do not absorb water. All
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas in
concrete, asphalt, packed gravel or stone, and any other such areas as
determined by the Borough Engineer shall be considered "impervious
surfaces" within this definition. All decks and pools are impervious
surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — The "impervious surface ratio" is a
measure of the intensity of use of a piece of land. It is measured by
dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the site by the
base site area.[Amended 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
187. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “flood elevation, regulatory,” “flood fringe,” “flood
line, one-hundred-year,” and “flood, one-hundred-year,” which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985.
188. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "flood, regulatory," "floodway," and "floodway
line," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
985.
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:656
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat
or subdivision plan approved by Perkasie Borough and recorded in the
Bucks County Recorder of Deeds Office, or by a condominium plan,
planned community, or other plan creating unit ownership and to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, ACCREDITED ZONING — A parcel of land which fronts upon
or has private right-of-way access to a Borough-maintained street as
designated on the Official Map of Public Streets, meets the dimensional
requirements of this chapter and, by documentary evidence acceptable
to the Zoning Officer, is held in separate and distinct ownership from
all abutting land.
LOT AREA — The total area of a lot lying within the lot lines and shall
specifically exclude the area of any easement within the aforesaid lot
lines, except for Borough electric department easements.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT — The amount of lot area, whether
occupied by structures or not, that exists for each dwelling unit located
on the lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street
or streets shall be considered a "corner lot" if the tangents to the curve
at the points beginning with the lot or at the points of intersection of the
side lot lines with the street right-of-way lines intersect at an interior
angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The proportion of the lot area, expressed as a
percentage, that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross section of
all principal and accessory buildings (including balconies, decks, patios,
porches, breezeways, and carports), and outside storage of materials.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45% of
being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street
line, and except that in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have
the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines
is to be considered a "front lot line." In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of an odd shape, the lot line nearest a street shall be
considered a "front lot line."
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street
line, and except that in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have
the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines
is to be considered a "rear lot line." In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line furthest from any
street shall be considered a "rear lot line."
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot
line.
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:657
LOT WIDTH — The distance at the required minimum front yard line
between the side lot lines or, in a case where there is only one side lot
line, between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot line or street
line. The lot width for a single-family semidetached dwelling shall be
measured from the side lot line to the wall in common with an adjoining
dwelling.
MASSAGE —
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a
dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly
exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written
The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands and/
or a mechanical or bathing device on a person's skin other than
the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain
monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who
are related to each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official
guardianship.
(1)
It shall not be any of the following activities:
Treatment by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a
licensed osteopath, a nationally certified masseur or masseuse,
a licensed practical nurse or a registered professional nurse;
(a)
Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis
equipment;
(b)
(c) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices;
Barbershops or beauty parlors which offer massage to the
scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only; and
(d)
Athletic facilities of an educational institution including an
alumni club, or a philanthropic or charitable institution.
(e)
(2)
(1) Massages are conducted (see definition).
The person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional or a licensed massage therapist by the state.
(2)
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital, nursing
home, physical therapist, personal care center or office of a
medical doctor or chiropractor.
(3)
(4) The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to
a permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic
program.
(5)
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:658
agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
acceptable.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation. For the purposes of this chapter, any inhabited
"mobile home" shall be considered a detached dwelling unit and as such
shall be subject to all applicable regulations in this chapter or other
municipal ordinances.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit erected on a foundation and
made of one or more sections built in a factory. The unit shall not
be constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device
allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a
permanent site. A "modular home" is also known as a prefabricated
or manufactured dwelling. The completed unit shall meet the building
code in effect. (See Chapter 70, Building Construction, in the Code of
the Borough of Perkasie.)
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
Perkasie Borough.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where
such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation. Such "nonconforming
structures" include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:659
amendment, prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to
its location by reason of annexation.
OPEN SPACE — Land held in common ownership, protected by
easement, dedicated to the public or identified in another suitable
manner in accordance with this chapter as "open space." To qualify
as "open space," such land shall be used only for "open space" uses,
recreation, amenity, buffer or resource protection. "Open space" does
not include land occupied by buildings, roads or road rights-of-way, nor
does it include the yards or lots of individual or group dwelling units
as required by the provisions of this chapter in §§ 186-18 and 186-20.
"Open space" shall be left in its natural state, except in the case of
recreation uses. All impervious surfaces within "open space" areas shall
be countable as part of the total impervious surface area in arriving at
impervious surface ratio for the development.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — A measure of intensity of land use. It is arrived
at by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the
gross site area.
PATIO — A level, concrete structure adjacent to a principal building and
not covered by a permanent roof.
PERSON — Includes corporation, partnership and association as well
as the individual.
PORCH — A permanently roofed structure which may be glassed or
screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or
from a building and greater than 25 square feet in area.
PREMISES — A separate lot or tax parcel with individual frontage
abutting the street line. A "premises" may include more than one
occupant as in an office complex or shopping center.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended (See
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S.
Chapter 7, as amended (related to open meetings).
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed as a mobile
home for travel or camping required to be licensed in accordance with
the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code. See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:660
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a
solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon their recipient, board,
officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal be therefrom. Any report
used, received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency
rendering a determination or decision shall be made available for
inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon
request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of production.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a
structure or other outdoor surface that shall display or include any
letter, work, insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in
the nature of an advertisement, announcement, visual communication,
direction or which is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to
the attention of the public. See § 186-74 for definitions of specific sign
types.
SITE — A parcel or parcels of land which are intended to have one or
more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA, BASE — The area of a tract of land remaining after
subtracting land which is not contiguous, land previously subdivided
and existing road and utility rights-of-way from the site area. (See
§ 186-56, Site capacity calculation.)
SITE AREA, NET BUILDABLE — A calculated area for various districts
taking into consideration protected natural resources. It can be
determined for a particular tract of land by completing the site capacity
calculations found in § 186-56.[Amended 10-6-2014 by Ord. No.
978]
SOILS ON FLOODPLAIN — Areas subject to periodic flooding and
listed in the Official Soil Survey provided by the US Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web Soil Survey
(http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/) as being on the floodplain or
having a flooding frequency other than none.[Amended 3-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 985]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of § 186-102, Special exceptions, and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
This term includes any of the following:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
(1)
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:661
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which
are subject, because of this slope, to higher rates of stormwater runoff
and therefore erosion.
STOOP — A step or landing area providing access to a doorway, a
maximum of 25 square feet in area and not enclosed.
STREET — A public or private way for vehicular use which provides
frontage and access to abutting properties. See § 186-45C for street
classifications.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The
"street line" shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line, provided
that the street right-of-way line shall be not less than 25 feet from
the center line of any road or street, and where a future right-of-way
width for a road or street has been officially established, then the street
right-of-way line shall be the side line of the future right-of-way so
established.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed
or erected at a fixed location, including a building, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — The building in
which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a cellular
telecommunications facility is housed.
TOWER — A tower is a structure that is intended to support equipment
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals. Examples
of such structures include monopoles and lattice construction steel
structures.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
(c)
The term does not include any of the following:
Medical publications or films or bona fide educational
publications or films.
(a)
Any art or photography publications which devote at least 25%
of the content of each issue to articles and advertisements
dealing with subjects of art or photography.
(b)
Any news or periodical which reports or describes current
events and which from time to time published photographs
of nude or seminude persons in connection with the
dissemination of the news.
(c)
Any publications or films which describe and report different
cultures and which from time to time publish or show
photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when
describing cultures in which nudity or seminudity is indigenous
to the populations.
(d)
(2)
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:662
TRAILER — An enclosed structure constructed of metal, wood, plastic
or cloth fabric designed for human occupancy, which now is or ever was
intended to be removed either under its own power or by other means
of locomotion, regardless of its size, composition, design or general
appearance, and which structure, if it were to be moved on a public
highway within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, would be required
to be licensed in accordance with the provisions of the Motor Vehicle
Code. See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ) — An area that is radial to the trunk of
a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The "tree protection
zone" shall be 15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained or the
distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where
there is a group of trees or woodlands, the "tree protection zone" shall
be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract
of land.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use
and clearly incidental or subordinate to and customary in connection
with the principal use.
USED OR OCCUPIED — As applied to any land or building, includes the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of § 186-101,
Variances, and Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
WATERCOURSE — Any intermittent or perennial, natural or man-made
channel, canal, millrace, creek, stream, ditch, dry run, spring, river,
swale or any other natural or man-made feature conveying water.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, lakes, dammed
water, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
§ 186-5 WATER § 186-5
185:663
typically adapted for life in saturated soils conditions; or those areas of
lands defined as wetlands in either: a) the United States Army Corps
of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual; or b) the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Wetlands Identification and
Delineation, Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterways Management
Rules and Regulations, as most recently updated or modified.
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature
trees covering an area greater than 1/4 acre in which the largest trees
measure at least six inches dhb (diameter at breast height or 4 1/2 feet
above the ground). "Woodlands" are also 10 or more individual trees
which measure at least 10 inches dbh and form a contiguous canopy.
The "woodlands" shall be measured from the dripline of the outer trees.
YARD — An open space unobstructed from the ground up, on the
same lot with a size of a required "yard" shall be measured as the
shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
(See illustrations below.)
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner
lot, the yards extending along all streets are "front yards." In the case
of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the
yards extending along all streets are "front yards."
YARD, REAR — A yard between a structure and a rear lot line and
extending the entire length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear
yard shall be considered a "side yard."
§ 186-5 PERKASIE CODE § 186-5
185:664
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 186-6. Borough divided into districts.
Perkasie Borough is hereby divided into districts of different types, each
type being of such number, shape, kind and area and of such common unity
of purpose and adaptability of use that are deemed most suitable to carry
out the objectives of this chapter.
§ 186-7. Land and structures subject to district regulations.
Every parcel of land and every building or other structure in the Borough,
except as otherwise provided by law or by the chapter, shall be subject to
the regulations, restrictions and requirements specified for the district in
which it is located.
§ 186-8. Districts designated.
For the purpose of this chapter, Perkasie is hereby divided into districts.
The purpose, intent, permitted uses, and dimensional requirements of each
district are established in Article V, Zoning districts.
§ 186-9. Zoning Map.
Zoning districts are bound and defined as shown on the map entitled
"Zoning Map Perkasie Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania," dated March
4, 2008, which is attached to this chapter, and which, with all explanatory
matters thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.
§ 186-10. Floodplain District. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985]
The boundaries of the floodplain (Floodplain District) are any areas of
Perkasie classified as Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) dated March 16, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including
all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
§ 186-11. Interpretation and identification of district boundaries.
A. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries between
districts as indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
coinciding with the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(2) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be
said boundaries.
§ 186-6 WATER § 186-11
185:665
(3) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to street or railroad rights-of-way, such
district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and
at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
(4) Where district boundaries divide a lot, the location of such
boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on
the Zoning Map, unless the boundaries are indicated by
dimensions.189
189. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding Flood Profiles, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985.
§ 186-11 PERKASIE CODE § 186-11
185:666
ARTICLE IV
Use Regulations and Restrictions
§ 186-12. Compliance required.
§ 186-13. Applicability of regulations other than use regulations.
Uses permitted by right or special exception shall be subject, in addition
to use regulations, to such regulations of yard, lot size, lot width, building
coverage, height, provisions for off-street parking and loading and to such
other provisions as are specified in this chapter.
§ 186-14. Additional sewer and water regulations to apply.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or in this chapter, no building or
structure shall be constructed, erected or extended and no building,
structure or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted in this article.
B. The Zoning Officer, who administers and enforces the Zoning Chapter
according to §§ 186-113 and 186-114, shall not consider issuance of a
zoning permit until the provisions of Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall have been complied with, where applicable.
A. The laws of the commonwealth and the regulations of the Bucks County
Health Department regarding public and on-lot water supply and waste
disposal systems shall be adhered to. No zoning permit shall be issued
until approval is obtained from the Bucks County Department of Health
for water supply and sewage disposal.
B. Whenever a lot is adjacent to, abutting or accessible to public water
supply or public sanitary sewers, a zoning or construction permit shall
not be issued before or until the applicant shall have received a permit
for connection to said water supply and/or sanitary sewer from Perkasie
Regional Authority.
C. Use of groundwater as potable water prohibited.
(1) No person shall drill, install, or otherwise construct any new
potable water well, cistern, or any other groundwater collection
device in those areas within the "groundwater restricted area" as
shown on the Groundwater Restricted Area Map which
accompanies this chapter190 and which identifies properties
between Ninth Street and South Fifth Street and between West
Spruce Street and West Walnut Street.
(2) No person shall use or attempt to use as potable water the
groundwater from the groundwater restricted area.
190. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an appendix to this chapter.
§ 186-12 WATER § 186-14
185:667
§ 186-15. Preexisting special exception uses.
Any use existing on the effective date of this chapter which is classified
as requiring a special exception in the district in which the land occupied
by the use is located shall be deemed to have been granted a special
exception subject to maintaining the character and extent of operations
and structures existing on that date. Any application for change in use or
structure shall require a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board
as provided in Article XI.
§ 186-16. Temporary nonconforming buildings and uses.
§ 186-17. (Reserved)
§ 186-18. Principal and accessory use regulations.
(3) For the purpose of this section, "potable" is defined as any water
used for human or domestic consumption or for agricultural
purposes, including but not limited to, water used for drinking,
bathing, swimming, washing dishes, preparing foods, watering
lawns or producing food, crops and/or livestock.
(4) For the purpose of this section, "person" is defined as any
individual, partnership, co-partnership, company, limited liability
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns, including the Borough.
(5) The Borough shall provide 30 days' advanced written notice to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection prior to this
prohibition being modified or eliminated.
A. The Zoning Officer may grant a permit for a nonconforming temporary
building or use incidental to a construction project when such building
or use is reasonably required for such project.
B. Such permit shall be granted for an initial period of not more than one
year and, in the case of a building, only upon application accompanied
by a bond and a bill of sale to the Borough to be effective in case the
building is not removed prior to the expiration date of the authorized
permit. Such permit may be renewed annually by the Zoning Officer for
an aggregate period of not more than three years.
C. Excepted from the required permit above shall be temporary portable
construction shacks not exceeding 50 square feet in area for the
storage of construction tools and equipment.
A. Agricultural uses.
(1) Farming. The production of agricultural, horticultural,
arboriculture, viticultural and dairy products; the keeping of
livestock, poultry, and the products thereof; the raising of fur-
§ 186-14 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:668
bearing animals and the products thereof; the products of poultry
and bee-raising and all buildings (barns, sheds, silos, etc.)
associated with this use. All facilities shall meet the requirements
of the Act of May 20, 1993, (P.L. 12, No. 6) known as the Nutrient
Management Act.191
(a) Any building or structure used for the keeping or raising of
bees, livestock, horses or poultry shall be situated not less than
100 feet from any street line or property line.
(b) Silos shall not be located less than 1.25 times the height of the
silo from any street or property line.
(c) Riding stables, livery or boarding stables and commercial dog
kennels are not included under this use.
(d) Retail sales shall meet the requirements of § 186-18H(6),
Roadside stand.
(e) This use does not include the making of compost and/or mulch
using materials from off site.
(f) No "game" or "wildlife" (as defined in 34 Pa.C.S.A. Section 102,
"The Game and Wildlife Code") or "Exotic Wildlife" (as defined
in 34 Pa.C.S.A. Section 2961, "The Game and Wildlife Code")
may be kept except in accordance with the provisions of the
Game and Wildlife Code of Pennsylvania, 43 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(g) Livestock, poultry and fur-bearing animals kept as pets without
the intent of pecuniary gain through the boarding, sale or
breeding of such livestock, poultry and fur-bearing animals or
the products thereof, shall not be subject to the dimensional
requirements of Subsection A(1)(a) hereof.
(2) Forestry/timber harvesting. The management of forests and
timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted forestry
principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting,
transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does
not involve any land development. Clear cutting or selective cutting
of forest or woodlands for development, building, subdivision, or
any other land use change is not forestry.
(a) Applicability. A zoning permit shall be required for all forestry/
timber harvesting activities; however, an individual property
owner need not obtain a permit to cut a tree or trees as part of
normal home maintenance and upkeep, and the following
activities are specifically exempted:
191. Editor's Note: The Nutrient Management Act, 3 P.S. § 1701 et seq., was repealed by 2005,
July 6, P.L. 112, No. 38, § 3. See now the Nutrient Management and Odor Management Act,
3 Pa.C.S.A. § 501 et seq.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:669
[1] Removal of diseased or dead trees.
[2] Removal of trees which are in such a condition or physical
position as to constitute a danger to the structures or
occupants of properties or a public right-of-way.
(b) Forestry plan. Every landowner on whose land timber
harvesting is to occur shall submit a written logging plan in the
form specified by this chapter. The plan shall be prepared by a
professional forester or forest technician. No timber
harvesting shall occur until the plan has been prepared. The
provisions of the plan shall be followed throughout the
operation. The plan shall be available at the harvest site at all
times during the operation and shall be provided to the
Borough upon request.
(c) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the operator
shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with
the terms of the logging plan.
(d) Contents of the forestry/logging plan.
[1] Design, construction, maintenance of the access system,
including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings.
[2] Design, construction and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings.
[3] The general location of the proposed operation in relation
to municipal and state highways, including any accesses to
those highways.
[4] Copies of all required permits shall be submitted.
[5] Proof of current general liability and/or worker's
compensation insurance.
[6] Proof of PennDOT highway occupancy permit or Borough
driveway permit for temporary access, as applicable.
[7] Copy of Bucks County Conservation District letter of
adequacy for the proposed erosion control facilities,
including associated plans, reports and other permits as
required.
[8] Map showing site location and boundaries, including both
the boundaries of the property on which the timber
harvest will take place and the boundaries of the proposed
harvest area within that property.
[9] Significant topographic features related to potential
environmental problems.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:670
[10] Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads,
landings and water control measures and structures.
[11] Location of all crossings of streams or waters of the
commonwealth.
(e) Compliance with all laws. The forestry/logging plan shall
address and comply with the requirements of all applicable
federal, state and Borough laws and regulations including, but
not limited to, the following:
[1] Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained
in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.);
[2] Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, promulgated
pursuant to the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (32
P.S. § 693.1 et seq.); and
[3] Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S.
§ 680.1 et seq.)
[4] Compliance with federal law/regulations. The forestry/
logging plan shall address and comply with the
requirements of all applicable federal laws and regulations
including, but not limited to, the best management
practices (BMPs).
[5] Compliance with Borough ordinances. The forestry/
logging plan shall comply with the requirements of the
Borough zoning ordinance, § 186-57G, which limits
removal of trees in woodlands.
(f) Forest practices. The following requirements shall apply to all
forestry/timber harvesting operations.
[1] Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the
Borough or the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance
of the thoroughfare.
[2] No forestry refuse shall be left on or within 25 feet of any
public thoroughfare.
[3] Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall
be removed from the site before it is vacated by the
operator.
[4] Any soil, stones and/or debris carried onto public
roadways must be removed immediately.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:671
[5] No forestry/logging use shall be permitted within areas
with slopes of 15% or greater.
[6] When the harvest is completed, both dirt roads used by the
trucks and skid roads used to drag the logs from the woods
to the loading area must be graded approximately to
original contours, and be seeded and mulched as
necessary to establish stable groundcover.
[7] A "no logging" buffer zone with a width of 25 feet shall be
maintained along any street abutting or running through a
property on which the forestry/logging operation is to be
conducted. The buffer shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way of a public street and from the easement
boundary of a private street. No trees shall be cut,
removed, skidded, or transported in a "no logging" buffer
zone except as necessary for access to site from the street.
[8] A "no logging" riparian buffer zone with a width of 50 feet
shall be maintained along both sides of any watercourse or
canal that abuts or runs through a property on which the
forestry, logging, or timber harvest operation is to be
conducted. The buffer shall be measured from the high
water mark of the watercourse or canal. No trees shall be
cut, removed, skidded, or transported in a "no logging"
riparian buffer zone.
B. Residential uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling. A dwelling unit on an individual
lot with private yards on four sides of the house. Detached
dwellings may include dwellings constructed on the lot,
prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings, modular
dwellings, and mobile homes. If the dwelling is a mobile home, the
following conditions shall also apply:
(a) No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a single
parcel, and such mobile home shall be occupied by not more
than a single family.
(b) Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation
that meets all applicable requirements of the Borough's
Building Code, Chapter 70, Building Construction.
(c) The exterior covering material of the mobile home shall extend
to the ground, except that when a solid concrete or masonry
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:672
perimeter foundation is used, the exterior material need not
extend below the top of the foundation.
(d) All mobile home tow bars, wheels and axles shall be removed
when the dwelling is installed on a residential lot.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(a) Twin: A building containing two dwelling units, each of which
is totally separated from the other by a solid wall extending
from ground to roof. Dwellings having a party wall in common
must be erected at the same time. Each twin dwelling unit
must be placed on a separate lot.
(b) Duplex: A building containing two dwelling units, each of
which is totally separated from the other by a solid ceiling and
floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a
common stairwell.
(c) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Number
of
Bedrooms
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
per
Dwelling
Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
2 3,600 4,000 2.00 40
3 4,000 4,500 2.00 40
4 4,200 4,700 2.25 45
5 4,500 5,000 2.50 45
(3) Townhouse: A single-family attached dwelling unit, with one
dwelling unit from the ground to the roof, having an individual
outside access. A row of townhouses shall contain a minimum of
three units and a maximum of seven units, not to exceed an average
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:673
of five units per row in each individual subdivision or land
development.
(4) Multiplex: An attached dwelling which does not fall under the
definition of a townhouse. In general, all units have independent
outside access, but this is not necessary. Units may be arranged in
a variety of configurations: side-by-side, back-to-back or vertically.
The essential feature is the small number of units attached. No
more than five units shall be attached in any group, and the groups
shall average four units per structure.
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type of
Dwelling
Minimum
Lot Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Average Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces per
Dwelling
Unit
Efficiency 800 1,000 1.25
1-bedroom 1,500 1,700 1.75
2-bedroom 2,200 2,400 2.00
3-bedroom 2,500 2,800 2.00
4-bedroom 2,700 3,000 2.25
(b) General requirements.
[1] Minimum building setback line: roads, 30 feet; parking
areas, 20 feet; site boundary, 40 feet.
[2] Minimum building spacing: 24 feet.
[3] Minimum lot area (for building): 8,000 square feet.
[4] Minimum lot width (for building): 80 feet.
[5] Maximum height: three stories.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:674
(5) Multifamily: A building having three or more dwelling units and not
having more than three stories.
(a) Building orientation.
[1] The minimum horizontal distance between facing walls of
any two buildings or one building with facing walls shall
be: 75 feet where two facing walls both contain a window
or windows; 50 feet between two facing walls where only
one contains a window or windows; and 25 feet between
corners of two buildings where no exterior wall of one can
be intersected by a line drawn perpendicular to any
exterior wall of other buildings (other than a line that
results from colinear walls).
[2] "Facing walls" are defined as walls that are opposite to and
parallel with one another or that are wall lines or
extensions of wall lines of opposite walls which intersect at
angles of less than 65°.
(b) Building standards. The following building standards shall be
required:
[1] Maximum building size shall be restricted to no more than
16 dwelling units in any one continuous structure, and
there shall not be more than eight dwelling units in any
unbroken apartment structure line.
[2] A setback of more than 10 feet shall be considered as an
acceptable break in the apartment structure line.
[3] Not more than two floors or levels may be used for
dwelling units or living quarters in any building.
(c) Landscaping. Where side or rear lot lines of a multifamily
dwelling development abut a residential district, an evergreen
planting shall be provided along said side or rear lot lines.
Planting material shall be a continuing obligation of the owner
of the property.
(d) Off-street parking design standards. In addition to the offstreet
parking provisions of Article VIII, the following
additional provisions shall be required:
[1] All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least 20
feet from any multifamily dwelling on the lot.
[2] No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall
exceed 36 cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a lot
shall be physically separated from one another by an eightfoot
planting strip.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:675
[3] No on-street parking shall be permitted on any street,
whether public or private.
(6) Residential conversion: The conversion of an existing building into
two or more dwelling units or the conversion of an accessory
building into one or more dwelling units.
(a) Detached dwellings which are converted must maintain the
appearance of a detached dwelling with a single front
entrance. Additional entrances may be placed on the side or
rear of the structure. The dwelling units may share the single
front entrance. Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be
located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall, and in
no case on a front or side wall facing a street.
(b) Except as may be necessary for purposes of safety in
accordance with the preceding Subsection B(6)(a), there shall
be no major structural change in the exterior of the building in
connection with the conversion. After conversion, the building
shall retain substantially the same structural appearance it had
before such conversion.
(c) Off-street parking.
[1] Off-street parking spaces shall be available for each
dwelling unit created in accordance with the following
schedule:
Type of Dwelling Number of Spaces
Efficiency 1
1, 2, 3 bedrooms 2
4 or more bedrooms 3
[2] Off-street parking lots with three or more spaces shall be
buffered from abutting residences. Hedge material as
designated by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be placed
on three-foot centers. Alternately, a four- to five-foot high
fence may be erected which provides a visual screen.
(7) Single-family cluster: A single-family detached cluster use shall
include single-family detached dwellings on individual lots that are
clustered to preserve open space.
(a) Single-family detached.
[1] A dwelling unit on an individual lot with private yards on
four sides of the house. Detached dwellings may include
dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings,
manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings, and mobile
homes. If the dwelling is a mobile home, the following
conditions shall also apply:
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:676
[a] No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a
single parcel, and such mobile home shall be occupied
by not more than a single family.
[b] Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation that meets all applicable requirements of
the Borough's Building Code, Chapter 70, Building
Construction.
[c] The exterior covering material of the mobile home
shall extend to the ground, except that when a solid
concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
exterior material need not extend below the top of the
foundation.
[d] All mobile home tow bars, wheels and axles shall be
removed when the dwelling is installed on a
residential lot.
(b) Dimensions.
[1] Minimum site area: five acres.
[2] Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 7,500 square feet.
[3] Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
[4] Minimum yards: front, 25 feet; side (each), 10 feet; rear,
30 feet.
[5] Minimum lot width at setback: 70 feet.
[6] Minimum building spacing: 20 feet.
(8) Performance standard subdivision: A type of cluster development in
which the developer may choose to develop a variety of housing
types subject to the regulations stated below and the requirements
of Article IV, § 186-18B of this chapter, provided the site is a
minimum of five acres.
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
[1] A dwelling unit on an individual lot with private yards on
four sides of the house. Detached dwellings may include
dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings,
manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings, and mobile
homes. If the dwelling is a mobile home, the following
conditions shall also apply:
[a] No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a
single parcel, and such mobile home shall be occupied
by not more than a single family.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:677
[b] Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation that meets all applicable requirements of
the Borough's Building Code, Chapter 70, Building
Construction.
[c] The exterior covering material of the mobile home
shall extend to the ground, except that when a solid
concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
exterior material need not extend below the top of the
foundation.
[d] All mobile home tow bars, wheels and axles shall be
removed when the dwelling is installed on a
residential lot.
[2] Dimensions.
[a] Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
[b] Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
[c] Minimum yards: front, 25 feet; side, 10 feet; rear, 30
feet.
[d] Minimum lot width at setback: 70 feet.
[e] Minimum building spacing: 20 feet.
[f] Parking: two off-street spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) Two-family dwelling.
[1] Twin: A building containing two dwelling units, each of
which is totally separated from the other by a solid wall
extending from ground to roof. Dwellings having a party
wall in common must be erected at the same time. Each
twin dwelling unit shall be placed on a separate lot.
[2] Duplex: A building containing two dwelling units, each of
which is totally separated from the other by a solid ceiling
and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall,
except for a common stairwell.
[3] Table of Dimensional Requirements.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:678
Number
of
Bedrooms
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Off-
Street
Parking
per
Dwelling
Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
2 3,600 4,000 2.00 40
3 4,000 4,500 2.00 40
4 4,200 4,700 2.25 45
5 4,500 5,000 2.50 45
[4] General requirements.
[a] Minimum yards: front, 30 feet; side, 10 feet; rear, 30
feet.
[b] Minimum building setback from site boundary: 30
feet.
(c) Multiplex.
[1] The multiplex is an attached dwelling which does not fall
under the definition of a townhouse. In general, all units
have independent outside access, but this is not necessary.
Units may be arranged in a variety of configurations: side
by side, back to back or vertically. The essential feature is
the small number of units attached. No more than five
units shall be attached in any group, and groups shall
average four units per structure.
[2] Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type of
Dwelling
Minimum
Lot Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Average Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces per
Dwelling
Unit
Efficiency 800 1,000 1.25
1-bedroom 1,500 1,700 1.75
2-bedroom 2,200 2,400 2.00
3-bedroom 2,500 2,800 2.00
4-bedroom 2,700 3,000 2.25
[3] General requirements.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:679
[a] Minimum building setback line: roads, 30 feet;
parking areas, 20 feet; site boundary, 40 feet.
[b] Minimum building spacing: 24 feet.
[c] Minimum lot area (for building): 8,000 square feet.
[d] Minimum lot width (for building): 80 feet.
[e] Maximum height: three stories.
(d) Townhouse.
[1] The townhouse is a single-family attached dwelling unit,
with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having an
individual outside access. A row of townhouses shall
contain a minimum of three units and a maximum of seven
units, not to exceed an average of five dwelling units.
[2] Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Number
of
Bedrooms
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Off-
Street
Parking
per
Dwelling
Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
1 1,500 1,600 1.75 18
2 1,700 1,800 2.00 18
3 1,800 1,900 2.00 20
4 1,900 2,000 2.25 22
5 2,200 2,400 2.50 24
[3] General requirements.
[a] Minimum building setback: street, 30 feet; parking
areas, 20 feet; pedestrian walk, 15 feet; site boundary,
40 feet.
[b] Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
(e) Garden apartments.
[1] Garden apartments are multifamily dwelling units, where
individual dwelling units share a common outside access.
They share with other units a common yard area, which is
the sum of the required lot area of all dwelling units within
the building. Garden apartments shall contain six or more
dwellings in a single structure.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:680
[2] Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type of
Dwelling
Lot Area per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Parking Spaces per
Dwelling Unit
Efficiency 1,300 1.50
1-bedroom 1,750 1.75
2-bedroom 2,000 1.75
3-bedroom 2,500 2.00
4-bedroom 2,550 2.25
[3] General requirements.
[a] Minimum building setback line: street, 50 feet;
parking, 30 feet; site boundary, 40 feet.
[b] Maximum number of units per building: 16 dwelling
units.
[c] Building spacing: 50 feet.
[d] Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(9) Mobile Home Park: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Distance
Between
Units
(feet)
Singlewide
units to
61 feet
4,500 45 25% 25 5 20 30
Singlewide
units 61
feet or
longer
5,250 45 25% 25 5 20 30
Doublewide
units
7,000 60 25% 25 5 20 30
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:681
(b) Performance standards.
[1] Minimum site area: five acres.
[2] Maximum density: 7.3 dwelling units per acre net.
[3] Minimum open space ratio: 45%.
[4] Maximum impervious surface ratio: 30%.
(c) The following conditions shall apply to all mobile homes:
[1] No more than one mobile home shall be placed on a mobile
home lot, and such mobile home shall be occupied by not
more than a single family.
[2] Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent
foundation that meets all applicable requirements of the
Borough's Building Code, Chapter 70, Building
Construction.
[3] The exterior covering material of the mobile home shall
extend to the ground, except that when a solid concrete or
masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior
material need not extend below the top of the foundation.
[4] All mobile home tow bars, wheels and axles shall be
removed when the dwelling is installed on a residential lot.
(d) Every mobile home shall have access to an improved street in
the mobile home park in accordance with Chapter 164,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(e) The minimum number of lots completed and ready for
occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be
nine.
(f) No lot shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in
any such park except for periods of 90 days or more.
(g) Each lot conforming to the minimum standards must be
designated on the plan whether the lot is to be leased or sold in
fee simple.
(h) Plans for any mobile home park shall be submitted in
conformance with Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(i) The buffer requirements of § 186-54 of this chapter shall be
met.
(j) Minimum off-street parking: two spaces for three bedrooms or
less; three spaces for four bedrooms or more. An additional
two off-street parking spaces per 10 mobile home lots shall be
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:682
provided in a common parking area for visitors. All parking
spaces and driveways shall be at least five feet from any side
or rear mobile home lot line.
(10) Housing for elderly: Consisting of a building or group of buildings
designed and used for federally assisted or state assisted housing
or sponsored by a nonprofit organization for persons aged 62 or
older or for other subsidized housing. Where permitted as a
conditional use, a housing-for-elderly project shall meet the
following conditions and standards:
(a) Site or lot:
[1] Area shall be no less than five acres, excluding any
floodplain lands and public street rights-of-way.
[2] Adjacent to collector or primary street.
[3] Gradient of buildable area of site shall not exceed 8%.
[4] Not physically separated from social/commercial
community by such barriers as unbridged streams,
railroads or expanses of undeveloped industrial land.
[5] (Reserved)
[6] Located within a fifteen-minute drive of a hospital or other
major medical facility.
[7] Access streets to or through the site shall conform to the
general plan of streets in the neighborhood.
(b) Dimensional requirements:
[1] Density shall not exceed 16 dwelling units per acre, nor
shall any site contain more than 150 dwelling units.
[2] Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of not less
than 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. Where supporting
facilities are incorporated into the project, additional offstreet
parking shall be provided as may be determined in
the review of conditions.
[3] Minimum yards shall be: front, 30 feet; rear, 30 feet; and
side, 15 feet.
[4] A buffer planted with appropriate screening shall be
required between any parking lot area and an adjoining
residential district.
[5] Maximum building height shall be 40 feet.
[6] Impervious surface shall not exceed 60% of the gross site
area.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:683
(c) Required improvements:
[1] Public water supply, public sanitary sewage and
stormwater drainage.
[2] Concrete curb along all streets, drives and parking areas.
[3] Streets, drives and parking areas to be constructed in
conformance with established Borough standards.
[4] Paved pedestrian ways connecting all buildings and
facilities and connection with sidewalks or walkways to all
adjacent developed areas. The grade of any walkway
within the site shall not exceed 5%.
[5] Appropriate lighting for streets, drives, parking areas and
walkways.
(d) Supporting uses, such as dining facilities, recreational
facilities, retail sales, medical services and other service
facilities may be permitted, but only where it can be
demonstrated that such uses can be supported primarily by the
elderly housing population within the project.
(11) Rooming house: A building having sleeping accommodation and no
cooking facilities. Individuals to whom the units are rented must be
living independently, needing no assistance such as physical or
custodial care. Such use may include dormitories, fraternity or
sorority houses, or other buildings of charitable, educational, or
philanthropic use.
(a) The lot shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet, plus
300 square feet for each sleeping room in excess of four.
(b) The required yard, lot width and height requirements for a
single-family detached dwelling shall be met.
(c) The location of the use with respect to less intensive dwelling
use shall be such as to not be disturbing to such uses.
C. Institutional, religious, educational, recreational uses.
(1) Cemetery: A burial place or graveyard, including a mausoleum,
columbarium and crematorium, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Buffer yards as required by § 186-54 shall not include burial
plots and/or markers.
(c) Maximum height of any structure: 15 feet.
(d) No more than 10% of the lot area, to a maximum of five acres,
shall be devoted to above-ground buildings not serving as
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:684
burial markers or memorials, such as business and
administrative offices, chapels, maintenance facilities and the
like. This restriction includes parking facilities.
(2) Community center: A community center is an educational, social or
recreational center operated by an educational, philanthropic, or
religious institution, which is not a use which is customarily carried
on as a business and which does not include residential facilities for
chronically ill or other persons who need institutional care due to
illness, disability, or who are part of a criminal justice program.
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than the required front yard depth.
(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential use): A garage
or parking area for noncommercial vehicles for residents of the
neighborhood.
(a) The lot shall have an area of not less than 350 square feet for
each vehicle stored.
(b) The required yard, lot width and height requirements for a
single-family dwelling shall be met.
(c) The use shall be necessary in the particular neighborhood to
facilitate the provision of automobile parking space as required
by this chapter.
(d) Reasonable safety provisions shall be established.
(4) Community garage or parking area (for nonresidential use): A
community garage or major garage or community parking area.
(5) Day-care center: A facility in which out-of-home day care is
provided to more than six children, disabled persons and/or elderly.
This use also may include nursery school.
(a) An outdoor recreation area shall be provided with a minimum
area of 200 square feet for each child and 100 square feet for
each disabled or elderly person. This outdoor recreation area
shall be located to the side or the rear of the lot and shall not
include any parking areas. The outdoor recreation area shall
be fully enclosed by a four-foot-high fence and shall be
sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect the
neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances.
(b) Sufficient facilities for passenger loading and unloading shall
be provided.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:685
(c) This use may be permitted as accessory to a permitted
nonresidential use.
(d) The facility shall be licensed by and designed to meet all
applicable design, site, and area standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare, Day Care Division.
(6) Golf course:
(a) A lot area of not less than 10 acres shall be required.
(b) All buildings shall not be less than 100 feet from any lot line.
(c) A buffer shall be provided in accordance with the buffer
provisions of § 186-54 along side and rear property lines where
abutting properties are in any residence or apartment district.
(7) Hospital: A licensed hospital or medical center which has a fulltime
staff and provides primarily in-patient care.
(a) A lot area of not less than five acres shall be required.
(b) Any such establishment providing convalescent care or care
for the chronically sick shall provide an additional lot area of
not less than 1,000 square feet per bed in use for such longterm
care.
(c) The use shall have direct access to an arterial or a collector
highway.
(8) Library on Borough-owned land: A library situated on land owned
by the Borough which is open to the public and not conducted as a
private gainful business.
(a) Where permitted as a conditional use, a library situate on
Borough-owned land shall meet the following conditions and
standards:
[1] Site. Notwithstanding any definition to the contrary as set
forth herein, for the purposes of this section, the term
"site" shall refer to the specific location of the library on
Borough-owned land, and such location shall not
necessarily be described in metes and bounds.
[a] The site shall be adjacent to a collector or primary
street.
[b] The gradient of buildable area of site shall not exceed
8%.
[c] There shall be no maximum site coverage; however,
the provisions of Chapter 158, Stormwater
Management, of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie
shall be strictly adhered to. Any requirements arising
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:686
from Chapter 158, Stormwater Management, may be
constructed off site on adjacent Borough-owned land.
[d] The Borough shall retain title to the site.
[2] Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
[a] Parking: See Article VIII, Off-street Parking and
Loading.
[b] Minimum yards: front, 20 feet; rear, 10 feet; and side,
15 feet. In the event that it can be demonstrated that
the site cannot provide the aforesaid yards, a
reduction may be permitted where those trees
required to be planted in a Class C buffer are planted
at the required distances as set forth for a Class C
buffer yard. For the purposes of this section, the buffer
plantings may be planted within the ultimate right-ofway.
[c] Maximum building height: 25 feet.
[3] Required improvements.
[a] Concrete curb along all streets, drives and parking
areas.
[b] Appropriate lighting for streets, drives, parking areas
and walkways.
(b) The Borough may enter into a long-term lease of the site with
another governmental agency or a not-for-profit corporation
without the necessity of proceeding through subdivision
procedures, as may be required by Chapter 164, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie.
(c) If, at any time after a conditional use is granted under the
terms hereof, the Borough decides to convey title of the site to
another party, the site shall be subdivided from the Borough's
lands under and subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and such
other statutes, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time
the conditional use was granted.
(9) Library or museum, public: Library or museum open to the public
or connected with a permitted educational use and not conducted
as a private gainful business.
(10) Nursing home: A care facility licensed and approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to provide personal care,
intermediate care, or full-time convalescent or chronic care to
individuals who, by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, require
such care. Nursing homes must be licensed by the Pennsylvania
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:687
Department of Health; facilities providing personal care boarding
must be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare.
(a) A lot area of not less than 40,000 square feet, plus 500 square
feet additional for each resident person over 40 in number.
(b) The use shall have direct access to an arterial or collector
thoroughfare.
(11) Private club or lodge: Private club or lodge other than a
recreational facility owned or operated by a nongovernmental
agency.
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) The use shall be for members only.
(12) Recreational facility, governmental: Recreational facility owned or
operated by the Borough or other government.
(13) Recreational facility, nongovernmental: Recreational facility owned
or operated by a nongovernmental agency.
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) A lot area of not less than three acres shall be required.
(c) No building shall be located within 100 feet of any lot line.
(d) Outdoor play area shall be sufficiently screened and sound
insulated so as to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate
noise and other disturbances.
(14) Religious place of worship: Any structure or structures used for
worship or religious instruction, including social and
administrative rooms accessory thereto, but not including any
commercial activity except for place of worship-sponsored
functions.
(15) School, public or private: A private school, religious or
nonreligious, or a public school which is not conducted as a private,
gainful business, and is licensed under the proper governmental
authority to provide education for kindergarten through grade 12.
(a) The minimum lot area for elementary schools, junior high
schools, middle schools, or high schools shall meet the
guidelines of the Pennsylvania State Board of Education.
(16) School, trade or commercial: Trade or commercial school providing
instruction in a trade, in the arts or other activities. This does not
include a public or private school as defined by this chapter or a
day care center.
D. Office uses.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:688
(1) Office, business or professional: Offices for business or professional
use, including offices providing legal, engineering, design,
insurance, brokerage, or other similar services, and which do not
include retail activities and which are distinct from home offices.
No accessory outside storage is permitted and all activities must
take place within an enclosed building.
(2) Office or clinic, medical: Office or clinic for medical or dental
examination or treatment of persons as outpatients, including
laboratories incidental thereto.
(3) Veterinary office: A place where animals are given medical or
surgical treatment.
(a) An animal hospital is permitted incidental to the office use,
including the boarding of animals undergoing medical or
surgical treatment, provided that all activities are within an
enclosed building.
(b) Use as a kennel shall be prohibited.
E. Retail and consumer service uses.
(1) Bank or savings and loan association: A bank, savings and loan
association, credit union, or other financial institution. If a drivethrough
window is permitted in the zoning district, the drivethrough
requirements of § 186-18H(3) shall be met.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast: The use of a detached dwelling for the
accommodation of overnight guests for a fee.
(a) The prescribed area, yard setbacks, lot width, and height
requirements for a single-family detached dwelling shall be
met.
(b) Number of guest rooms: maximum number, five; minimum
number, two.
(c) There shall be one full bathroom for every two guest rooms.
(d) There shall be only one central common kitchen and eating
area if eating facilities are provided, and guest rooms shall not
have separate cooking or eating facilities. The serving of meals
shall be limited to breakfast and afternoon tea to overnight
guests.
(e) The premises shall be managed by a person or persons who
shall be permanent full-time residents within the structure
housing the bedrooms for guests. The manager's quarters shall
have full bathroom facilities and may have kitchen facilities, in
addition to and separate and apart from those servicing the
guests.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:689
(f) The use of amenities provided by the bed-and-breakfast, such
as swimming pools or tennis courts, shall be restricted in use
to the guests of the establishment.
(3) Eating place (without drive-through service except in C-1 District
by conditional use) — An establishment for the sale and
consumption of food and beverages with service at table or counter
facilities only (drive-through permitted in C-1 District by
conditional use only).
(a) All trash disposal areas shall be enclosed so as not to be visible
from nearby residences and shall be closed to control odors.
(b) Eating places for the sale and consumption of food and
beverages where a drive-through window is proposed may be
permitted only by conditional use under the provisions of
§ 186-128, Conditional use administration. Eating places and
facilities with drive-through service shall satisfy the criteria of
§ 186-18H(3).
(4) Entertainment, adult uses: This is limited to the following: adult
arcade, adult bookstore, or adult novelty store, adult movie theater,
massage parlor or adult live entertainment use.
(a) No more than one adult use shall be located on a zoning lot.
(b) No such use shall be located within 1,500 linear feet of any
other existing or approved "adult use."
(c) A thirty-foot buffer yard shall be provided along the side and
rear lot lines but with plantings of an initial minimum height of
six feet, planted 10 feet on center maximum.
(d) No pornographic materials, displays or words shall be placed
in view of persons who are not inside of the establishment. No
portion of any sign may be flashing. No sign shall be permitted
on the roof of any building nor shall such signs extend above
curb level at a height greater than 25 feet.
(e) Definite precautions shall be made to prevent minors from
entering the premises. An owner or operator of an adult use
commits a violation of this subsection if the person knowingly
allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of an
adult use. It shall be grounds for an immediate revocation of
the use permit for the adult use if the owner is found to have
violated this subsection.
(f) The applicant must prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that such use would not in any way adversely
affect the character of the surrounding area, including
property values. In this regard, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
prescribe reasonable setbacks of the proposed use from
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:690
neighboring properties, primary and secondary schools, places
of worship, public parks, day-care centers, child nurseries,
libraries and existing residential dwellings.
(g) No such use shall be permitted for any purpose that violates
any federal, state or Borough law. Any violation of this zoning
requirement involving a serious criminal offense that the
proprietor had continuing knowledge of and allows to occur
shall be sufficient reason for the Borough to revoke Borough
permits.
(h) No such use shall be allowed in combination with the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(i) The use shall not include the sale or display of obscene
materials, as defined by state law, as may be amended by
applicable court decisions.
(j) These uses are specifically prohibited in all districts except
where specifically permitted by special exception.
(k) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts or any
sexual contact between entertainers or between entertainers
and customers.
(l) Only lawful massages as defined by state court decisions shall
be performed in a massage parlor.
(m) All persons within any adult use other than a permitted adult
live entertainment use shall wear nontransparent garments
that cover their genitals and the female areola.
(n) The applicant shall provide receipts showing that he/she has
mailed by certified mail a written notice of the proposed zoning
hearing date for a special exception to all property owners of
record within 1,000 feet of the subject property at least 10
days prior to the hearing date.
(o) Adult use owners and managers. The applicant shall submit a
written list of all persons having an ownership interest of more
than 1% in the business, including shareholders and partners
of any corporation. The applicant shall also submit the name of
the manager who is responsible to ensure that all Borough and
state regulations are enforced on a day-to-day basis. Such
information shall include the person's business and home
addresses and phone numbers and shall be a matter of public
record. Such information shall be kept up-to-date. Failure to
keep such information up-to-date shall be a violation of this
subsection and be a reason for automatic suspension of
Borough permits. Upon satisfactory compliance with this
provision, said permit shall be reinstated insofar as it is
accomplished within 30 days of revocation.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:691
(p) Sufficient data shall be provided to the Zoning Hearing Board
to determine if the requirements of this subsection relevant to
the proposed use will be fulfilled. Said data shall be provided
by a certified land surveyor.
(5) Entertainment and recreation facilities, indoor, nongovernmental:
Entertainment and recreation facilities operated as a gainful
business within a building.
(6) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor, nongovernmental:
Outdoor entertainment and recreation facilities operated as a
gainful business, other than a private club or lodge, and not
including an outdoor motion picture establishment.
(7) Funeral home or mortuary: An establishment for the preparation of
the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and
ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
(a) The facility must be operated by a licensed funeral director.
(b) The facility must meet all state licensing requirements.
(c) There shall be no crematory, receiving vault, preparation room
or display of merchandise or advertising visible from outside
the main or accessory building.
(d) Except as part of the funeral or memorial service, there shall
be no loading or unloading of merchandise or bodies of
deceased persons on public property.
(e) Provided, further, that the Zoning Hearing Board determines
that the scale of business in relationship to the character of the
uses around the particular location will be such as to be not
detrimental to or alter the character of the neighborhood
located in the R-3 and A Districts.
(8) Kennel: A place where dogs or cats are boarded for a fee. In
addition to the principal use as a boarding facility, the kennel may
include as accessory uses training, grooming, limited breeding, or
dog day care.
(a) All kennels shall provide the minimum area for kennels
required by state regulations.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs shall be
located at least 100 feet from all lot lines.
(c) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot be perceived at the lot
lines.
(d) Outdoor runs may be provided so long as a visual barrier at
least four feet in height is provided between the runs and a
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:692
planting screen of double evergreen plantings at least six feet
in height is provided around the runs. The evergreens shall be
selected from the plant materials list in § 186-54. No animal
shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs from 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
(e) All areas used for training of animals shall be enclosed by a
fence not less than six feet in height. The fence shall be no
closer than 12 feet from any property line.
(f) All kennels shall be licensed under the Dog Law Act of 1982,
P.L. 784-255, as amended.
(9) Mixed use: The conversion, construction, or reconstruction of one
structure to contain a mixture of uses consisting of commercial,
office, retail and consumer, which are permitted in a C-2 district in
combination with a residential use.
(a) The first floor and below shall consist solely of commercial,
retail, office or service uses as permitted in a C-2 district and
shall not include, or consist of, residential uses.
(b) The second floor and above may consist of uses consisting of
commercial, retail, office or service uses as permitted in a C-2
district, together with residential uses.
(c) All entrances on the front or sides of the building which face
the street shall be for the commercial, retail, office or service
uses on the first floor or below. Residential entrances may
share these entrances but shall not be in addition to them on
the front or street-facing sides. Additional entrances may be
placed on the side or the rear of the building, so long as such
entrances do not face the street. Exterior stairways and/or fire
escapes shall be located on the rear wall in preference to
either side wall and in no case on a front wall or a side wall
facing a street.
(d) In the event of a conversion of an existing building, there shall
be no major structural change in the exterior of the building,
except as may be necessary for purposes of safety. After
conversion, the building shall retain substantially the same
structural appearance it had before such conversion.
(e) Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(f) Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of
the structure.
(g) The lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced to less than
the lot area per dwelling unit permitted, according to the type
of dwelling unit, for this district.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:693
(h) Two off-street parking spaces shall be available for each
dwelling unit created. Off-street parking lots with three or
more spaces shall be buffered from abutting residences. Hedge
material, as approved by the approving body should be placed
on three-foot centers. Alternately, a four- to five-foot-high fence
may be erected which provides a visual screen.
(10) Motel or hotel: A building or group of buildings for the
accommodation of transient guests, chiefly motorists, containing
guest rooms for rent. This use does not include other residential
uses specifically provided for in this chapter nor does it include
residential facilities for chronically ill or other persons who need
institutional care due to illness, disability, or who are part of a
criminal justice program.
(a) There is a minimum lot area of two acres.
(b) The total floor area of principal and accessory buildings shall
not exceed 15% of the lot area.
(c) No structure, except a permitted sign, shall be nearer any lot
line than 100 feet.
(d) A minimum ten-foot buffer strip along side, front and rear
property lines shall be provided, except for entrance and exit
drives. The buffer strip shall comprise evergreen trees and
foliage and other appropriate ground cover. The entrance and
exit drives crossing the street right-of-way shall be limited to
two along the frontage of any street.
(e) All lighting shall be shielded so as not to shine on abutting
properties.
(f) Eating places, and conference and meeting rooms, shall be
permitted only as accessory uses to a motel or hotel.
(11) Motor vehicle accessories sales: Sale of automobile accessories,
parts, tires, batteries and other supplies.
(a) Installation of parts shall be in an enclosed structure.
(b) Entry to the structure by vehicles for the purpose of installing
parts shall be taken in the rear of the building.
(12) Motor vehicle gasoline station: A facility whose function is the sale
of gasoline and fuels for motor vehicles. Minor automotive
accessories and food and beverage items also may be sold, subject
to the limitations of this chapter. Routine automobile maintenance
and inspections may be performed and may include lubricating,
repairing, or otherwise servicing motor vehicles but shall not
include painting, body and fender repairs, or vehicular sales. This
use is distinguished from and does not include motor vehicle
accessories sales where automobile parts and accessories are sold
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:694
and installed within the facility but where there are no fuel sales.
Any facility that provides for gasoline or fuel sales directly to
retail customers shall be considered to be a motor vehicle gasoline
station and shall meet the requirements of this use and shall only
be permitted in the zoning districts where this use is permitted.
(a) Minimum lot width of not less than 120 feet shall be provided
along each street on which the lot abuts.
(b) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
[1] Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from any street rightof-
way.
[2] All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar
articles shall be stored within a building.
[3] Full body paint spraying, body or fender work, or vehicular
sales shall not be permitted.
(13) Motor vehicle repair garage: Repair garage, including paint
spraying and body and fender work or car-washing facility,
provided that all repair and paint work is performed within an
enclosed building.
(a) All automobile parts, refuse, and similar articles shall be stored
within a building or enclosed area screened from view from the
street or surrounding properties in accordance with the buffer
requirements of § 186-54.
(b) No vehicle shall be stored in the open awaiting repairs for a
period exceeding five consecutive days. All vehicle storage
areas shall be screened from all adjacent roads and properties
by a solid fence or compact hedge at least eight feet in height.
(c) Vehicles used for parts or unregistered vehicles may not be
stored in the open at any time.
(14) Motor vehicle sales or rental: Sales or rental of automobiles,
including incidental and minor service and repair.
(a) All service and repair shall be conducted within an enclosed
structure.
(b) There shall be no openings toward adjoining residential
districts in the building housing the service and repair areas.
(15) Planned commercial development: A group of retail, service
business, office and related establishments which is planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, where parking spaces,
stormwater management facilities, access drives and circulation,
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:695
lighting systems and other improvements are shared by three or
more uses on one lot.
(a) Retail shops and stores selling apparel, motor vehicle
accessories [subject to § 186-18E(11)], books, beverages,
cards, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs, floor
coverings, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, hardware, toys,
household appliances, jewelry, tobacco, video, musical
instruments, medical equipment and supplies, paint,
periodicals, pets, printing, novelties, hobbies, art supplies,
music, luggage, sporting goods, fabrics, shoes, stationery,
building supplies, home improvement supplies, computer
hardware, computer software, eyewear, office supplies,
packaging supplies, electronic equipment, antiques,
collectibles, cosmetics, photographic equipment and
processing, bicycles, house equipment and supplies, provided
that all products produced on the premises are sold on the
premises at retail.
(b) Repair shops for such items as appliances, motor vehicles
(excluding heavy body work, frame straightening and auto
salvage), lawnmowers, guns, locks, small business machines,
shoes, bicycles and watches.
(c) Service businesses including barber, beautification, laundry
and dry cleaning, shoe repair, motor vehicle service center
(excluding sale of gasoline and excluding heavy body work,
frame straightening, and auto salvage), tailor, photographer,
caterer, financial institution, health club, dress maker, travel
agency and offices.
(d) Eating places for the sale and consumption of food and
beverages, including those where a drive-through window is
proposed, may be permitted only by conditional use under the
provisions of § 186-128, Conditional use. Eating facilities with
drive-through service shall satisfy the criteria of § 186-18H(3),
Drive-through.
(e) Community center, adult education center or other similar
facility.
(f) Day-care center, nursery school, kindergarten or other facility
providing day care to children or adults.
(g) A planned commercial development must consist of at least
three separate uses on a single lot whether in one building or a
group of buildings; provided, however, that in the C-1 Zoning
District, a separate use otherwise permitted in a planned
commercial development shall be permitted on a single lot,
provided that the said lot shares driveway access and/or
parking with a property that has at least three separate uses
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:696
located thereon, and provided further that said use shall be
limited to retail shops and stores as defined in § 186-18E(16).
(h) The development shall provide service and parking areas,
circulation and open spaces planned and designated as an
integral unit in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient
and convenient shopping development.
(i) Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress from and to public streets and highways. Vehicular
access to and from public streets shall be not less than 100 feet
from the intersection of any public street lines with each other.
(j) The development plan must be in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land Development, and be
approved by the Perkasie Borough Planning Commission.
(16) Retail Shop: An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods. "Retail shop" includes stores selling apparel, books,
beverages, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs,
furniture, gifts, hardware, toys, household appliances, jewelry,
tobacco, paint, records, cards, novelties, hobbies, art supplies,
music, luggage, sporting goods and fabrics, provided that all
products produced on the premises are sold on the premises at
retail. A repair shop for such items as appliances, watches and
bicycles is included.
(a) If a drive-through window is permitted in the zoning district,
the drive-through requirements of § 186-18H(3) shall be met.
(17) Service business: A service business includes barber, beautician,
laundry and dry cleaning, shoe repair, tailor, photographer, caterer,
loan office, health club, dressmaker and travel agency.
(a) If a drive-through window is permitted in the zoning district,
the drive-through requirements of § 186-18H(3) shall be met.
(18) Tavern: An establishment which serves alcoholic beverages
primarily for on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. The sale of food shall be
incidental to the primary use.
(a) Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and
trash removal. These stations shall be located to the rear of the
building and shall be screened and landscaped.
(b) All parking shall be screened in accordance with § 186-54.
(19) Brewery: a facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic
beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and
consumption, and which possesses the appropriate license from the
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:697
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. On-site consumption may
occur in a tap room or in a permitted outdoor dining area. Outdoor
dining areas shall be in accordance with outdoor dining standards.
[Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
(20) Microbrewery, microwinery, microdistillery: a facility in which beer,
wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or
distilled for distribution and consumption, and which possesses the
appropriate license from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
and produces less than 15,000 barrels per year. (A barrel is
approximately 31 gallons.) On-site consumption may occur in a tap
room or in a permitted outdoor dining area. Outdoor dining areas
shall be in accordance with outdoor dining standards. [Added
11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
(21) Brewpub: an eating place (without drive-through service) in
conjunction with a facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic
beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and
consumption, and which possesses the appropriate license from the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. Outdoor dining areas shall be
in accordance with outdoor dining standards. [Added 11-7-2016
by Ord. No. 998]
(22) Tap room: a room that is ancillary to the production of beer at a
microbrewery, brewpub, or brewery where the public can purchase
and/or consume only the beer produced on site. [Added
11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
F. Utility and public service uses.
(1) Emergency services: Fire station, police facilities, ambulance, or
rescue squad station for emergency services.
(2) Utility: A transformer station, electrical substation, automatic
telephone exchange, pumping station, wastewater treatment
facility, or other operation station or facility necessary to provide
electrical, telephone, water supply, or wastewater conveyance or
treatment services.
(a) In residence districts the facility shall be essential to service
such residential areas, no public business office nor any
storage yard or storage building shall be operated in
connection with the use, and a fifty-foot buffer yard shall be
provided along all property lines.
(b) This use does not include broadcast towers, relay towers, or
cellular telecommunications facilities including towers,
antenna, or equipment building, or any other structure which
exceeds 35 feet in height.
(3) Railway or bus station: A building used by bus and/or railroad
passengers for transportation-related services.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:698
(4) Telecommunications: A structure or structures, including a tower,
antenna or associated buildings, for cellular and personal wireless
communications used to transmit or receive cellular and personal
wireless telecommunications signals.
(a) General. The following general provisions apply to all cellular
telecommunications facilities. The general standards are in
addition to the provisions for the particular applications
specified below.
[1] The location of the tower and equipment building shall
comply with all natural resource protection standards of
this chapter.
[2] The following buffer plantings shall be located around the
perimeter of the security fence:
[a] An evergreen screen shall be planted that consists of
either a hedge, planted three feet on center maximum,
or a row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center
maximum. All plantings shall be at least six feet in
height.
[b] Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[3] An eight-foot-high security fence shall completely
surround the tower (and guy wires if used) and equipment
building.
[4] The tower shall be designed and constructed to all
applicable standards of the American National Standards
Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, as amended.
[5] A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA 222-E, as amended,
shall be submitted to the municipality to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation for the
tower and anchors for the guy wires if used.
[6] Towers and antennas shall be designed to withstand wind
gusts of at least 100 miles per hour.
[7] An antenna may not be located on a building or structure
that is listed on an historic register.
(b) Permitted districts; design requirements.
[1] A cellular telecommunications facility is permitted by
special exception in the following zoning districts: I-1 and
I-2, subject to the following conditions.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:699
[a] Sole use on a lot. A cellular telecommunications
facility is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the
following:
[i] Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
[ii] Minimum setback requirements. The distance
from the base of the proposed tower to the
nearest point on the lot line shall not be less than
the full height of the tower. The equipment
building shall comply with the minimum setback
requirements for the district in which the building
is located.
[iii] Maximum height.
[A] Tower: 200 feet.
[B] The equipment building shall comply with the
maximum height requirements for the district
in which the building is located.
[b] Combined with another use. A cellular
telecommunications facility is permitted on a property
with an existing or proposed use, subject to the
following:
[i] The existing or proposed use on the property may
be any permitted use in the district or any lawful
nonconforming use, and need not be affiliated
with the cellular telecommunications provider.
[ii] The cellular telecommunications facility shall be
fully automated and unattended on a daily basis,
and shall be visited only for periodic maintenance.
[iii] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be
the area needed to accommodate the tower (guy
wires if used), the equipment building, security
fence and buffer planting. If the title to the land
on which the cellular telecommunications facility
is located is conveyed to the owner of the facility,
the land remaining with the principal lot shall
continue to comply with the minimum lot area for
the district.
[iv] Minimum setbacks. The telecommunications
equipment building shall comply with the
minimum setback requirements for the host lot.
The distance from the base of the proposed tower
to the nearest point of the lot line shall not be less
than the full height of the tower.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:700
[v] Maximum height.
[A] Tower: 200 feet.
[B] The equipment building shall comply with the
maximum height requirements for the district
in which the building is located.
[c] Combined with an existing structure. Where possible
an antenna for a cellular telecommunications facility
shall be attached to an existing structure or building
subject to the following conditions.
[i] Maximum height: 50 feet above the existing
building or structure.
[ii] Minimum setbacks. The distance from the base of
the proposed tower to the nearest point on the lot
line shall not be less any the full height of the
tower.
[iii] If the applicant proposed to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate
building, the building shall comply with the
following:
[A] The building shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for the subject zoning
district.
[B] An eight-foot-high security fence shall
surround the building.
[C] A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance
with § 186-18F(4)(a)[2].
[D] Vehicular access to the building shall not
interfere with the parking or vehicular
circulation on the site for the principal use.
[iv] Elevations of existing and proposed structures
showing width, depth and height, use statistical
data on the antenna and support structure shall
be presented.
(c) Criteria for special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
have the power to approve special exceptions for a cellular
telecommunications facility, provided that the applicant
satisfies the requirements of this article, § 186-102, and the
following:
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower for the
telecommunications facility is the minimum height
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:701
necessary for the service area. The applicant shall also
demonstrate that the facility must be located where it is to
serve the company's system.
[2] The applicant shall present certifications from a structural
engineer that the tower is designed in accordance with the
standards cited in this chapter for cellular
telecommunications towers.
[3] The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower
complies with all state and federal laws and regulations,
including, without limitation, all emission standards of the
Federal Communications Commission, effective
September 1, 1997, or as amended from time to time. The
applicant shall also demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission to operate the
facility.
[4] The need for additional buffer yard treatment shall be
evaluated.
[5] The applicant shall demonstrate that the
telecommunications facility must be located where it is
proposed in order to serve the applicant's service area.
[6] Where the telecommunications facility is located on a
property with another principal use, the applicant shall
present documentation that the owner of the property has
granted an easement or lease for the proposed facility and
that vehicular access is provided to the facility.
[7] The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
antenna and any tower structure are safe and that the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by tower
structure failure, falling ice or other debris or radio
frequency interference. All guy wires and guyed towers
shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times.
[8] All towers shall be fitted with anticlimbing devices.
[9] No sign shall be mounted on the tower structure.
[10] Tower structures supporting antennas shall be painted
silver or have a galvanized finish or may be painted green
up to the height of adjacent trees in order to reduce visual
impact.
[11]No antenna or tower structure shall be illuminated except
as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the
Federal Communications Commission.
[12] Any addition to an antenna or modification of an existing
antenna shall require submission of a new application for
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:702
special exception in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
G. Industrial uses.
(1) Contractor offices and shops: Contractor offices and shops, such as
building, cement, electrical, heating, masonry, painting, roofing,
plumbing shop, and carpentry shop.
(2) Crafts: Upholstery, cabinet making, furniture making and similar
crafts.
(a) Retail sales of items produced on the premises are permitted.
(3) Lumber yard: Facilities for the storage and sale of wood and
building products.
(4) Manufacturing: Facilities for the production, processing, cleaning,
testing and distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and
products.
(5) Motor freight terminal: The building plus contiguous space to
which freight is brought for transfer, assembly and storage for
shipment by truck.
(a) Short-term warehousing of less than 30 days may be permitted
under this use.
(b) The motor freight terminal shall be licensed by the Public
Utilities Commission.
(c) Trucks with compressors running 24 hours a day shall be
located within a quadrangle of buildings or walls.
(6) Printing, publishing and binding: Printing, publishing,
lithographing, bookbinding or similar establishment.
(7) Recycling facility: A recycling facility is a business that
accumulates material such as paper, glass, aluminum and/or plastic
that is no longer useful for its intended purpose. The materials are
then sold to another business as a raw material which can be used
to manufacture a new product.
(a) Minimum lot area: 1.75 acres.
(b) Yard requirements:
[1] Front yard: 100 feet.
[2] Side yard: 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(c) The provisions set forth in § 186-18G(9)(c) through (u) for
resource recovery facility shall also be met.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:703
(8) Research: Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental
laboratory or similar establishment for research or product
development. No research facility shall be permitted which
constitutes a danger to the community because of combustible,
chemical, radioactive, or other hazardous materials.
(9) Resource recovery facility: A resource recovery facility is a facility
or land that is used for any one or a combination of the following:
composting, incineration, material separation or trash transfer.
(a) Related definitions. As used in this subsection, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility for the composting of the
organic matter in municipal solid waste.
INCINERATOR — A facility designed to reduce municipal solid
waste by combustion. This use may or may not include heat
exchange equipment for energy recovery.
MATERIAL SEPARATION and/or REFUSE DERIVED FUEL
(RDF) FACILITY — The extraction of materials from municipal
solid waste for recycling or for use as refuse derived fuel
(RDF).
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — The unseparated and/or
unprocessed combination of residential and commercial solid
waste materials generated in a municipality.
TRANSFER STATION — A facility where municipal solid waste
is delivered for the purpose of compacting the material into
larger vehicles for transport to a final disposal site or
processing facility. A "transfer station" may include the
separation and collection of material for the purpose of
recycling.
(b) Table of Dimensional Standards.
Required Yard
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Composting
facility
2 100 50 50
Municipal solid
waste
2 100 50 50
Transfer station 2 100 50 50
Incinerator 10 200 200* 200*
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:704
Required Yard
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Material
separation and/
or refuse derived
fuel
10 200 200* 200*
* Setback from residential district or occupied residential
dwelling: 300 feet.
(c) Truck parking areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any
property line.
(d) Operation of a resource recovery facility shall at all times be in
full compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection (PaDEP) and the provisions of this
subsection. In the event that any of the provisions of this
subsection are less restrictive than any present or future rules
or regulations of PaDEP, the more restrictive PaDEP
regulations shall control.
(e) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every resource
recovery facility shall be protected by locked barricades,
fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access
to the area at unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade
shall be at least six feet high and shall be kept in good repair
and neatly painted in a uniform color.
(f) Unloading of municipal solid waste shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
(g) Hazardous waste as included on the list of hazardous waste as
maintained by the Department of Environmental Protection
shall not be disposed of, handled or processed in a resource
recovery facility.
(h) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
submitted to the municipality. To control blowing paper, there
shall be erected a fence having a minimum height of six feet,
with openings not more than three inches by three inches
along all boundaries. The entire area shall be kept clean and
orderly.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:705
(i) All parts of the process, unloading, handling and storage of
municipal solid waste, shall occur within a building. However,
certain separated recyclable materials like glass, aluminum
and other metals may be stored outdoors.
(j) The storage of paper shall be within an enclosed structure.
(k) Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as
not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property.
(l) No material shall be placed or deposited to a height greater
than the height of the fence or wall herein prescribed.
(m) No municipal solid waste shall be processed or stored at a
recycling facility. For all other types of resource recovery
facilities, municipal solid waste shall not be stored on the site
for more than 72 hours.
(n) A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste during
a plant shutdown must be submitted to the municipality and
approved by the governing body.
(o) Leachate from the municipal solid waste and water used to
wash vehicles or any part of the operation shall be disposed of
in a manner in compliance with PaDEP regulations. If the
leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage treatment
plant, appropriate permits shall be obtained from the
applicable agencies and authorities. In no event shall the
leachate be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
(p) Waste from the resource recovery facility process, such as but
not limited to ash from an incinerator, shall be stored in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried from the site by
wind or water. Such process waste shall be located at least 100
feet from any property line and stored in leakproof and
vectorproof containers.
[1] Such process waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary
landfill approved by PaDEP or in another manner approved
by PaDEP.
(q) A dense evergreen buffer shall be provided on the outside
perimeter of the fenced area. Evergreens shall be four to five
feet in height and planted on ten-foot staggered centers. In
addition, the buffer requirements of § 186-54 of this chapter
shall be met.
(r) Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any
materials shall specifically be prohibited.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:706
(s) The performance standards of Article VII of this chapter shall
be met regarding noise, smoke, emissions, heat and vibrations.
(t) A traffic impact study and a water impact study shall be
required.
(u) A zoning permit shall be renewed on an annual basis after
inspection for compliance with the above provisions.
(10)Warehousing and distribution: Facilities operated for a specific
commercial establishment or group of establishments for the
storage of goods and materials and reshipping of goods and
materials.
(a) Storage of materials shall be screened along all property lines
by a planted buffer 12 feet wide, unless a greater buffer is
required by § 186-54 of this chapter.
(b) Tractor trailers, cargo boxes, or other vehicles or structures
intended to be transportable shall not be used as accessory
buildings for storage.
(11) Airport services: Airport services include all uses directly related to
the operation of an airport and uses directly associated with an
airport, including: [Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
(a) Office uses for aviation administration, maintenance and
operational facilities, including ancillary warehousing/storage
for aircraft operations on airport property.
(b) Air cargo and related ground transportation facilities.
(c) Motor vehicle rental.
(d) Aviation instruction facilities.
(e) Aircraft storage buildings.
(f) Helicopter pads.
(g) Terminal buildings.
(h) Fixed base operators.
(i) Air hangars.
(j) General aviation operations.
(k) Airport auxiliary facilities, including fences, lighting and
antenna systems, on-premise signs, driveways and access
roads.
(l) Other uses determined to be airport-related by the regulations
of the Department of Commerce.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:707
(12) Planned industrial development: a group of industrial,
manufacturing, office and warehousing, distribution, retail, service
business, and related establishments, which is planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, where parking spaces,
stormwater management facilities, access drives and circulation,
lighting systems and other improvements are shared by three or
more uses on one lot, or within a unified development. A planned
industrial development may contain a combination of any of the
uses permitted by right within the zoning district in which a
planned industrial development is permitted. [Added 11-7-2016
by Ord. No. 998]
(13) Flex tech (FT) development: a development characterized by a
unified site designed for either a single building or multiple
buildings, with each building having the right to contain a mix of
occupants and/or uses. Flex tech development is intended for
general business and office development, as well as for light
industrial related uses, such as creative industries seeking open
floor plans for a mix of office and production activities, in-house/onsite
warehousing/storage for low-intensity production facilities and
accommodations for related shipping. Flex tech development
allows for flexibility in accommodating business and light industrial
production-oriented uses through a unified environment based on a
comprehensive site plan. [Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
H. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structure or accessory use: Accessory structure,
building, or accessory use customarily incidental to a permitted use
and not normally conducted as an independent principal use.
(2) Accessory dormitory: Accessory dormitories or other accessory
living accommodations for faculty or students in a private or public
school which is not conducted as a private gainful business.
(a) There shall be a five-acre minimum lot size.
(b) The use shall have direct access to an arterial, collector, or
primary access road.
(c) There shall be a ten-foot buffer area planted with evergreen
trees along the side and rear lot lines.
(3) Drive-through: Any vehicle-related commercial facility in which a
service is provided or goods, food or beverages are sold to the
operator or passengers of a motor vehicle without the necessity of
the operator or passengers disembarking from the vehicle. Drivethroughs
shall be accessory uses to the following: eating place in
the C-1 District; eating places which are part of a planned
commercial development; retail shops and stores; services
business; and bank or savings and loan association. Drive-throughs
shall be permitted by conditional use and shall comply with the
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:708
following general standards: [Amended 12-1-2014 by Ord. No.
980]
(a) A drive-through lane with stacking space shall be provided to
serve a minimum of six vehicles, each space a minimum 22 feet
in length, measured from the first point of service (menu/
ordering board). Drive-through lanes and stacking areas shall
be a minimum of 12 feet wide. The minimum turning radius of
a drive-through shall be 18 feet.
(b) A drive-through stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot
circulation aisles nor shall it in any way conflict with through
circulation, parking or safe pedestrian access to the building. A
drive-through/stacking lane shall not cross or be crossed by
pedestrian accessways. The drive-through/stacking lane shall
not be the sole ingress and egress from the site. If located in a
planned commercial development, the circulation pattern shall
be integrated with that of the center.
(c) A bypass or escape lane of at least 10 feet wide shall be
provided for ease of circulation and emergency purposes.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided for the drive-through
stations.
(e) Overhead canopies shall be set back at least 10 feet from any
street right-of-way and property line and at least 20 feet from
any residential property line. The total height of any overhead
canopy shall not exceed 20 feet.
(f) Outdoor speakers or menu boards must be set back at least 30
feet from all lot lines.
(g) Order board signs incidental to restaurants with drive-through
facilities shall be located either on the building in which the
drive-through facility is located or between the drive-through
lane of traffic and the building containing the drive-through
facility. Any such sign should be of sufficient size and location
to be easily visible from cars using the drive-through but shall
not exceed 35 square feet on each face. Additionally, the
facility may place traffic flow signs so as to coordinate ingress
and egress from the facility.
(h) The drive-through shall be screened from adjacent residential
uses and adjacent properties according to the buffer standards
of § 186-54.
(i) A traffic impact study shall be submitted to provide information
to be used to determine the necessary stacking area and the
impacts of the proposal upon local traffic circulation. The
traffic impact study shall address the following issues:
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:709
[1] Nature of the product or service being offered.
[2] Method by which the product or service is provided (e.g.,
window service or brought to vehicle by employee).
[3] Time required to service typical patron.
[4] Arrival rate for patrons.
[5] Peak demand hour(s).
[6] Anticipated vehicle stacking required.
[7] Anticipated traffic generation.
(4) Home occupation: A routine, accessory and customary
nonresidential use conducted within or administered from a
portion of a dwelling or its permitted accessory building that is
clearly incidental and secondary to the principal residential use.
(a) Uses permitted as an accessory home occupation, subject to
the restrictions of this chapter, include but are not limited to:
art studio, office, hair care, photography, custom sewing, tax
preparation, or musical instruction.
(b) The following uses shall not be permitted as an accessory home
occupation: veterinarian office, stable, kennel, funeral home,
retail store (other than over the phone or through the mail, or
where clearly incidental to the accessory use), restaurant, auto
repair, trucking company terminal, hotel, motel, nursing home,
boardinghouse, retail sales, painting of vehicles, tractor repair,
lawn mower and engine repair, manufacturing (other than
custom crafts) or bulk welding.
(c) Professional office. The main office of a medical doctor,
chiropractor, dentist or attorney, accountant or other like
professional shall only be allowed as an accessory home
occupation if the property abuts an arterial or collector street.
(d) An accessory home occupation shall not include any retail or
wholesale sales on the premises (other than over the phone
and through the mail, or where clearly incidental to the
accessory use) nor any industrial use (other than custom crafts
and sewing).
(e) An accessory home occupation must be conducted within a
dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal
practitioner or in an accessory building thereto which normally
is associated with a residential use. The accessory home
occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors.
(f) The maximum amount of floor area devoted to an accessory
home occupation shall not be more than 25% of the ground
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:710
floor area of the principal residential structure, excluding the
floor area covered by an attached garage or similar structure.
(g) In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure be
altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in
a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its
residential character by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, show windows or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers or clients, other than
those signs permitted by this chapter.
(h) An accessory home occupation shall only involve persons
working on the premises who are permanent residents of the
dwelling, plus a maximum of one nonresident employee
working on the premises at any one point in time; except a
barber, beauty shop or hairstylist may not include any
nonresident employees.
(i) Hours. An accessory home occupation shall not be conducted
in a way that is perceptible from beyond the lot line between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. This time limit shall also
apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles on the property or
on a street that causes noise to adjacent residences.
(j) Signs and displays. There shall be no use of show windows,
business display or advertising visible from outside the
premises, except that one nonilluminated sign permitted with a
maximum sign area of four square feet on each of two sides,
with a maximum height of eight feet. Such sign shall not be
located within five feet of the rear edge of the sidewalk or
within 10 feet of the proposed curbline of the street in those
areas not having a sidewalk.
(k) Advertising. The address of the accessory home occupation
shall not be advertised in such a way that would encourage
customers and salespersons to come to the property without an
appointment.
(l) Parking and loading.
[1] In any case, an accessory home occupation shall include
an absolute minimum of one off-street parking space
(which may be the same space as serves the dwelling).
[2] The applicant shall prove that the use will include
adequate off-street parking and loading spaces. The
amount of parking in the required front yard should be
held to a minimum to maintain a residential character. The
applicant is encouraged to minimize the need for on-street
parking, but appropriate, safe on-street areas may be
allowed to be used to meet a portion of parking needs.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:711
[3] If additional parking is needed beyond what can be
accommodated using appropriate on-street spaces and a
residential-style driveway, then such parking may be
required to be provided in the rear of the home, with
adequate buffering between adjoining properties, and may
deny the use if such rear parking and buffering cannot be
accommodated.
[4] Any required off-street spaces shall be conveniently
located to reach the door of the accessory home
occupation.
[5] Traffic. The use shall not involve the parking of more than
three vehicles of nonresidents at any one time.
[6] Truck traffic. The use shall not require the use or servicing
by a vehicle with more than one-ton loading capacity,
except for deliveries a maximum of two times per day. This
use shall not involve the parking of more than two trucks
of any type on the lot or on adjacent streets at any period
of time. The use shall not need servicing by, deliveries by,
or parking of tractor-trailer trucks.
(m) If the accessory home occupation involves work (other than
auto/tractor trailer repair or painting) occurring on a
vehicle(s), no more than one such vehicle(s) shall be parked on
the lot overnight. At no time should such vehicles be parked on
abutting streets.
(n) Hazardous substances. The use shall not involve the storage or
use of hazardous, flammable, or explosive substances, other
than types and amounts commonly found in a dwelling. The use
shall not involve the use or storage of toxic substances.
(o) There shall be no exterior storage of materials or refuse
resulting from the operation of the accessory home occupation.
(p) The use shall comply with all environmental and nuisance
control regulations of this chapter, including Article VII.
(q) A zoning permit shall be required for all accessory home
occupations.
(5) No-impact home-based business: A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves
no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the
premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential
use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following
requirements:
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-18
185:712
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(e) The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
or electronic interference at the property line, and no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television or telephone
receiver off the lot or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
lot.
(f) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally
associated with residential use.
(g) The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area of the principal residential structure.
(h) No home business shall be located in an area needed to meet
the off-street parking requirements of the principal residence.
(i) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(6) Roadside stand: Roadside stand for the sale of farm nursery or
greenhouse products produced on the premises where offered for
sale.
(a) The stand may be in the front yard but shall not be in the street
lines.
(b) The location shall not be within 80 feet of any intersection
center line.
(c) Parking for vehicles shall be provided off the street cartway
and in compliance with the provisions of Article VIII, Off-street
Parking and Loading.
(7) Keeping of animals:
(a) Keeping of pets: The keeping of dogs, cats, or other small
animals as pets accessory to a residential use.
§ 186-18 WATER § 186-18
185:713
§ 186-19. Flood District use regulations.
Refer to Chapter 94, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Borough
of Perkasie.
[1] No more than four customary household pets or domestic
animals (e.g., dogs, cats, etc.) ordinarily kept in the home
shall be kept under the permanent care of the occupants.
[2] Five or more adult dogs or cats shall meet the
requirements of § 186-18A(1).
[3] Commercial breeding or use of these pets shall not be
permitted under this use.
[4] A zoning permit shall not be required for this use.
(b) Keeping of large animals and fowl: The keeping of large
animals (such as cattle, horses, llamas, sheep, goats, and pigs)
and fowl (such as chickens and turkeys) as accessory to a
residential use, not as a farming use.
[1] Large animals (such as cattle, horses, llamas, sheep, goats,
and pigs) and fowl (such as chickens and turkeys) shall be
stabled or housed in buildings at least 100 feet from any
lot line.
[2] No more than one livestock unit shall be permitted for
every 1 1/2 acres of lot area. Livestock units are as follows:
[a] One horse, llama, or cow: two livestock units.
[b] Two sheep or goats: one livestock unit.
[c] One pig: one livestock unit.
[3] Fowl shall require a minimum lot area of 1/4 acre for two
birds and additional 1/4 acre for every two birds
thereafter. Roosters and guinea fowl are not permitted.
[4] Commercial breeding or use of large animals and fowl
shall not be permitted under this use.
[5] A zoning permit shall be required for large animals.
§ 186-18 PERKASIE CODE § 186-19
185:714
ARTICLE V
Zoning Districts
§ 186-20. Districts regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum
lot area per dwelling unit, minimum lot width, minimum front yard,
minimum side yard, minimum rear yard, maximum height and maximum
building coverage shall be as specified in this section, in the following
subsections, in Article VI, Dimensional Regulations, and subject to such
additional requirements as shall be found in this chapter and in other
Borough ordinances.
A. R-1A Residential District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain the low-density residential character as it now exists, while
providing for the protection of natural resources and the preservation
of permanent open space and while limiting the percentages of
impervious surface. The district permits the development of either
single-family residential areas or single-family clusters subject to
performance standards. Additional purposes for the establishment of
this district are the exclusion of activities which are incompatible with
residential development and the creation of conditions conducive to the
carrying out of the broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.192
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(1) Single-family detached dwelling
B(7) Single-family cluster
C(1) Cemetery
C(2) Community center
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
F(1) Emergency services
192. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:715
F(2) Utility
H(1) Accessory structure or use
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
B(10) Housing for elderly
C(8) Library on Borough-owned land
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
C(3) Community garage or parking/area (for residential
use)
C(5) Day-care center
C(15) School, public or private
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(4) Home occupation
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Detached
Residential Use.
Minimum lot area 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 90 feet
Corner 110 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Cluster.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:716
Minimum site area 5 acres
Maximum density 5.14 dwelling units per net
acre
Minimum open space ratio 0.45
Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.20
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Minimum lot area 7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
70 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(4) Housing for elderly: Requirements of § 186-18B(10) shall be met.
(5) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 80 feet
Corner 110 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(6) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Open Space Preservation
Performance Subdivision I. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
Minimum site area 5.01 acres to 10.0 acres
Maximum density 5.5 dwelling units
Minimum open space ratio 0.45
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:717
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
35%*
Maximum lot coverage 35%*
Minimum lot area 6,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
60 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building
height
15 feet
Minimum 20-foot Class C buffer 20 feet
NOTE:
*The developer shall be subject to the maximum impervious
surface ratio and lot coverage ratio (on-lot) as specified. An
individual lot owner may exceed these maximum ratios by 5%
for on-lot improvements; however, the developer shall be required
to design and construct the stormwater management facilities
to accommodate the total maximum impervious surfaces and lot
coverage allowed on the site.
(7) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Open Space Preservation
Performance Subdivision II. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
Minimum site area 10.01 acres
Maximum density 5.5 dwelling units
Minimum open space ratio 0.30
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
35%*
Maximum lot coverage 35%*
Minimum lot area 11,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
80 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:718
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building
height
15 feet
Minimum 20-foot Class C buffer 20 feet
NOTE:
*The developer shall be subject to the maximum impervious
surface ratio and lot coverage ratio (on-lot) as specified. An
individual lot owner may exceed these maximum ratios by 5%
for on-lot improvements; however, the developer shall be required
to design and construct the stormwater management facilities
to accommodate the total maximum impervious surfaces and lot
coverage allowed on the site
B. R-1B Residential District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain the low-density residential character as it now exists, while
providing for the protection of natural resources and the preservation
of permanent open space and while limiting the percentages of
impervious surface. The district permits the development of either
single-family residential areas or any type of residential dwelling unit
subject to performance standards. Additional purposes for the
establishment of this district are the exclusion of activities which are
incompatible with residential development and the creation of
conditions conducive to the carrying out of the broad purposes of this
chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.193
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(1) Single-family detached dwelling
B(2)(a) Two-family, twin dwelling
B(7) Single-family cluster
B(8) Performance standard subdivision
C(1) Cemetery
C(2) Community center
193. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:719
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
B(10) Housing for elderly
C(8) Library on Borough-owned land
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
B(9) Mobile home park
C(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential
use)
C(5) Day-care center
C(15) School, public or private
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(4) Home occupation
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Detached
Residential Use.
Minimum lot area 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 90 feet
Corner 110 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 40 feet
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:720
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Two-family Twin Dwelling
Use.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 45 feet
Corner 45 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (one side yard for each
twin dwelling)
15 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(4) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Cluster.
Minimum site area 5 acres
Maximum density 5.14 dwelling units per net
acre
Minimum open space ratio 0.45
Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.20
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Minimum lot area 7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
70 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:721
(5) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Performance Standard
Subdivision.
Minimum site area 5 acres
Maximum density 8.30 dwelling units per net
acre
Minimum open space ratio 0.45
Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.35
Requirements of § 186-18B(8) for performance standard
subdivision use also shall be met.
(6) Mobile home park: Requirements of § 186-18B(9) shall be met.
(7) Housing for elderly: Requirements of § 186-18B(10) shall be met.
(8) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 80 feet
Corner 110 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(9) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Open Space Preservation
Performance Subdivision I. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
Applicable site area 5.01 acres to 10.0 acres
Maximum density 5.5 dwelling units
Minimum open space ratio 0.45
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
35%*
Maximum lot coverage 35%*
Minimum lot area 6,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
60 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:722
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building
height
15 feet
Minimum 20-foot Class C buffer 20 feet
NOTE:
The developer shall be subject to the maximum impervious surface
ratio and lot coverage ratio (on-lot) as specified. An individual
lot owner may exceed these maximum ratios by 5% for on-lot
improvements; however, the developer shall be required to design
and construct the stormwater management facilities to
accommodate the total maximum impervious surfaces and lot
coverage allowed on the site
(10) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Open Space Preservation
Performance Subdivision II. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
Minimum site area 10.01 acres
Maximum density 5.5 dwelling units
Minimum open space ratio 0.30
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
35%*
Maximum lot coverage 35%*
Minimum lot area 11,500 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
setback
80 feet
Minimum building spacing 20 feet
Minimum Yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building
height
15 feet
Minimum 20-foot Class C buffer 20 feet
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:723
NOTE:
*The developer shall be subject to the maximum impervious
surface ratio and lot coverage ratio (on-lot) as specified. An
individual lot owner may exceed these maximum ratios by 5%
for on-lot improvements; however, the developer shall be required
to design and construct the storm water management facilities
to accommodate the total maximum impervious surfaces and lot
coverage allowed on the site
C. R-2 Residential District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain the character and to maintain the existing medium residential
density areas where single-family homes as well as single-family
semidetached homes are permitted. Additional purposes for the
establishment of this district are excluding activities incompatible with
residential development and creating conditions conducive to carrying
out the broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.194
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(1) Single-family detached dwelling
B(2)(a) Two-family, twin dwelling
B(2)(b) Two-family, duplex dwelling
C(1) Cemetery
C(2) Community center
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Public utility
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(5) No-impact home-based business
194. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:724
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
B(10) Housing for elderly
C(8) Library on Borough-owned land
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
B(11) Rooming house
C(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential
use)
C(5) Day-care center
C(13) Recreational facility, nongovernmental
C(15) School, public or private
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(4) Home occupation
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Detached
Residential Use. [Amended 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 967]
Minimum lot area 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 65 feet
Corner 85 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 30 feet
Side (each) 10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Two-family Twin or Duplex
Dwelling Use.
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:725
Minimum lot area 9,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 4,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 40 feet
Corner 85 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 30 feet
Side (each, one side yard for
twin dwelling)
10 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(4) Housing for elderly: Requirements of § 186-18B(10) shall be met.
(5) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 65 feet
Corner 85 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 30 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
D. R-3 Residential District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain and maintain the character and density of residential areas
where a variety of housing types are permitted. Additional purposes for
the establishment of this district are excluding activities incompatible
with residential development and creating conditions conducive to
carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:726
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.195
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(1)(a) Single-family detached dwelling
B(2)(b) Two-family, twin dwelling
B(2) Two-family, duplex dwelling
B(3) Townhouse
B(4) Multiplex
C(1) Cemetery
C(2) Community center
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
B(10) Housing for elderly
C(8) Library on Borough-owned land
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
B(11) Rooming house
C(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential
use)
C(5) Day-care center
195. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:727
C(13) Recreational facility, nongovernmental
C(15) School, public or private
E(2) Bed-and-breakfast
E(7) Funeral home or mortuary
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(4) Home occupation
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Detached
Residential Use.
Minimum lot area 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 50 feet
Corner 65 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 9 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 1.5 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Two-family Twin or Duplex
Dwelling Use.
Minimum lot area 9,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 4,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 30 feet
Corner 40 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each, one side yard for
twin dwelling)
9 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:728
(4) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Townhouse or Multiplex
Dwelling. [Amended 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 974]
Minimum lot area 7,800 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 2,600 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 18 feet
Corner 25 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each; one yard for
townhouse end units)
8 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 40%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(5) Housing for elderly: Requirements of Section 186-18B(10) shall be
met.
(6) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 65 feet
Corner 85 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 30 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
E. A Apartment District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
provide appropriate areas for multifamily development in order to
broaden the Borough's housing base and therefore serve a greater
variety of housing needs. Reasonable standards are provided to prevent
overcrowding of land, to regulate the density of population, to avoid
undue congestion in the streets and to allow for the harmonious
development of apartments and other uses which are compatible with
higher density residential development. Creating conditions conducive
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:729
to carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter is an additional
reason for the establishment of this district.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.196
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(5) Multifamily dwelling
C(2) Community center
C(5) Day-care center
C(6) Golf course
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(13) Recreational facility, nongovernmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
E(6) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor,
nongovernmental
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
B(10) Housing for elderly
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
196. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:730
B(6) Residential conversion
C(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential
use)
C(7) Hospital
C(10) Nursing home
C(11) Private club or lodge
C(15) School, public or private
E(7) Funeral home or mortuary
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(4) Home occupation
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Multifamily Dwelling Use.
Minimum lot area 87,120 square feet (2 acres)
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 3,630 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 200 feet
Corner 200 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 40 feet
Rear 50 feet
Maximum lot coverage 20%
Maximum building height 30 feet maximum height
may be exceeded by 1 foot
for each foot by which the
width of the front, rear, and
side yards is increased
beyond the minimum yard
requirements, up to a
maximum of 50 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Housing for elderly: Requirements of § 186-18B(10) shall be met.
(4) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 50 feet
Corner 65 feet
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:731
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 20%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
F. C-1 Business Professional District: The purpose and intent of this
district is to provide areas for modern office, retail and personal service
and related uses. A comprehensive set of design standards is included
to promote the grouping of retail and service uses in the form of a
shopping center development. Building coverage, access, off-street
parking and buffering requirements are also included to help ensure an
attractive setting for permitted land uses and to create conditions
conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.197
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions are met. [Amended 12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 980]
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
C(2) Community center
C(14) Religious place of worship
D(1) Office, business or professional
D(2) Office or clinic, medical
E(1) Bank or savings and loan association
E(3) Eating place
E(15) Planned commercial development
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(4) Home occupation
H(5) No-impact home-based business
197. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:732
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
H(3) Drive-through
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
C(7) Hospital
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(10) Nursing home
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(15) School, public or private
E(4) Entertainment, adult uses
H(2) Accessory dormitory
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Planned Commercial
Development Use.
Minimum lot area 87,120 square feet (2 acres)
Minimum lot width
Interior 100 feet
Corner 100 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 40 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 40 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 75 feet
Corner 75 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:733
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 25 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
G. C-2 General Commercial District: The purpose and intent of this district
is to provide for a wide variety of retail and personal service business
uses in areas where said uses already exist and where the application of
restrictive development standards accompanying the Business
Professional District is not feasible. The standards of this district are
designed to provide for the public convenience and to fulfill the other
broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.198
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
B(1) Single-family detached dwelling
B(2)(a) Two-family, twin dwelling
B(2)(b) Two-family, duplex dwelling
B(3) Townhouse
C(2) Community center
C(4) Community garage or parking area (for
nonresidential use)
C(5) Day-care center
C(9) Library or museum, public
C(11) Private club or lodge
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(14) Religious place of worship
C(16) School, trade or commercial
D(1) Office, business or professional
198. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:734
D(2) Office or clinic, medical
D(3) Veterinary office
E(1) Bank or savings and loan association
E(3) Eating place (without drive-through service)
E(5) Entertainment and recreation facilities, indoor,
nongovernmental
E(6) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor,
nongovernmental
E(7) Funeral home or mortuary
E(10) Motel or hotel
E(11) Motor vehicle accessories sales
E(12) Motor vehicle gasoline station
E(14) Motor vehicle sales or rental
E(15) Planned commercial development
E(16) Retail shop
E(17) Service business
E(18) Tavern
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
F(3) Railway or bus station
G(2) Crafts
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(4) Home occupation
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
E(9) Mixed use
H(3) Drive-through
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
B(11) Rooming house
C(3) Community garage or parking area (for residential
use)
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:735
C(6) Golf course
C(7) Hospital
C(10) Nursing home
C(13) Recreational facility, nongovernmental
C(15) School, public or private
E(2) Bed-and-breakfast
H(2) Accessory dormitory
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Single-family Detached
Residential Use.
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 50 feet
Corner 65 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 8 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Two-family Twin or Duplex
Dwelling Use.
Minimum lot area 8,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 30 feet
Corner 40 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each, one side yard for
twin dwelling)
8 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 35%
Maximum building height 30 feet
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:736
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(4) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Townhouse Dwelling Use.
Minimum lot area 7,800 square feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 2,600 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 18 feet
Corner 25 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
Side (each; 1 yard for
townhouse end units)
8 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 35%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(5) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Planned Commercial
Development Use.
Minimum lot area 87,120 square feet (2 acres)
Minimum lot width
Interior 100 feet
Corner 100 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 40 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 40 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
(6) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 50 feet
Corner 65 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 25 feet
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:737
Side (each) 8 feet
Rear 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
H. I-1 Planned Industrial District: The purpose and intent of this district is
to provide for the requirements of modern industrial development
which are appropriate in selected areas. Among other things, this
district is intended to provide desirable locations for those types of
industry which are harmonious with and do not constitute a hazard or
nuisance to surrounding areas. Performance and development
standards will help ensure desirable and attractive industrial areas and
help create conditions conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of
this chapter.
(1) Uses permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.199
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
C(4) Community garage or parking area (for
nonresidential use)
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
E(8) Kennel
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
F(3) Railway or bus station
G(1) Contractor offices and shops
G(4) Manufacturing
G(6) Printing, publishing, and binding
G(7) Recycling facility
G(9) Resource recovery facility
G(8) Research
199. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:738
G(10) Warehousing and distribution
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
H(4) Home occupation
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
C(6) Golf course
E(10) Motel or hotel
F(4) Telecommunications
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of dimensional Requirements for Any Principal Structure or
Use.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Interior 200 feet
Corner 200 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 50 feet
Side (each) 20 feet
Rear 20 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
I. I-2 Light Industrial District: The purpose and intent of this district is to
provide for a greater variety of industrial development, including office,
retail and personal service uses. Reasonable, but less restrictive,
development standards provide a means for industries requiring
smaller lots and smaller setbacks to locate in this district, thereby
broadening Perkasie's industrial base by providing an opportunity to
accommodate a variety of industrial uses. Standards for this district are
also established to create conditions conducive to carrying out the
broad purposes of this chapter.
(1) Uses Permitted: A building may be erected or altered to be used
either in whole or in part and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:739
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.200
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
C(4) Community garage or parking area (for
nonresidential use)
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
D(1) Office, business or professional
D(2) Office or clinic, medical
D(3) Veterinary office
E(1) Bank or savings and loan association
E(6) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor,
nongovernmental
E(8) Kennel
E(12) Motor vehicle gasoline station
E(13) Motor vehicle repair garage
E(14) Motor vehicle sales or rental
E(15) Planned commercial development
E(16) Retail shop
E(17) Service business
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
F(3) Railway or bus station
G(1) Contractor offices and shops
G(3) Lumber yard
G(4) Manufacturing
G(5) Motor freight terminal
G(6) Printing, publishing, and binding
G(7) Recycling facility
G(8) Research
G(10) Warehousing and distribution
H(1) Accessory structure or accessory use
200. Editor's Note: See also § 186-18, Principal and accessory use regulations.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:740
H(4) Home occupation
H(5) No-impact home-based business
(b) Uses by conditional approval. The following uses shall be
permitted when authorized as a conditional use by Council in
accordance with Article XII.
C(8) Library on Borough-owned land
H(3) Drive-through
(c) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met.
B(6) Residential conversion
C(6) Golf course
F(4) Telecommunications
H(6) Roadside stand
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Planned Commercial
Development Use.
Minimum lot area 87,120 square feet (2 acres)
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 13,500 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 100 feet
Corner 100 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 40 feet
Rear 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25%
Maximum building height 40 feet
(3) Table of Dimensional Requirements for Any Other Principal
Structure or Use.
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Interior 100 feet
Corner 100 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:741
Front 30 feet
Side (each) 15 feet
Rear 15 feet
Maximum lot coverage 30%
Maximum building height 40 feet
Maximum accessory building height 15 feet
J. TC - Town Center Overlay District: The Town Center District is a special
zone which overlies and supersedes rights granted in other districts.
The purpose of the district is to facilitate the growth of commerce and
economic development in the downtown while still preserving the
overall character of this portion of the Borough. This district is also
intended to further the objectives of the Perkasie Town Center Plan.
The following modifications to the requirements of this section shall
only occur within the boundaries of the Town Center Overlay District.
(1) Permitted uses: The only uses permitted in the Town Center
Overlay District (TC) shall be those permitted in the applicable
underlying R-2, C-2 or I-2 District, except as may be specifically
stated otherwise in the regulations of this Overlay District.
(2) Prohibited uses: The following uses shall be prohibited in the TC
Overlay District:
(a) Motor freight terminal.
(b) Motor vehicle repair garage.
(c) Motor vehicle gasoline station.
(d) Motor vehicle sales or rental.
(3) Dimensional requirements: The area, height, setback and building
coverage regulations applying to the TC District shall be the same
as those governing the applicable underlying R-2, C-2 or I-2 District
with the following exceptions:
(a) Any conversion of an existing building into three or more
dwelling units that may be permitted under other sections of
this chapter [§ 186-18B(6)] in the C-2 District shall meet the
following standards:
[1] Minimum lot area-per dwelling unit: 1,800 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 40 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: zero feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: zero feet, except as may be
required by buffer yard requirements.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:742
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: zero feet, except as may be
required by buffer yard requirements.
[6] Maximum building height: 45 feet with a maximum of four
stories.
[7] Maximum accessory building height: 15 feet.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
(b) Any conversion of an existing building into three or more
dwelling units that may be permitted under other sections of
this chapter [§ 186-18B(6)] in the R-2 District shall meet the
following standards:
[1] The standards for any other structure or use in § 186-20C
except for minimum lot area as required by Subsection
J(3)(b)[2] below.
[2] A minimum lot area per dwelling unit of 3,000 square feet.
(c) Mixed use: the conversion, construction or reconstruction of
one structure to contain a mixture of uses consisting of
commercial, office, retail and consumer, which are permitted
by other sections of this chapter [§ 186-18E(9)] in a C-2 District
in combination with residential uses shall be in accordance
with the following standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 500 square feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: zero feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: zero feet, except as may be
required by the buffer yard requirements.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: zero feet, except as may be
required by the buffer yard requirements.
[6] Maximum building height: 45 feet with a maximum of four
stories.
[7] Maximum accessory building height: 15 feet.
[8] Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
[9] Minimum portion of the total floor area of the first floor of
a mixed-use structure used for commercial uses: 70% for
new construction; 100% for a conversion.
(d) Motels/hotels that are permitted by other sections of this
chapter within the TC - Town Center Overlay District shall be
exempt from the provisions of § 186-20G and H, and instead a
minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet shall apply.
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:743
(e) Rooming house. The minimum lot area shall be 25,000 square
feet plus 300 square feet for each sleeping room in excess of
four.
(4) Buffering.
(a) Where a nonresidential use or a mixed residential/
nonresidential use abuts a strictly residential use, such
nonresidential or mixed use shall maintain a Class E buffer.
(b) No buffer shall be required where two strictly nonresidential
uses abut.
(c) Where a nonresidential use or a mixed residential/
nonresidential use abuts a public street, not including an alley,
the nonresidential or mixed residential/nonresidential use shall
maintain a Class A buffer, unless such street trees already
exist.
(d) The required intervals between plants shall be an average,
without requiring plants to be planted at very specific
intervals. Within the TC - Town Center Overlay District, buffer
classes shall be as follows:
Buffer Class Requirements
A 1 canopy tree per 40 feet of boundary
E Within a 1-foot wide buffer yard: 1 evergreen
tree per 12 feet and 1 flowering tree per 60
feet of boundary
(5) Parking: The following shall apply within the TC Overlay District:
(a) The following number of off-street parking spaces shall be
required for uses within the C-2 portion of the TC District for
the uses listed below. The parking requirements for any use not
listed below and for any other portion of the TC District shall
remain in accordance with § 186-61.
Use
Number of Off-Street
Spaces Required
All residential or mixed use
structures containing 4
dwelling units or fewer
1 per dwelling unit of 2
bedrooms or 2 per dwelling
unit of 3 bedrooms or more
All residential or mixed use
structures containing 5
dwelling units or more
1.5 per dwelling unit
Office or clinic, medical 1 per 500 square feet of or
clinic total floor area
Office, business or
professional
1 per 500 square feet of total
floor area
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:744
Use
Number of Off-Street
Spaces Required
Retail shop
Service business
1 per 500 square feet of total
floor area
Eating place (without drivethrough
service)
1 per 500 square feet of total
floor area or 1 per every 6
seats, whichever is greater
Entertainment and
recreational facility, indoor,
nongovernmental
1 per 75 square feet of total
floor area or 1 per 6 seats,
whichever is greater
Bank or savings and loan
association
1 per 500 square feet of total
floor area
Private club or lodge 1 per 7 members or 1 per 100
feet of total floor area,
whichever is greater
* In mixed-use structures, parking requirements are based
on the number of dwelling units only and not combined
with nonresidential use requirements.
(b) Within the C-2 or I-2 portions of the TC District, where two or
more business uses on two or more adjoining lots provide for
parking in a coordinated, shared and common parking area,
each such business use shall be eligible to reduce the required
number of parking spaces by 10%.
(c) Within the TC Overlay District, all off-street parking areas
containing parking for three or more vehicles shall include
parking stalls that result in a rectangular space nine feet wide
and 18 feet long for all nonparallel parking spaces. The stall
size for parallel spaces and the minimum aisle widths shall
remain the same as would apply in other districts of the
Borough.
(d) All off-street parking areas located in the TC Overlay District
shall be exempt from the provisions of § 186-70J requiring a
twelve-foot planting strip. Instead, a five-foot buffer strip shall
be required between the ultimate right-of-way and all parking
spaces.
(e) Nonconforming parking situations within the TC Overlay
District.
[1] Where an existing lot and an existing building in the Town
Center District does not allow room for any additional offstreet
parking spaces, the requirements for numbers of
off-street parking spaces for commercial uses within such
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:745
building shall not apply beyond what spaces can be
physically accommodated on such lot.
[2] However, the development of any additional dwelling units
or additional commercial building space beyond what
existed at the time of this article and beyond what may
lawfully be rebuilt under the nonconforming provisions of
§ 180-205(6), shall only be permitted if the use meets all of
the applicable parking requirements for the total number
of spaces for all of the existing and proposed uses.
(6) Rebuilding of nonconformities: Structures within the TC Overlay
District damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural causes may
be rebuilt, reconstructed, repaired or used for the same
nonconforming use, provided that:
(a) Each measurement of nonconformity shall not be increased or
made more severe than the measurement of that particular
nonconformity that existed prior to the damage or destruction,
except as provided in §§ 186-84 to 186-86.
(b) Reconstruction shall begin within three years from the date of
damage and shall be carried on without interruption.
(7) Signs: The report entitled "Sign Guidelines for Perkasie," which
hereby is incorporated into this section, provides voluntary
guidelines for the erection and maintenance of signs in the TC -
Town Center Overlay District.
K. FP Flood District: The purpose of this district is to prevent the loss of
property and life, to prevent the creation of health and safety hazards,
to prevent the disruption of commerce and governmental services and
to render unnecessary the expenditure of public funds for flood relief
and to prevent the impairment of the tax base by regulating land uses in
the one-hundred-year flood plain. The Flood District is a special zone
which overlies and supercedes rights granted by any provision of
Chapter 186. Refer to Chapter 94, Floodplain Management, in the Code
of the Borough of Perkasie. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985]
L. I-3 Airport Industrial District: The purpose and intent of this district is
to promote and encourage a unified district for airport supportive
commercial uses and other supportive/ancillary services, to capture the
economic benefits of proximity to the Pennridge Airport in a manner
that balances aviation safety with land uses that provide a transitional
buffer of intensity to surrounding areas. The purpose is to establish a
campus-like setting for a mix of light industrial, manufacturing and
office uses, with support retail, service business and related
establishments and uses which are planned for and developed as a
cohesive district, where access, infrastructure, and other
improvements are coordinated by integrating uses on one or more lots.
[Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 998]
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:746
(1) Uses permitted. A building may be erected or altered to be used,
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following uses and no other, provided that every use shall
comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter, including
yards, lot area, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surface, buffers, and off-street parking.
(a) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted,
provided the requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met:
A(1) Farming
A(2) Forestry/timber harvesting
C(4) Community garage or parking area (for
nonresidential use)
C(5) Day care
C(12) Recreational facility, governmental
C(13) Nongovernmental recreational facilities
D(1) Office, business or professional
D(2) Office or clinic, medical
E(1) Bank or savings-and-loan association
E(3) Eating place
E(5) Indoor entertainment recreational facilities
E(6) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor,
nongovernmental
E(10) Motel or hotel
E(16) Retail shop
E(17) Service business
E(19) Brewery
E(20) Microbrewery, microwinery, microdistillery
E(21) Brewpub
E(22) Tap room
F(1) Emergency services
F(2) Utility
F(3) Railway or bus station
G(1) Contractor offices and shops
G(4) Manufacturing
G(5) Motor or rail freight terminal
G(6) Printing, publishing, and binding
G(7) Recycling facility
G(8) Research
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:747
G(10) Warehousing and distribution
G(11) Airport services
G(12) Planned industrial development
G(13) Flex tech
(b) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be
permitted by special exception only when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XI and when
all requirements of Article IV, Use Regulations and
Restrictions, are met:
[1] None.
(2) Table of Dimensional Requirements for All Principal Structure(s) or
Use(s).
Minimum lot area One acre
Minimum lot width
Interior 100 feet
Corner 100 feet
Minimum yards (setbacks)
Front 40 feet
Side (each) 20 feet
Rear* 20 feet
Maximum impervious surface 65%, plus an additional 5% for
public improvements, including
but not limited to walking trails,
sidewalks and roads
Maximum building height 45 feet, not to exceed three
stories**
Maximum accessory building
height
25 feet
Buffering See § 186-54***
NOTES:
* For rear yards adjacent to the airport, no rear yard
standards are applicable when direct access to the airport
is proposed for the building.
** Subject to compliance with Article XIII, Airport Hazard
Regulations, and § 186-42.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:748
NOTES:
*** No matter the adjacent uses, a fifty-foot front yard setback
and fifty-foot buffer is required for uses abutting to the rear
of any parcels containing residential homes that front on
North Ridge Road. The required front yard setback and
buffer can overlap.
(3) Required parking spaces by use.
(a) Parking in the I-3 District shall meet the requirements in
§ 186-61 et seq., except as set forth below:
[1] Manufacturing: one off-street parking space for every
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[2] Research: one off-street parking space for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
[3] Warehouse: one off-street parking space for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Borough Council may, in its sole discretion and as a part of the
subdivision/land development approval process, reduce the
required parking based on a parking study prepared by an
appropriate professional. The study shall demonstrate that the
proposed parking supply will be adequate to serve the parking
needs of the proposed use.
(c) Borough Council may, in its sole discretion and as part of the
subdivision/land development approval process, permit shared
parking and/or reserved parking. For properties with
woodlands, and where it is feasible, any reserve parking shall
be located in areas of woodlands in an attempt to protect such
woodlands if additional parking is not required for the users,
unless otherwise directed by Borough Council as part of the
subdivision/land development approval process. If reserved
parking is provided, Borough Council shall have the right to
require the reserved parking to be constructed in the future if
the Zoning Officer confirms the need for the additional
parking.
(4) Additional provisions.
(a) The minimum woodland protection in the I-3 Zoning District is
30%. The Borough Council may, in its sole discretion, as part of
the subdivision/land development approval process, authorize
a further reduction or elimination of the woodland protection
ratio on the property in exchange for the applicant installing a
replacement tree for every tree removed over the permitted
70% disturbance; provided, however, if such replacement trees
cannot be installed on the property, after taking into account
§ 186-20 WATER § 186-20
185:749
the landscaping requirements and other development
requirements in this chapter, the applicant shall be permitted
to make a contribution to the Borough to plant replacement
trees in other places in the Borough, in an amount determined
by Borough Council, as part of the subdivision/land
development approval process.
(b) As part of the development plan, sidewalks and/or trails should
be installed and, where feasible, shall be designed to connect
to the Borough's trail system.
(c) The E(3) eating place and the E(16) retail shop uses shall only
be permitted in the I-3 Zoning District when they are proposed
to be located in a building with other uses (i.e., such use shall
not be conducted in its own freestanding building), and may
not occupy more than 50% of the total building square footage
for buildings of 20,000 square feet or less, 37.5% for buildings
of 20,000 to 40,000 square feet and 25% for buildings greater
than 40,000 square feet.
(d) All buildings shall:
[1] Include common area amenities near the primary entry to
each building that shall include benches, trees and
walkways.
[2] Provide parking, loading and circulation areas planned
and designated as an integral unit in such a manner as to
constitute a safe, efficient and convenient development.
[3] Make provisions for safe and efficient ingress and egress
from and to public streets and highways.
(e) The one-hundred-foot setback provision in § 186-18E(10)(c) for
a motel or hotel shall be reduced down to 40 feet in the I-3
Zoning District if the motel or hotel fronts on a collector or
arterial road.
(f) Nonadjacent parcels, which are included in one land
development application, may be combined together for
purposes for completing any required calculations under the
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 186-20 PERKASIE CODE § 186-20
185:750
ARTICLE VI
Dimensional Regulations
§ 186-21. Property included in required lot and yard measurements.
The lot area and yards required for any new building or use shall not include
any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply with
the requirements of this chapter. No required lot area and yard shall include
any property, the ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter if such property was a part of the area
required for compliance with the dimensional requirements applicable to
the lot from which such transfer was made.
§ 186-22. Yards for multiple nonresidential buildings on one lot.
Where two or more principal buildings for other than residential uses are
proposed to be built upon property in one ownership, the front, side and
rear yards are required only at lot lines abutting other property.
§ 186-23. Compliance to accredited zoning lot requirements.
In addition to other dimensional regulations, a lot or parcel of ground must
meet the requirements for an accredited zoning lot.
§ 186-24. Lot area and lot area per dwelling unit requirements.
Where a minimum lot area is specified, no principal building or use shall be
erected or established on any lot of lesser area, except as may be permitted
in § 186-26.
§ 186-25. Lot width.
Where a minimum lot width is specified, no principal building shall be
erected on any part of a lot which has a width of less than is specified,
except as may be permitted by § 186-26.
§ 186-26. Existing lawful or approved lots.
A. The provisions of §§ 186-24 and 186-25 shall not prevent the
construction of a building, provided that the yard requirements are
observed, on any lot which was lawful when created and which, prior to
the effective date of this chapter, was in separate ownership duly
recorded by plan or deed.
B. This exception shall not apply to any two or more contiguous lots in a
single ownership as of or subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter in any case where a reparceling or replatting could create one
or more lots which would conform to the above provisions, unless said
lots were approved under Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land
Development, but prior to the enactment of this chapter.
§ 186-21 WATER § 186-27
185:751
§ 186-27. Accessory structures in required side and rear yards.
§ 186-27.1. Patios and decks in required side and rear yards.
§ 186-28. Traffic visibility at corners.
A. Required side and rear yards may be occupied by an accessory
residential garage for uses normally associated with residential garage
use and other permitted accessory buildings, structures or use,
provided that such accessory buildings, structures or use shall be
situated not less than five feet from any lot line, that such accessory
buildings, structures or use shall be at least five feet from the principal
building and that such accessory buildings, structures or use shall not
exceed 15 feet in height, except that swimming pools shall be located at
least 15 feet from the principal building and they shall not encroach
into the required side yards.
B. A garage constructed as a structural part of a dwelling may extend into
a required side yard for a distance not exceeding four feet, provided
that it does not exceed 15 feet in height and does not extend nearer any
side or rear lot line than five feet.
C. An accessory structure shall not be located between the front yard
setback line and the front facade of a house.
D. A nonresidential accessory garage or indoor storage facility shall meet
the minimum required setbacks for the principal nonresidential use in
the subject zoning district.
A. Concrete patios and decks may extend into required side and rear yards
for a distance not exceeding 50% of the minimum setback requirement,
but in no case closer than five feet to any lot line.
B. No patio or deck in a required side or rear yard shall be enclosed or
under roof. Any such structure enclosed or under roof is subject to the
requirements of Article V, Zoning Districts.
A. On corner lots in any district, no wall, fence, planting or other structure
shall be maintained between a plane two feet above the curb level and a
plane seven feet above curb level so as to interfere with traffic visibility
across the corner within that part of the required front or side yard
which is within a triangle bounded by the street lot line and a straight
line drawn between points on each such lot line 25 feet from the
intersection of said lot lines or extension thereof.
B. At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or
road, a clear-sight triangle of 10 feet, measured from the point of
intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway, shall be
maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions shall
be limited to a height of not more than two feet above the street grade.
§ 186-27 PERKASIE CODE § 186-29
185:752
§ 186-29. Front and side yards on corner lots.
On a corner lot, the street side shall equal the required front yard for lots
facing that street.
§ 186-30. Front yards.
Where a minimum depth of front yard is specified in Article V, Zoning
Districts, an open space of at least the specified depth shall be provided
between the street line or lines and the nearest point of any building or
structure, except as may be permitted hereafter.
§ 186-31. Projections into front yards.
§ 186-32. Fences, walls and steps in front yards.
Subject to § 186-28, the provisions of § 186-30 shall not apply to front
fences, hedges or walls less than seven feet high above the natural grade in
the required front yard, nor to steps or stoops.
§ 186-33. Accessory uses in front yards.
Subject to § 186-28, the front yard requirements of Article V, Zoning
Districts, shall not apply to accessory signs and off-street parking facilities,
except that said parking facilities shall be located a minimum of five feet
from any lot line.
§ 186-34. Front yard reduction to conform to neighboring lots.
When there is an existing building on each of two lots adjacent on either
side to a lot on which a proposed building is to be erected, where both
such existing buildings have an alignment nearer to the street than the
required front depth elsewhere specified in this chapter and when both such
existing buildings are within 100 feet of the proposed building, the average
of the existing front yard depths of such adjacent lots shall be the minimum
required front yard depth of the lot on which the proposed building is to be
erected.
§ 186-35. Conformity to side yard requirements.
Where a minimum width of side yard is specified in Article V, Zoning
Districts, no building or structure shall be erected within the specified
distance from either side lot line, except as permitted in § 186-27.
A. Ground-story bays and porches not over half the length of the front wall
of a dwelling may project into any front yard 3 1/2 feet.
B. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills and ornamental features may project not
more than one foot and cornices and gutters not more than two feet
over a required front yard.
§ 186-29 WATER § 186-36
185:753
§ 186-36. Projections into side yards.
Bays, balconies, chimneys, flues and fire escapes may project into a
required side yard not more than 1/3 of their width and not more than four
feet in any case. Ground-story bays and porches not over 1/2 the length of
the side wall may project into any side yard 3 1/2 feet.
§ 186-37. Fences, walls and steps in side yards.
Subject to § 186-28, the provisions of Article V, Zoning Districts, shall not
apply to fences, hedges or walls not over seven feet high above the natural
grade, nor to steps or stoops.
§ 186-38. Rear yards.
§ 186-39. Conformity to building height maximums.
No building shall exceed the maximum height of buildings specified in
Article V, Zoning Districts, except as specified in § 186-42.
§ 186-40. Measurement of building height.
Height shall be measured from the mean elevation of the proposed finished
grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat
roofs, to the decklines of mansard roofs and to the mean height between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
§ 186-41. Building height for accessory structure or use.
No accessory building, structure or use shall exceed 15 feet in height.
§ 186-42. Structures excepted from building height limits.
A. No building or structure shall be built within the minimum depth from
the rear lot line specified in Article V, Zoning Districts, except as
permitted in § 186-27.
B. In the case of a triangular lot with no rear lot line, the distance between
any point on the building and corner of the lot farthest from the front lot
line shall be at least twice the minimum rear yard depth specified in
Article V, Zoning Districts.
A. The height limitations specified for each district in this chapter shall not
apply to the following: farm buildings, church spires, belfries, chimneys
or other structures normally built above the roof and not devoted to
human occupancy. Such structures, however, shall be erected only to
such heights and of such areas as are necessary to accomplish the
purpose they are normally intended to serve.
B. The height limitations specified for each district in this chapter shall not
apply to telecommunications, including facilities such as a tower or
§ 186-36 PERKASIE CODE § 186-42
185:754
§ 186-43. Awning or canopy.
§ 186-44. (Reserved)
§ 186-45. Future right-of-way widths.
antenna, which shall meet the regulations for these uses as set forth in
Article V, Zoning Districts.
A. Design and construction of awnings and canopies. All fixed awnings,
canopies and similar structures shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind or other lateral loads and live loads with due allowance
for shape, open construction and similar features that relieve the
pressures or loads. Structural members shall be protected to prevent
deterioration.
B. All awnings and canopies shall be constructed of durable, flameresistant
material. Awnings and canopies shall be attached to the
building at the inner end.
C. Awnings and canopies and similar structures shall not be constructed in
the public right-of-way unless an easement is obtained from the
appropriate governmental entity.
D. The clearance between the covering and the ground surface shall not
be less than seven feet.
A. Minimum right-of-way widths are established for those roads wherein
the existing legal right-of-way is less than that indicated for the
particular class of road.
B. The future rights-of-way shall be measured from the center line of the
existing road. The attached Street Classification Map shows the
classification for each road. The Street Classification Map can be found
at the end of this chapter (titled Borough Street Map).201
C. Streets are classified as follows:
(1) Arterial highways: designed for large volumes and high-speed
traffic, with access to abutting properties restricted.
(2) Collector street: designed to carry a moderate volume of fastmoving
traffic from primary and secondary streets to arterial
streets, with access to abutting properties restricted.
(3) Primary street: designed to provide access to abutting properties
and carry traffic from secondary streets to collector streets.
(4) Secondary street: designed primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
201. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an appendix to this chapter.
§ 186-42 WATER § 186-45
185:755
(5) Marginal access street: is a service street which is parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial or collector street and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D. Widths and standards.
Street Classification
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Arterial 100
Collector 80
Primary 60
Secondary 50
Marginal access 30
§ 186-45 PERKASIE CODE § 186-45
185:756
ARTICLE VII
General Performance Standards
§ 186-46. Compliance required.
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the following performance standards.
§ 186-47. Noise.
A. The sound level of any operation (other than the operation of motor
vehicles or other transportation facilities, operations involved in the
construction or demolition of structures, emergency alarm signals or
time signals) shall not exceed the decibel levels in the designated
octave bands and center frequency as stated below. The sound pressure
level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave band
analyzer that conforms to specifications published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc. [American National Standard
Specification for Sound Level Meters, S1. 4-1971, American National
Standards Institute, Inc., New York and the American Standard
Specification for Octave, Half-Octave and Third-Octave Band Filter
Sets, S1. 11-1966 (R 1971), American Standards Association, Inc., New
York, New York], shall be used. Such levels shall be measured at the
property boundary of the sound source.
B. The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for smooth and
continuous noise shall be as follows (all of the decibel levels stated
below shall apply in each case):
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Center
Frequency
Maximum
Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(A-weighted decibelsdBA)
10 to 599 63 Hz 50
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
600 to 2,399 1,000 Hz 38
2,000 Hz
2,400 to 4,799 4,000 Hz 35
8,000 Hz 32
C. If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is radiated during sleeping
hours (between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.), one or more of
the corrections below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the
decibel levels given in Subsection B above:
§ 186-46 WATER § 186-47
185:757
§ 186-48. Smoke.
No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of visible gray
opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published by
the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart may be emitted for not more
than four minutes in any thirty-minute period.
§ 186-49. Fumes, gases and emission of damaging particulate
matter.
§ 186-50. Heat.
There shall be no transmission of heat or heated air in quantities discernible
above ambient levels at the lot line without instruments by a healthy
observer such as the Zoning Officer or a designee. This requirement applies
to all land uses and activities, except that this standard shall not apply to
heat created during the construction of the use on the subject property, or
by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations.
Type of Operation or Character of
Noise
Correction in A-weighted
Decibels
(dBA)
Noise occurring between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
-3
Noise occurring less than 5% of any
1-hour period
+5
Noise being of periodic character
(hum, scream, etc.), or being of
impulsive character (hammering, etc.).
In the case of impulsive noise,
correction shall apply only to the
average pressure during an impulse,
and impulse peaks shall not exceed
the basic standards given above
-5
A. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can
cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation or to other
forms of property or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons
or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the
emission is herewith prohibited.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point
beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission. For measurement
of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard
correction shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500° F. and 50%
excess air in stack at full load.
§ 186-47 PERKASIE CODE § 186-51
185:758
§ 186-51. Odorous emissions.
No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities
as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The guide for
determining such quantities of offensive odors shall be the 50 Percent
Response Level of Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air), Research on Chemical
Odors: Part I - Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals, October
1968, Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
§ 186-52. Outdoor lighting.
A. General standards: Outdoor lighting for all residential and
nonresidential uses shall be designed to minimize undesirable offpremises
effects.
(1) No use shall produce glare off the premises by illumination
originating on the premises. Glare is defined as the sensation
produced by light within the visual field that is sufficiently greater
than the light to which the eyes are adapted and which causes
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance or visibility,
for any period of time, no matter how short in duration.
(2) No bare or direct light source shall be visible beyond the lot lines.
All lights shall have a full cutoff fixture, which is defined as a light
fixture with light distribution pattern that results in no light being
projected at or above a natural plane located at the bottom of the
fixture. This applies to all pole-mounted lights, building-mounted
lights, sign lights, walkway lights, and any other type of
illumination. No light shall shine directly into windows or onto
streets and driveways off the premises. These standards shall not
apply to holiday lights that are temporarily displayed during
holiday seasons.
(3) Outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior to and operable on
the effective date of this amendment to the zoning chapter are
exempt from all requirements of this chapter. There shall be no
change in use or lamp type, or any replacement (except for sametype
and same-output lamp replacement) or structural alteration
made, without conforming to all applicable requirements of this
chapter. Further, if the property is abandoned, or if there is a
change in use or ownership of the property, the provisions of this
chapter will apply when the abandonment ceases or the new use or
ownership commences.
B. Types of pole-mounted lights permitted: Lighting shall be provided by
fixtures with a height not more than 18 feet above finished grade in all
zoning districts. Height shall be measured from the ground to the
uppermost point of the light fixture. Light fixtures shall be fully shielded
fixtures where the light source is not visible from the property line.
Borough Council may consider other type of light fixtures, provided that
the intent of this chapter is met.
§ 186-51 WATER § 186-52
185:759
§ 186-53. Vibrations.
No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable beyond its
lot lines without the aid of instruments, with the exception of that vibration
produced as a result of construction activity.
§ 186-54. Buffering.
C. Lighting plan required: Any outdoor lighting such as pole-mounted,
building, sign, canopy, or sidewalk illumination, and driveway lights,
shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow
determination of the effects to adjacent properties, traffic safety, and
overhead sky glow.
D. Light at the property line: Illumination from light originating on the site
shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at the lot line. Overhead light pollution
caused by unshielded or bright lights shall not be permitted.
E. Maximum lighting levels: The maximum lighting level at areas within
each Borough property shall not exceed five footcandles at building
entrances and three footcandles elsewhere on the lot.
A. Buffering serves to soften the outline of buildings, to screen glare and
noise and to create a visual and/or physical barrier between conflicting
land uses. Except in cases of lot line adjustments, buffer yards are
required between various land uses and along existing and proposed
streets. The extent of buffering required shall be determined by the
type of use proposed and the adjacent uses or streets surrounding the
proposed development. The impact of the proposed use on adjoining
properties is the basis for establishing buffer yard standards.
(1) The standards of this section are minimum design requirements.
The Borough reserves the right to request that the minimum
requirements listed herein be exceeded if conditions so warrant. All
landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect familiar
with this section to promote the proper use and arrangement of
plant materials.
B. To determine the required buffer yard and planting schedule, a threestep
procedure shall be followed:
(1) Step 1: site analysis and determination of buffer yard class.
(2) Step 2: selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(3) Step 3: selection of the plant materials from the plant materials list.
C. Step 1: site analysis and determination of buffer yard class.
(1) For each property boundary, the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land use or road classification. Land use information shall
be determined by an on-site survey, and this chapter shall be
§ 186-52 PERKASIE CODE § 186-54
185:760
utilized to determine road classifications. Table 1 below specifies
the buffer yard class for each boundary.202
(2) The applicant shall match his proposed land use with the
corresponding adjacent land use or road classification for each
property boundary. The letter indicates the buffer yard class.
(3) If other uses are determined to be potential conflicts or where
unique site conditions warrant, the applicant shall provide a buffer
class as specified by Borough Council, upon recommendation by
the Borough Planning Commission.
D. Step 2: selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(1) After determining the buffer class, the applicant shall select a
planting option from Table 2 to meet the buffer yard requirement
for each boundary. The Borough may consider an alternate planting
option which shall have a screening capability equal to or greater
than any of the available options.
(2) Table 2: Planting options. The options below indicate the amount of
plant material that is required per linear foot of property line.
Plantings aligned on property or right-of-way boundaries shall be
located one foot to five feet inside of the boundary line. Plantings
are not required to be aligned on property or right-of-way
boundaries and may be sited on any portion of the buffer yard for
buffering purposes. The Borough may permit staggering or
grouping of plant materials if a satisfactory buffer is achieved.
Class Option
A Within a 10-foot buffer yard: 1 canopy tree per 40 feet of
boundary; or 1 flowering tree per 30 feet of boundary.
B Within a 15-foot buffer yard: 1 canopy tree per 40 feet and
1 flowering tree per 60 feet of boundary; or 1 canopy tree
per 40 feet and 1 evergreen tree per 30 feet; or a 4-foot
high opaque fence and 1 flowering tree per 40 feet.
C Within a 20-foot buffer yard: 1 evergreen tree per 20 feet
and 1 flowering tree per 60 feet of boundary; or a hedge
or large shrub (4 foot centers) along property boundary
and 1 evergreen tree per 25 feet of boundary; or an
opaque fence 4 feet high and 1 flowering tree per 40 feet
and 1 shrub per 20 feet.
D Within a 50-foot buffer yard: 2 staggered rows of
evergreen trees spaced no more than 20 feet apart; or a
combination of trees and shrubs which achieve a similar
level of vegetative density; or an opaque fence 6 feet high
and 1 canopy tree per 40 feet.
202. Editor's Note: Said table is included is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 186-54 WATER § 186-54
185:761
E. Step 3: selection of plant materials from the plant materials list.
(1) Each planting option may utilize any of the plant materials outlined
in Table 3. Minimum plant size, given either in height or caliper, is
indicated on this table. The Borough may permit other planting
types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight or
disease, and are of the same general character and growth habit as
those listed in Table 3. All planting material shall meet the
standards of American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA).
(2) Where vegetation, topography, or man-made structures exist which
can meet the objectives of the buffer requirements, they may be
preserved and may be used to meet the buffer and planting
requirements. Quantities, size, species, and locations of existing
plant materials and other features must be shown on plans and
verified by the Borough. Where the Borough allows existing
vegetation and features to be counted toward meeting the buffer
requirements of this chapter, the vegetation or features shall not be
removed and shall be protected by recorded plan note to insure
that it remains as a part of the subdivision or land development.
(3) Table 3: Plant Materials List.
(a) Canopy trees, including columnar trees (minimum 2 1/2 inch
caliper).
Acer rubrum (red maple)
Acer saccharum (sugar maple)
Cercidiphyllum japonica (katsura tree)
Gleditsia triacanthos 'Inermis' (thornless honeylocust)
Liquidambar styraciflua (sweetgum)
Phellodendron amurense (Amur cork tree)
Platanus acerifolia (London planetree)
Quercus alba (white oak)
Quercus rubra (red oak)
Quercus coccinea (scarlet oak)
Quercus palustris (pin oak)
Sophora japonica (Japanese pagodatree)
Tilia-linden (all species hardy to the area)
Zelkova serrata (Japanese zelkova)
Columnar Trees
Acer rubrum 'Bowhall' (Bowhall red maple)
Acer rubrum 'Karpick' (Karpick red maple)
Acer saccharum 'Goldspire' (Goldspire sugar maple)
§ 186-54 PERKASIE CODE § 186-54
185:762
Acer x freemanii 'Jaffersred' (Autumn Blaze freeman maple)
Acer x freemanii 'Armstrong' (Armstrong freeman maple)
Carpinus betulus 'Fastigiata' (fastigate European hornbeam)
Ginkgo biloba; male only (Ginkgo; 'Princeton Sentry' or other
cultivars)
Quercus robur 'Fastigiata" (columnar English oak)
Quercus robur 'Skyrocket' (skyrocket English oak)
Taxodium distichum (bald cypress)
(b) Flowering trees (minimum 8 feet high).
Amelanchier canadensis (shadblow serviceberry)
Cornus florida (flowering dogwood)
Cornus kousa (kousa dogwood)
Cornus mas (cornelian cherry dogwood)
Crataegus species (hawthorn)
Koelreuteria paniculata (goldenrain tree)
Laburnum vossi (golden chain tree)
Magnolia soulangiana (saucer magnolia)
Magnolia virginiana (sweetbay magnolia)
Malus species (disease resistant)
Malus baccata 'Jackii' (Siberian crabapple)
Malus floribunda (Japanese flowering crabapple)
Oxydendrum arboreum (sourwood)
Prunus kwanzan (Kwanzan cherry)
Prunus subhirtella 'Pendula' (weeping Japanese cherry)
(c) Evergreens (minimum 5 feet high).
Ilex opaca (American holly)
Picea abies (Norway spruce)
Picea omorika (Serbian spruce)
Picea pungens (Colorado spruce)
Pinus strobus (white pine)
Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas fir)
Tsuga canadensis (Canada hemlock)
x Cupressocyparis leylandii (Leyland Cypress)
(d) Deciduous shrubs (30-inch minimum height, 24-inch minimum
spread).
§ 186-54 WATER § 186-54
185:763
Cotoneaster species
Daphne species
Azalea species (deciduous)
Deutzia species
Eleagnus species
Enkianthus species
Erica species
Forsythia species
Hamamelis vernalis (Vernal witch hazel)
Hamamelis virginiana (Common witch hazel)
Ilex verticillata (winterberry holly and other deciduous
hollies)
Potentilla species
Pyracantha species
Viburnum species
(e) Evergreen shrubs (24-inch minimum height, 18-inch minimum
spread).
Azalea species (evergreen)
Rhododendron species (evergreen)
Ilex crenata (Japanese holly species and other evergreen
shrub hollies)
Juniper species
Leucothoe species
Taxus species (Yew)
Vaccinium species
(4) General requirements.
(a) Location of buffer yard.
[1] The buffer yard shall be measured from the property line
or the near street line where the street serves as a
property line.
[2] The buffer yard may overlap the required front, side, or
rear yards and, in case of conflict, the larger yard
requirements shall apply. The lot shall provide a minimum
of 10 feet of usable, nonbuffer yard between the rear of the
principal structure and the required buffer yard setback
line.
§ 186-54 PERKASIE CODE § 186-54
185:764
[3] The buffer yard may be part of the lot area assigned to a
dwelling unit. A deed restriction conforming to the
dimensions of the buffer yard shall be placed on the lot.
[4] All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of all
debris, rubbish, and weeds.
[5] No structure, play structure, driveway, sign, stormwater
detention facility, manufacturing or processing activity,
commercial activity, parking, storage or display of
materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard, except that
a driveway may cross a required buffer area in order to
connect the street with a parking area or driveway lying
outside the buffer area. Fences are permitted when part of
a required buffer yard as specified in this section.
[6] Required plant materials shall be permanently maintained
and any plant material which dies shall be replaced.
(b) Planting requirements near overhead utility lines. Where trees
are to be planted near overhead power lines, the following
requirements shall be met:
[1] If trees are to be planted within 15 feet of a utility pole or
line, measured along the ground from the base of the pole,
only trees which grow no taller than 25 feet shall be
planted.
[2] If trees are to be planted within 15 feet to 25 feet of a
utility pole or line, measured along the ground from the
base of the pole, only trees which grow no taller than 40
feet shall be planted.
(c) Guarantee: All plant material shall be guaranteed for 18
months from the day of final approval of the landscape
installation by the Borough in accordance with the provisions
of the Borough's developer's agreements, escrow agreements,
and maintenance agreements. Any plant material 25% or more
of which is dead shall be considered dead. A tree shall be
considered dead when the main leader has died or 25% or
more of the crown is dead. Any dead plant material shall be
replaced and installed according to the approved planting
practices.
(d) Berming shall be provided where the Borough determines that,
due to topography or other factors, the buffer classes in Table
1203 do not provide an adequate buffer between adjoining
incompatible uses.
203. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 186-54 WATER § 186-54
185:765
§ 186-55. Transportation impact study.
(e) In general, to prevent the planting of a monoculture, at least
two different genus of each type of plant should be specified.
F. Supplemental regulations. The minimum buffer requirement to be
provided by either Open Space Preservation Performance Subdivision 1
or Open Space Preservation Performance Subdivision II shall be a Class
C twenty-foot buffer yard. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of
this chapter, the required buffer yard for an Open Space Preservation
Performance Subdivision I and Open Space Preservation Performance
Subdivision II may be permitted within the rear or side yards of
individual lots and may be included in the area of required open space.
Any portion of the required buffer yard located on an individual lot shall
be subject to a restriction prohibiting disturbance of or construction
within the buffer yard. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
A. Requirement for transportation impact study. A transportation impact
study shall be required for all rezoning applications and in all
applications for a zoning variance, special exception and conditional
use to enable the Borough and/or the Zoning Hearing Board to assess
the impact of a proposed rezoning or zoning application on the local
transportation systems, both highways and public transportation. The
purpose of the study is to ensure that the proposed rezoning or zoning
application does not adversely affect the transportation network and to
identify any traffic problems that may be created in the existing
highway network as a result of the rezoning or zoning relief and to
delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements
to be incorporated into the proposed rezoning or zoning relief or to the
highway and/or public transportation systems within the designated
study area. The study shall assist in the protection of air quality, the
conservation of energy and the encouragement of public transportation
use.
B. The transportation impact study shall be performed in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Chapter 164, Article III, § 164-41.2, titled,
"Transportation impact study."
C. The transportation impact study shall be submitted as part of all
rezoning applications and zoning applications that have the potential of
generating 250 or more trips per day. Where doubt exists as to the need
for the study, the applicant shall seek guidance from the Borough
Engineer or his/her designee. The application shall not be considered
complete until the transportation impact study is submitted to the
Borough in accordance with the provisions of this section and
§ 164-41.2. Council may, at its discretion, require any other application
to be accompanied by a transportation impact study, provided that
Council notifies the applicant immediately following Council's first
meeting to consider the proposal. Such notification shall specify the
reason for the requirement, citing the proposal's particular location or
existing problems or type of use (e.g., generation of heavy truck traffic).
§ 186-54 PERKASIE CODE § 186-55
185:766
§ 186-56. Site capacity calculation.
Each site is unique. It has physical features which are rarely precisely
duplicated on another site. Portions of some sites may not be usable, and
a minimum amount of buildable land should be retained for recreation.
The purpose of this section is to determine the appropriate intensity of use
to which a specific tract may be put. For each tract that is five acres or
larger in R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts, the developer shall include
the following calculation with the initial plan submission.
D. Submission procedures and implementation.
(1) Time of submission. The transportation impact study shall be
submitted to the Borough of Perkasie or the Zoning Hearing Board
with the rezoning or zoning application. In the case of rezoning
applications, a copy of the study shall also be submitted to the
Bucks County Planning Commission.
(2) Implementation. The Perkasie Borough Planning Commission, the
Bucks County Planning Commission (in the case of rezoning
applications only), the Perkasie Borough Engineer and the Perkasie
Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board shall review the
transportation impact study to analyze its adequacy in identifying
solutions to traffic problems that may occur either totally, or in part
as a result of the application. Transportation improvements
required in order to eliminate deficient conditions may be required.
These necessary improvements may be attached to the conditions
of approval set forth by the Borough or the Zoning Hearing Board
prior to approval.
A. Base site area: Certain portions of tract may not be usable for the
activities proposed for the site; these shall therefore be subtracted from
the site area to determine base site area.
(1) Site area as determined by actual on-site survey (acres).
(2) Subtract: land within ultimate right-of-way of existing roads or
utility rights-of-way or easements (acres).
(3) Subtract: land which is not contiguous, i.e., a separate parcel which
does not abut or adjoin nor share common boundaries with the rest
of the development, and/or land which is cut off from the main
parcel by a road, railroad, existing land use or major stream so as
to serve as a major barrier to common use or so that is isolated and
unavailable for building purposes (acres).
(4) Subtract: land which in a previously approved subdivision was
reserved for resource reasons, such as flooding or recreation
(acres).
(5) Subtract: land used or zoned for another use, i.e., land which is
used or to be used for commercial or industrial uses in a residential
§ 186-55 WATER § 186-56
185:767
development, or land in a different zoning district than the primary
use (acres).
(6) Equals base site area (acres).
B. Resource protection land: All land within the base site area shall be
mapped and measured for the purpose of determining the amount of
open space needed to protect it.
(1) The resource protection land equals, for each resource, the acres of
land in the resource multiplied by the open space ratio for that
resource. The open space ratios are as follows: [Amended
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 985]
Resources Open Space Ratio
Floodplain district 1.00
Soils on floodplain 1.00
Watercourses, waters of the
commonwealth
1.00
Steep slope (25% or more) 0.85
Steep slope (15% to 25%) 0.70
Steep slope (8% to 15%) 0.60
Wetlands 1.00
Wetland buffer 0.80
Woodlands
Environmentally sensitive 0.80
Other 0.50
(2) The total land with resource restrictions equals the total of all the
acres of land in each resource.
(3) The total resource protection land equals the total of all the lands
resulting from the calculation in § 186-56B(1).
C. Determination of site capacity: Individual site capacity is based on net
buildable site area. For single-family cluster or performance standard
subdivisions, the number of allowable dwelling units is determined by
multiplying the density by net buildable site area. The calculations are
as follows:
(1) The base site area (acres) multiplied by the open space ratio [see
§ 186-20A(3), 186-20B(4), and 186-20B(5)] equals the minimum
required open space.
(2) The base site area (acres) minus the total resource protection land
or minimum required open space, whichever is greater (acres)
equals the net buildable site area.
§ 186-56 PERKASIE CODE § 186-56
185:768
§ 186-57. Environmental performance standards.
(3) The net buildable site area (acres) multiplied by the density [see
§ 186-20A(3), § 186-20B(4), and § 186-20B(5)] equals the number of
dwelling units (do not round up).
A. Floodplains: All such lands shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads and utilities may cross the floodplain where design
approval is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and where other applicable ordinances,
regulations and statutes are complied with.
B. Soils on floodplain: All such land shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads may cross these soils where design approval is
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and that recreational, conservation or agricultural open
space uses shall be permitted. Where floodplains are defined, they shall
be used rather than soils on floodplain. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord.
No. 985]
C. Steep slopes: In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) No more than 40% of steep slopes (8% to 15%) shall be altered,
regraded, cleared or built upon. The remaining 60% shall
permanently remain undisturbed in existing natural cover and as
permanent open space.
(2) No more than 30% of steep slopes (15% to 25%) shall be altered,
regraded, cleared, or built upon. The remaining 70% shall
permanently remain in existing natural cover and as permanent
open space.
(3) No more than 15% of steep slopes (25% or more) shall be altered,
regraded, cleared, or built upon. The remaining 85% shall
permanently remain in existing natural cover and as permanent
open space.
D. Watercourses, waters of the commonwealth: These areas shall be left as
permanent open space and free flowing. Such areas shall not be
altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted or built upon, unless design
approval is obtained from the Borough and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as required.
E. Wetlands.
(1) All such lands shall remain as permanent open space. No
development, grading, filling, piping, diverting, or disturbance of
any kind shall be permitted in wetlands except that bridges, roads,
and utilities may cross wetlands where design approval is obtained
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and the United States Army Corps of Engineers or their successor
§ 186-56 WATER § 186-57
185:769
§ 186-58. Open space standards. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 978]
On any site developed for an Open Space Preservation Performance
Subdivision I or Open Space Preservation Performance Subdivision II
development, naturalized stormwater management facilities in accordance
agencies, and where other applicable ordinances, regulations and
statutes are complied with.
(2) All wetland determinations shall be performed by the Army Corp of
Engineers or by an independent party certified by the Army Corp of
Engineers to be expert in wetland delineations, in which case a
copy of such certification shall be provided with the subdivision or
land development application and all wetland delineations shall be
attested to and sealed.
(3) At the time of application, the applicant shall file for review a
wetlands report that shall identify and delineate all wetlands on the
plan set in sufficient detail as to make on-site verification possible.
All wetland areas shall be clearly staked at the time of application
and throughout the review period to allow the entire perimeter of
the wetland area(s) to be located.
F. Wetlands buffer: In addition to the wetlands preservation, a buffer of
100 feet shall be maintained from the limits of any wetland as
delineated through the requirements in § 186-57E, in order to minimize
hydrologic modifications and potential for pollution. Within the buffer
area, an eighty-percent existing natural cover must be undisturbed and
maintained as permanent open space. The remaining 20% of the buffer
area may be disturbed. Any permanent wetland crossing in the buffer
area shall be part of the twenty-percent maximum allowable
encroachment.
G. Woodlands: In areas of woodlands, the following standards shall apply:
(1) No more than 20% of a woodland area associated with another
environmentally sensitive resource shall be altered, regraded,
cleared, or built upon. The remaining 80% shall permanently
remain in existing natural cover. For the purposes of this section
(§ 186-57G), an environmentally sensitive resource shall include
floodplains, soils on floodplain, steep slopes (15% and greater),
wetlands, and wetland buffers. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
985]
(2) No more than 50% of a woodland area not associated with another
environmentally sensitive resource shall be altered, regraded,
cleared or built upon. The remaining 50% shall permanently
remain in existing natural cover.
H. Tree protection zone: Such areas shall be 100% open space. No land
within the tree protection zone shall be altered, regarded, compacted,
or built upon or used for storage or parking of vehicles.
§ 186-57 PERKASIE CODE § 186-58
185:770
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection BMP
Manual and approved by the Borough Engineer, shall be permitted in the
required open space. Additional stormwater management facilities,
including retention basins, shall be limited to 20% of the required open
space area on a site, at the discretion of the Borough Engineer.
§ 186-58 WATER § 186-58
185:771

ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 186-59. Trailer storage, parking and placement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store, park or permit to be
placed, stored or parked any recreational vehicle or trailer upon any public
or private land or property within the limits or boundaries of the Borough
of Perkasie, except as follows:
§ 186-60. (Reserved)
§ 186-61. Required parking spaces by use.
A. A maximum of one trailer or recreational vehicle specifically designed
for and used as a vacation travel vehicle or trailer by the owner or
occupant of a lot may be placed, stored or parked on the owner's or
occupant's lot, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The recreational vehicle or trailer shall be stored in a principal or
accessory building constructed or maintained in accordance with
this chapter or shall be stored in the open on that portion of the lot
which may be occupied by an accessory structure as provided in
§ 186-27.
(2) The recreational vehicle or trailer shall not be used more than 15
days per calendar year during such storage for sleeping or living
quarters.
B. Trailers used for offices and/or storage at the site of construction
projects may be parked and used as temporary accessory structures in
accordance with the provisions of § 186-16 hereof.
C. All types of recreational vehicles and trailers may be temporarily
parked within the Borough for a period not exceeding 15 days per
calendar year.
D. All trailers and recreational vehicles authorized to be stored or parked
under the provisions of this article shall continuously bear a current
license issued under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code and shall so be maintained as to be readily capable of being
moved along and across pubic highways in compliance with such code.
A. Where a proposed use contains or includes more than one type of use,
the number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate use.
B. When a use is changed from one category of use to another, the
applicant for a certificate of occupancy shall produce documentation on
the location and number of parking spaces available and shall provide
this documentation to the Borough prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 186-59 WATER § 186-61
185:773
C. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained in accordance with the following provisions for each
building which, after the effective date of this chapter, is erected,
enlarged or altered for use for any of the following purposes in any
district.
(1) Agricultural uses.
(a) Farming: one off-street parking space for each employee.
(b) Forestry/timber harvesting: none.
(2) Residential uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwelling: two off-street parking spaces
for each dwelling unit.
(b) Two-family dwelling (twin or duplex): see § 186-18B(2)(c) for
use regulations and restrictions.
(c) Townhouse: two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling
unit.
(d) Multiplex: see § 186-18B(4)(a) for use regulations and
restrictions.
(e) Multifamily: two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling
unit.
(f) Residential conversion: see § 186-18B(6)(c) for use regulations
and restrictions.
(g) Single-family cluster: two off-street parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
(h) Performance standard subdivision: see § 186-18B(8) for use
regulations and restrictions for parking requirement for the
specific dwelling type(s) proposed.
(i) Mobile home park: see § 186-18B(9)(j) for use regulations and
restrictions.
(j) Housing for elderly: see § 186-18B(10)(b)(2) for use
regulations and restrictions.
(k) Rooming house: one off-street parking space for each three
beds.
(3) Institutional, religious, educational, recreational uses.
(a) Cemetery: none.
(b) Community center: one off-street parking space for every four
seats provided for patron use or at least one off-street parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area used or
§ 186-61 PERKASIE CODE § 186-61
185:774
intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients,
guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of
off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each
full-time employee.
(c) Day-care center: one off-street parking space for each teacher,
administrator, and maintenance employee, plus one space per
six children, disabled, or elderly persons.
(d) Golf course: one off-street parking space per four people of
total capacity.
(e) Hospital: one off-street parking space for each four patient
beds, plus one additional off-street parking space for each staff
and visiting doctor, plus one additional off-street parking space
for each employee on the largest shift.
(f) Library on Borough-owned land: one space per five seats or
one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area where no
seats are provided. The Borough may vary this requirement, in
its discretion, after hearing the evidence and may also reduce
the size of the required parking spaces to allow for compact
cars.
(g) Library or museum, public: one space per five seats or one
space per 250 square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided.
(h) Nursing home: one off-street parking space for each four
patient beds, plus one additional off-street parking space for
each staff and visiting doctor, plus one additional off-street
parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
(i) Private club or lodge: one off-street parking space for every
five members of total capacity or at least one off-street parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area used or
intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients,
guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of
off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each
full-time employee.
(j) Recreational facility, governmental: one off-street parking
space for each five persons of total capacity.
(k) Recreational facility, nongovernmental: one off-street parking
space for each five persons of total capacity or at least one offstreet
parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area
used or intended to be used for service to customers, patrons,
clients, guests, or members, whichever requires the greater
number of off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space
for each full-time employee.
§ 186-61 WATER § 186-61
185:775
(l) Religious place of worship: one off-street parking space for
each four seats provided for patron use or at least one offstreet
parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area
used or intended to be used for service to patrons, guests or
members, whichever requires the greater number of off-street
parking spaces, plus one additional space for each full-time
employee.
(m) School, public or private:
[1] Kindergarten: one off-street parking space for each faculty
member and employee, plus two additional spaces per
classroom.
[2] Kindergarten and elementary school: one off-street
parking space for each faculty member and employee, plus
one space per two classrooms and offices.
[3] Junior high school: one off-street parking space for each
faculty member and employee, plus one space per two
classrooms and offices.
[4] Senior high school: one off-street parking space for each
faculty member and employee, plus one space per 10
students of projected building capacity.
[5] College and junior college: one off-street parking space for
each faculty member and employee, plus one space for
each 10 classroom seats or one off-street parking space for
each 10 auditorium seats, whichever formula will require
the larger number of parking spaces.
(n) School, trade or commercial: one off-street parking space for
every three students, plus one additional space for each
employee.
(4) Office uses.
(a) Office, business or professional: one off-street parking space
for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
space for every two employees.
(b) Office or clinic, medical: one off-street parking space for every
200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space
for each employee.
(c) Veterinary office: one off-street parking space for every 200
square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space for
each employee.
(5) Retail and consumer services uses.
§ 186-61 PERKASIE CODE § 186-61
185:776
(a) Bank or savings and loan association: one off-street parking
space per 300 square feet of gross space used for servicing
customers, plus one space for every two full-time employees.
(b) Bed-and-breakfast: two spaces for the owner/resident, one
space for each guest room, and one space for each two
employees.
(c) Eating place (with or without drive-through service): one offstreet
parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area or
one space for five seats, whichever is greater.
(d) Entertainment, adult uses: one space for every 100 square feet
of floor space and one space for each full-time employee.
(e) Entertainment and recreation facilities, indoor,
nongovernmental: one off-street parking space for each four
seats provided for patron use or at least one off-street parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area used or
intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients,
guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of
off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each
full-time employee.
(f) Entertainment and recreation facilities, outdoor,
nongovernmental: one off-street parking space for every three
persons present when such facilities are filled to capacity.
(g) Funeral home or mortuary: one off-street parking space for
each four seats provided for patron use or at least one offstreet
parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area
used or intended to be used in the operation of the
establishment, whichever requires the greater number of offstreet
parking spaces, plus one additional space for each fulltime
employee.
(h) Kennel: one off-street parking space per four animals at total
capacity, plus one space for each employee.
(i) Mixed use: two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit
created, plus the required number of parking spaces for the
specific nonresidential use(s) proposed.
(j) Motel or hotel: one off-street parking space for each rental
room or suite, plus one additional off-street parking space for
each full-time employee.
(k) Motor vehicle accessories sales: one off-street parking space
for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
space for each full-time employee.
(l) Motor vehicle gasoline station: one off-street parking space for
every 300 square feet of gross floor area or two off-street
§ 186-61 WATER § 186-61
185:777
parking spaces for each service bay, whichever is larger, plus
one space for each full-time employee. Said off-street parking
spaces are not to be a part of nor interfere with the accessways
to the pumps.
(m) Motor vehicle repair garage: one off-street parking space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
space for each full-time employee.
(n) Motor vehicle sales or rental: one off-street parking space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional
space for each full-time employee.
(o) Planned commercial development: 5 1/2 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross leasable floor area.
(p) Retail shop: one off-street parking space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space for every two
full-time employees.
(q) Service business: one off-street parking space for each 300
square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space for
every two full-time employees.
(r) Tavern: one off-street parking space for every two seats
intended for use by patrons, plus one additional space for each
employee.
(6) Utility and public service uses.
(a) Emergency services: three off-street parking spaces for every
four employees/staff on the two major shifts at maximum
employment or four off-street parking spaces for each fire
truck or emergency vehicle where no community room is a part
of the building, whichever requires the greater number of
parking spaces; where a community room is provided, two offstreet
parking spaces for each fire truck or emergency vehicle,
plus one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area.
(b) Utility: two off-street parking spaces.
(c) Railway or bus station: off-street parking spaces as the Zoning
Officer shall determine adequate to serve customers, patrons,
visitors, employees and vehicles normally stored on the
premises.
(d) Telecommunications: None.
(7) Industrial uses.
(a) Contractor offices and shops: one off-street parking space for
each two employees on the largest shift or one off-street
§ 186-61 PERKASIE CODE § 186-61
185:778
parking space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(b) Crafts: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one additional space for each full-time employee.
(c) Lumber yard: three off-street parking spaces for every four
employees on the two major shifts at maximum employment,
but in no case less than one off-street parking space for every
300 square feet of gross floor area.
(d) Manufacturing: three off-street parking spaces for each four
employees on the largest shift or one off-street parking space
for every 250 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater, plus one space for each company vehicle normally
stored on the premises.
(e) Motor freight terminal: off-street parking spaces as the Zoning
Officer shall determine adequate to serve customers,
employees, visitors and vehicles normally parked on the
premises.
(f) Printing, publishing, and binding: three off-street parking
spaces for each four employees on the largest shift or one offstreet
parking space for every 250 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater, plus one space for each company
vehicle normally stored on the premises.
(g) Recycling facility: one off-street parking space for each
employee on the largest shift; one off-street parking space for
each company vehicle normally stored on the premises; plus
adequate spaces for visitors as determined by the Borough.
(h) Resource recovery facility: one off-street parking space for
each employee on the largest shift; one off-street parking space
for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises;
plus adequate spaces for visitors as determined by the
Borough.
(i) Research: three off-street parking spaces for each four
employees on the largest shift or one off-street parking space
for every 250 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater, plus one space for each company vehicle normally
stored on the premises.
(j) Warehouse and distribution: three off-street parking spaces for
each four employees on the largest shift or one off-street
parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater, plus one space for each company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
§ 186-61 WATER § 186-61
185:779
§ 186-62. General parking regulations.
(8) Accessory uses.
(a) Accessory dormitory: one off-street parking space for each
three beds.
(b) Home occupation: an absolute minimum of one off-street
parking space (which may be the same space as serves the
dwelling).
(c) No-impact home-based business: None in addition to required
spaces for principal use.
(d) Roadside stand: adequate number of off-street parking spaces
to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles stopping at
any one time, but in no case less than three such spaces.
A. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this
article so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, provided that
any parking facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the
future be reduced below such requirements.
B. Change in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure
or a change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements according to the standards of § 186-61, the total
additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of that section.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
D. Residential garages excluded. For residential uses, parking spaces
provided within garages shall not be counted toward the off-street
parking requirement.
E. Continuing obligation.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be provided and maintained so
long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent after
their provision, except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution of
floor area, seating area, the number of employees or change in
other factors controlling the regulation of the number of parking
spaces, such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of
this article.
(3) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
§ 186-61 PERKASIE CODE § 186-62
185:780
employees or other persons for whom the facilities are designed to
serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner
as to at no time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
F. Common parking facility. Two or more uses may provide for required
parking in a common parking lot if the total space provided is not less
than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually. However,
the number of spaces required in a common parking facility may be
reduced below this total by special exception under Article XI if it can
be demonstrated to the Zoning Hearing Board that the hours or days of
peak parking needed for the uses are so different that a lower total will
provide adequately for all uses served by the facility.
G. Fractional parking calculation. Where the computation of required
parking spaces shall be in a fractional number, any fraction of the next
highest number shall be counted as one.
H. Location of parking areas. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served or, where this
requirement cannot be met, within 300 feet of the principal use served
and within the same district. The applicant or developer shall provide
proof of the availability of parking spaces which are not needed to meet
the requirements of another use within 300 feet of the premises and
which can be used for parking purposes by the applicant. If spaces are
leased, the Borough shall require proof of the leasing arrangement to
be kept on file. Proof of ongoing leases will be required.
I. Maintenance of parking areas. For parking areas of three or more
vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including
driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other suitable
material and drained to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer to the
extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow
across streets or adjoining property.
J. Reduction of nonresidential parking requirements. In order to prevent
the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than is
actually required to serve the needs of nonresidential uses, Borough
Council, after consulting with the Planning Commission and Borough
Engineer, may permit a conditional reduction of parking space through
either joint use or reservation of land for future parking.
(1) Joint use: The number of spaces required in a common parking
facility may be reduced below this total if it can be demonstrated
that the hours or days of peak parking needed for the uses are
different and that a lower total will provide adequately for uses
served by the parking area. The total number of spaces shall not be
less than 75% of what would be required under strict ordinance
interpretation.
(2) Reservation of land for future parking: The design of the parking
lot, as indicated on the land development plan, must designate
§ 186-62 WATER § 186-62
185:781
§ 186-63. through § 186-69. (Reserved)
§ 186-70. Design standards for parking.
The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street
parking facilities with a capacity of three or more vehicles, built after the
effective date of this chapter.
sufficient space to meet the parking requirements of this chapter.
The plan also shall illustrate the layout for the total number of
parking spaces which must be in compliance with the impervious
surface and yard requirements of this chapter.
(a) The balance of the parking area reserved shall not include
areas for required buffer yards, setbacks, or area which
otherwise would be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the
physical characteristics of the land or other requirements of
this chapter. This parking area which is reserved shall be
landscaped and shall be located so that it can be used for
additional parking spaces if required.
(b) The developer shall enter into a written agreement with
Borough Council that, after one year following the issuing of
the last occupancy permit, the additional parking spaces shall
be provided at the developer's or owner's expense should it be
determined at the sole discretion of Borough Council that the
required number of parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the
need of the land development. The applicant shall establish a
performance bond with adequate security to cover the cost of
paving the additional spaces and shall enter into an agreement
with the Borough to ensure that the paving will be provided by
the current or any future owners when it is determined the
paving is needed.
A. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following
table:
Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
Parking
Width
(feet)
Stall Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 10 20 20 24
60° 10 21 18 21
45° 10 20 15 18
30° 10 18 12 15
Parallel 8 22 12 18
§ 186-62 PERKASIE CODE § 186-70
185:782
Handicapped-accessible parking stall dimensions: 13 feet wide eightfoot
parking space plus five-foot access aisle) by 20 feet deep, or per
current Americans with Disabilities Act standards, as amended.
B. All off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their
location.
C. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring
the moving of any other motor vehicles.
D. All dead-end parking aisles shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls of the parking lot.
E. In no case shall parking areas for three or more vehicles be designed to
require or encourage cars to back into a public street in order to leave
the lot.
F. Accessible parking spaces for disabled persons shall be located in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act standards.
Accessible spaces shall be provided in locations that are convenient for
disabled patrons, clients, and employees.
G. The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A minimum of 12 feet for one-way use only.
(2) A minimum of 20 feet for two-way use.
(3) A maximum of 35 feet at the street line and 54 feet at the curbline.
H. For the purpose of servicing any property held under single and
separate ownership, entrance and exit drives crossing the street lot line
shall be limited to two along the frontage of any single street, and their
center lines shall be placed at least 80 feet apart. On all corner
properties, there shall be spaced a minimum of 60 feet, measured at the
curbline, between the center line of any entrance or exit drive and the
street line of the street parallel to said access drive.
I. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from any
lot line.
J. Except where entrance and exit drives cross street lines, all parking
areas for any purpose other than single-family residences shall be
physically separated from any public street by a concrete curb and by a
planting strip which shall be not less than 12 feet in depth. This twelvefoot
planting strip shall be parallel to the street line and shall be
measured from the future right-of-way.
K. In any parking area of more than three spaces in a residence district or
abutting a residence or apartment district, all spaces not within a
building shall be buffered with evergreen or other suitable planting
which shall be at least four feet in height, designed to screen noise,
§ 186-70 WATER § 186-70
185:783
§ 186-71. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading requirements as specified below shall be provided on any
lot on which a building exceeding 6,000 square feet of gross floor area for
business or industry is hereafter erected.
odors, visibility and headlight glare and located between such parking
spaces and any lot in a residence or apartment district that abuts
directly or across a street. Parking shall be screened in accordance with
§ 186-54, Buffering.
L. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces
shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall
upon any neighboring property.
M. Shopping cart storage: Any establishment that furnishes carts as an
adjunct to shopping shall provide marked areas for the return of carts.
No carts shall be stored on sidewalk areas needed for pedestrian
circulation and all carts shall be stored under cover and secured.
A. Every freight terminal or railroad yard, hospital, retail establishment,
storage warehouse or wholesale establishment, industrial plant or
manufacturing establishment exceeding 6,000 square feet shall have at
least one off-street loading space. Where there is an aggregate gross
floor area of 20,000 square feet or more arranged, intended or designed
for such use, there shall be provided off-street truck loading or
unloading berths in accordance with the following table:
Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted to Each Use
(square feet)
Required Number of
Berths
6,000 to 19,999 1
20,000 to 79,999 2
80,000 to 127,999 3
128,000 to 191,999 4
192,000 to 255,999 5
256,000 to 319,999 6
320,000 to 391,999 7
For each additional 72,000 1 additional
B. Every auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, funeral home,
multiple-family dwelling of 20 units or more, office building, restaurant,
hotel, sports arena or welfare institution exceeding 6,000 square feet
shall have at least one off-street loading space. Where there is an
aggregate gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or more arranged,
intended or designed for such use, there shall be provided off-street
truck loading and unloading berths in accordance with the following
table:
§ 186-70 PERKASIE CODE § 186-71
185:784
§ 186-72. Design and layout of loading facilities.
Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following
specifications:
§ 186-73. Maintenance of loading facilities.
All required loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted to Each Use
(square feet)
Required Number of
Berths
30,000 to 49,999 1
45,000 to 119,999 2
120,000 to 197,999 3
198,000 to 290,999 4
291,000 to 389,999 5
390,000 to 488,999 6
489,000 to 587,999 7
580,000 to 689,999 8
For each additional 105,000 1 additional
A. Each required space shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 30 feet in
length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of drives and maneuvering
space, and located entirely on the lot being served.
B. There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as
adequate maneuvering space.
C. The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at
the street lot line shall be 35 feet; the minimum width shall be 20 feet.
D. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no
time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or unreasonable impediment to
traffic.
E. The grading and surface requirements of §§ 186-62I and 186-70B and
the setback, screening and lighting requirements of § 186-70I through
L shall be met when applicable.
F. Parking areas for three or more cars shall be paved with an all-weather,
cohesive, dust-free surface sufficient to carry the imposed load.
A. They shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which
the facilities were designed to serve.
§ 186-71 WATER § 186-73
185:785
B. They shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision, except
when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this
article.
C. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
delivery and pickup vehicles that they are designed to serve.
§ 186-73 PERKASIE CODE § 186-73
185:786
ARTICLE IX
Signs
§ 186-74. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN — A sign that is part of an awning or canopy
over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. See also § 186-5C,
Word usage and definitions, "Awning or canopy."
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises signs" and "commercial outdoor
advertising signs."
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign on which message copy can be
changed through the use of electronic switching of lamps or other
illuminated devices. This includes public service information, such as time
and temperature, displays or any sign which features automatic or manual
switching or changing of its message content.
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent offpremises
sign erected, maintained or used for the purpose of providing copy
area for advertising messages for rent or lease.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is
intended to advertise a nonprofit community or civic event.
CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which
is intended to advertise the name of project or development and/or the
contractor, architect, engineer, financier, etc.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by means of poles or standards
on the ground. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
proposed finished grade to the highest point of the sign structure.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a person,
business, profession, product, home occupation or activity not conducted on
the same premises.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a person, business,
profession, product, home occupation or activity conducted on the same
premises.
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign parallel to a wall or other vertical building
surface. Parallel signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other
surface to which they are mounted or shall not project more than six inches
from its surface.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any temporary sign pertaining to political views, an
individual seeking election or appointment to a public office or a
forthcoming public election or referendum.
PREMISES — A separate lot or tax parcel with individual frontage abutting
the street line. A "premises" may include more than one occupant, as in an
office complex or shopping center.
§ 186-74 WATER § 186-74
185:787
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign on a wall or other vertical building surface
other than a parallel sign or a window sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the
property upon which it is located.
ROOF SIGN — A sign upon the roof or parapet of a building, the entire face
of which is situated above the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, the
decklines of mansard roofs and the mean height between eaves and ridge
for gable, hip and gambrel roofs of the building to which it is attached and
which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A temporary sign, also called an A-frame sign,
which has no permanent base and is not fixed permanently to the ground or
a building, with a one- or two-sided sign face.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a
structure or other outdoor surface that shall display or include any letter,
work, insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in the nature of
an advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction or which
is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the
public.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended for short-term use, such as a
promotional sign, including signs pertaining to business events, community
events, political issues, an individual seeking public office or a forthcoming
public election.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A sign which is affixed and/or painted to a vehicle
in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs is no longer
incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose. Such signs shall be subject
to the regulations for freestanding signs as defined in this article. This
definition does not apply to signs on vehicles when in motion and vehicles
with a valid license.
WINDOW SIGN — A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to the
public right-of-way and is located on the inside or outside of a window to
direct attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
§ 186-75. General regulations.
A. Location of signs.
(1) No signs except those of a duly constituted governmental body,
including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices, shall be
allowed within five feet of the rear edge of a sidewalk and within 10
feet behind the proposed curbline of the street in those areas not
having a sidewalk. The proposed curbline shall be determined by
reference to the existing ordinance of Perkasie Borough which
ordains the street which the said curb abuts or, when there is no
such ordinance, by reference to the cartway width specified for the
classification of said street as set forth in § 164-20 of the Code of
§ 186-74 PERKASIE CODE § 186-75
185:788
Perkasie Borough, Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land
Development. This provision shall not apply to projecting signs.
(2) No person shall affix, by any means, a sign to any electric or light
pole, facility or structure of the Borough without the Borough's
authorization.
(3) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic
through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for
streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion with a traffic
control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other
characteristics) or through any other means. Reasonable sight lines
are defined in Chapter 164, Article III, § 164-20G, Sight distance, of
the Code of the Borough of Perkasie.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) No sign shall lie within a parking space or fire lane.
(6) No sign shall block movement of pedestrians traveling on public
thoroughfares.
B. Area of signs.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing
which are incidental to the display itself.
(2) The area of a sign painted upon or applied to a building shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs or symbols, together with any backing associated with the
sign.
(3) Where a sign consists of individual letters or symbols, the area
shall be considered to be the area of the smallest rectangle or other
shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(4) In computing area of a double-face sign, only one side shall be
considered, provided that both faces are identical. If the interior
angle formed by the two faces of the double-face sign is greater
than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in
calculating the sign area.
(5) If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets or if
the property fronts on more than one street, the sign area for each
building wall or property frontage shall be computed separately.
(6) A sign supported by more than one means (and therefore may be
defined as a freestanding, wall, roof or projecting sign) shall have
its area and height calculation determined by the type of sign
which has the least restrictive standards.
§ 186-75 WATER § 186-75
185:789
C. Code requirements.
(1) Prior to the erection of a sign and the issuance of a permit, the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall review all signs for
conformance to the provisions of this article, the Municipal
Building Code (see Chapter 70, Building Construction, and any
other article or regulation of the Borough).
(2) No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means, and
electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements of the National Electrical Code. All electrical sign
components, connections and installations shall conform to
specifications of the National Electrical Code and Underwriters'
Laboratories. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for
display purposes.
(3) Every sign permitted by this article must be constructed of durable
materials and kept in good condition and repair.
(4) Upon written notice by the Borough of Perkasie, the owner or the
person or firm maintaining a sign must remove said sign when it
becomes insecure, or it is in danger of falling, or it becomes so
deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of
communication, or it is determined by the Borough to be a
nuisance, or it is deemed unsafe by the Borough or it is unlawfully
erected in violation of any of the provisions of this article. The
Borough of Perkasie may remove or cause to be removed said sign
at the expense of the owner and/or lessee in the event the owner or
the person or firm maintaining said sign has not complied with the
terms of said notice within 30 days of the date of the notice. In the
event of immediate danger, however, the Borough of Perkasie may
remove said sign immediately upon the issuance of said notice to
the owner, person or firm maintaining said sign.
D. Other general requirements.
(1) Signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect lighting, but shall
have such lighting shielded so that no direct light will shine on
abutting properties or in the normal line of vision of the public
using the streets or sidewalks.
(2) Temporary signs placed outdoors directing attention to commercial
promotions or activities on the same lot shall be moved indoors at
the end of each business day.
(3) No off-premises sign shall be established nearer than 100 feet to an
R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, or A district, unless the advertising surface of
such sign is not visible therefrom.
(4) In those zoning districts in which freestanding and projecting signs
are permitted, only one of the foregoing types of signs may be
erected on any one premises.
§ 186-75 PERKASIE CODE § 186-75
185:790
§ 186-76. Nonconforming signs.
(5) In those zoning districts in which roof and projecting signs are
permitted, only one of the foregoing types of signs may be erected
upon any one premises.
(6) No more than two signs of any type shall be permitted per street
frontage, except as permitted in § 186-80A and E. [Amended
2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1000]
(7) Height of a sign is measured from finished grade. The height of an
earth mound on which a sign is mounted shall be included in the
allowable height.
(8) No sign shall be erected containing information which states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted
under the provisions of the Borough zoning chapter in the zoning
district in which the property is located.
A. Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this article that
does not conform in use, location, height or size to the regulations of
the district in which such sign is located shall be considered a
nonconforming sign and shall be bound by the regulations of this article
regarding nonconforming signs.
B. A sign on a building or structure which does not conform to this article
shall be removed when the building or structure is demolished or when
its renovation or expansion amounts to over 50% of the market value of
the structure as assessed by the Bucks County Board of Tax
Assessment.
C. Signs existing at the time of the passage of this article which do not
conform to the requirements of this article shall be considered
nonconforming signs and, once removed or damaged more than 60% of
the material of which the sign is constructed, including structural
framing and bracing, shall be replaced only with conforming signs.
However, nonconforming signs with damage of 60% or less may be
repainted or repaired, provided that such repainted or repaired sign
does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign.
D. A nonconforming sign must be removed within 14 days or be made to
conform to this article in every respect whenever:
(1) It is not firmly attached to the ground or some other object and can
be easily moved.
(2) It becomes so deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose
of communication and is a nuisance as determined by the Borough.
(3) The copy of a sign is changed for a change of business or
ownership.
§ 186-75 WATER § 186-77
185:791
§ 186-77. Permits.
§ 186-78. Exempt and prohibited signs.
A. A permit must be obtained from the Borough for the erection of all signs
erected in the Borough, unless specifically exempted in § 186-78A.
B. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not
be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from
responsibility for its erection in a safe manner and in a manner in
accordance with all the other provisions of this article.
C. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure,
plans and specifications may, at the discretion of the Borough of
Perkasie, be filed with the Borough showing the dimensions, materials
and details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and
any other pertinent engineering data. Plans for signs with a proposed
area greater than 100 square feet shall be prepared and sealed by a
structural engineer. The application for permit shall be accompanied by
the written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which
the sign is to be erected for the Borough to enter said premises to
inspect such sign.
D. No new sign shall hereafter be erected except as herein provided and
until a permit has been issued by the Borough.
E. The changing of movable parts of an approved changeable copy sign
that is designed for such changes or the repainting or reposting of
display matter shall not be deemed an alteration, provided that the
conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this article
are not violated. Normal sign maintenance shall not require a permit.
F. Permit fees to erect a sign shall be in accordance with the sign fee
schedule adopted by the Borough. Said schedule is on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary and may be examined there during regular
office hours.
A. Exempt signs. The following signs are permitted in all districts and do
not require a permit, unless otherwise specified, provided that the
applicable conditions have been met:
(1) Official highway route number signs, street name signs, directional
or other official federal, state, county or Borough signs.
(2) Signs displaying only the name and address of the occupant of the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
one square foot and not more than one such sign shall be erected
for each property held in single and separate ownership unless
such property fronts on more than one street, in which case one
such sign may be erected on each street frontage. Signs of this
nature shall be located not less than five feet from any lot line and
§ 186-77 PERKASIE CODE § 186-78
185:792
at least five feet behind the sidewalk or street line where no
sidewalk exists.
(3) No-trespassing signs and signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, provided that the area of any such sign
does not exceed one square foot.
(4) Real estate signs, provided that the area of such sign shall not
exceed six square feet and that not more than two such signs shall
be placed on property held in single and separate ownership unless
the property fronts on more than one street, in which case two such
signs shall be permitted along each street. All such signs shall be
removed within three days after a final settlement or an agreement
of rental has been entered into.
(5) Governmental flags or insignias.
(6) Legal notices.
(7) Window signs giving store hours or the name or names of credit or
charge institutions, provided that the total area of any such sign or
all signs together does not exceed two square feet.
(8) Vending machine signs bearing the brand name of a product or the
price of such product when displayed on a vending machine selling
such product.
(9) Public service and information signs advertising the availability of
rest rooms, telephones or similar public conveniences; also signs
advertising meeting times and places of nonprofit service or
charitable organizations. These may be erected provided that they
do not advertise any commercial establishment, activity,
organization, product, goods or service, except those of public
utilities. Any public service and information sign shall not exceed
four square feet. Signs advertising meeting times and places of
nonprofit service or charitable organizations shall not exceed four
square feet; provided, however, that a number of such signs may be
erected at a common location where their aggregate size does not
exceed 32 square feet.
(10) Permanent bulletin or announcement board signs for public service
announcements only, provided that the area of any one side of such
sign shall not exceed 16 square feet.
(11) Temporary window signs announcing a drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization, less than six
square feet, placed in store windows.
(12) Temporary on-premises signs announcing a drive or event of a
civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization and
temporary on-premises signs erected in conjunction with a political
election. Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and
§ 186-78 WATER § 186-78
185:793
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the campaign,
drive or event.
(13) Temporary off-premises signs announcing a drive or event of a
civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization and
temporary off-premises signs erected in conjunction with a political
election, subject to the following requirements:
(a) No such sign shall exceed 20 square feet.
(b) Signs shall be removed within one week after the date of the
exhibit, show, event or election.
(c) No such sign shall be posted earlier than three weeks before
the occurrence of the event to which it relates, with the
exception of political signs, which shall be posted not earlier
than one month prior to an election.
(d) The applicant shall have permission from the property owner
of the land where the sign is to be erected allowing the sign to
be installed.
(14) Memorial signs or historical signs or tablets, provided that such
sign or tablet does not exceed four square feet.
(15) Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, such as a cornerstone, or identifying letters carved into
or embossed on a building, provided that the letters are not made
of a reflective material nor contrast in color with the building.
(16) Temporary mechanic's or artisan's signs which have been set forth
on the Borough building permit application may be erected during
the period that such persons are performing work on the premises
on which such signs are erected; provided, however, that such
signs shall be removed immediately upon completion of work by the
mechanic or artisan, and the total areas for all such signs shall not
exceed 12 square feet. Not more than one such sign shall be placed
on any given property on which such person is performing work
unless such property fronts on more than one street.
(17) Bunting, pennants and similar materials are permitted to announce
the opening of a new business or industry and must be removed
after seven days.
(18) Revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not exceed
24 inches in height and that it is erected only in a C-2 Commercial
or I-2 Light Industrial District.
(19) A sign advertising a yard sale and/or garage sale is permitted,
provided that the sign is on premises, does not exceed four square
feet in area, remains up only during the sale and does not appear
more than once every six months on the same premises.
§ 186-78 PERKASIE CODE § 186-78
185:794
(20) On-site directional and parking signs and warning signs are
permitted in all zoning districts but are not considered in
calculating sign area. No such signs shall exceed two square feet.
[Added 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1000]
B. Prohibited signs. The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
(1) A sign that uses any method of illumination that can cause glare is
prohibited, except in accordance with the following:
(a) It must be so effectively shielded that glaring beams or rays of
light are not directed to any portion of any street or highway, or
any point off the lot.
(b) It must be less than 1/4 footcandle, as measured from the
curbline or shoulder, so as not to cause glare or impair the
vision of any motor vehicle driver or otherwise interfere with a
driver's operation of his motor vehicle.
(c) Illumination of any sign shall be continuous during all times of
illumination. No sign shall have blinking or flashing
illumination; provided, however, that changeable copy signs
are not prohibited by reason of any blinking or flashing
resulting from the changing of the message content or copy. It
is understood that the message copy or content shall not blink
or flash.
(d) The copy or content of a changeable copy, video, or similar type
sign shall not change more frequently than once every 60
seconds, except for time and temperature signs which may
change once every five seconds. The changeable copy or
animated portion of the sign may be no more than 50% of the
permitted sign area. No scrolling changeable copy is
permitted.
(2) No sign may use the words "stop," "look," "danger" or any other
word or character which attempts or appears to attempt to direct
the movement of traffic or which interferes with or resembles any
official traffic sign, signal or device within 75 feet of a public rightof-
way or within 200 feet of a traffic control device, whichever is
greater.
(3) Except for traffic control signals, red or green lights are prohibited
within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or 200 feet of a traffic control
device signal, whichever is greater.
(4) Any banner sign or sign of any other type is prohibited across a
public street or on any private property, except for such signs
which are approved by the Borough Council to be of general benefit
to the Borough or for public convenience, necessity or welfare.
§ 186-78 WATER § 186-78
185:795
§ 186-79. On-premises signs in residential districts or for
residential uses.
No sign shall be allowed except as follows:
(5) Any sign suspended between poles which is either a pennant which
blows in the wind or a spinner which spins in the wind is prohibited.
(6) Any banner-type sign suspended between poles and lighted by a
series of lights is prohibited.
(7) Any sign is prohibited which does not conform to the requirements
of the sign ordinance which was in effect when the sign was
erected.
(8) Any on-premises sign permitted under this article shall be removed
or replaced at such times as the original subject of the sign moves
to a different location or goes out of business.
(9) Any sign nailed to a tree.
(10) A sign that is in any way attached to a utility pole or municipal light
standard except as otherwise permitted by the Borough.
(11) Any sign which flashes, rotates, revolves, or oscillates, with the
exception of barber poles.
(12) Any vehicle or trailer which is parked on a public right-of-way or on
public or private property so as to be visible from a public right-ofway,
which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or
advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement
of products or directing people to a business or activity located on
the same or another property.
(13) A sign in violation of this § 186-78B, Prohibited signs, shall be
removed within 14 days of notice from the Borough that such sign
shall be removed.
A. Parallel or freestanding signs for bulletin- or announcement-type
boards or for identification of schools, churches, hospitals, recreation
areas and other principal uses and buildings other than dwellings,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet
and not more than one such sign shall be placed on property held in
single and separate ownership, unless such property fronts on more
than one street, in which case one such sign may be placed on each
street frontage, and provided that the height of such sign shall not
exceed 20 feet.
B. Parallel or freestanding signs for identification of an apartment
development or single-family residential development of 25 units or
more, erected on the site of said development and containing only the
name of the development and the location of a sale or rental office,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet
§ 186-78 PERKASIE CODE § 186-79
185:796
§ 186-80. On-premises signs in commercial districts.
Except for residential signs as governed by § 186-79, supra, or home
occupation signs as permitted in § 186-18H(4)(j), no sign shall be permitted
except as hereinafter set forth:
and not more than one such sign shall be placed on property held
in single or separate ownership, unless such property fronts on more
than one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each
street frontage. Such signs shall be constructed of brick, masonry, wood
or other durable material to resist weathering and deterioration. No
portion of such sign shall exceed 20 feet in height.
C. One sign for home occupations, indicating only names of persons,
addresses, telephone numbers and the occupations, provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed four square feet. A permit for
such sign shall not be required if the subject home occupation has been
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board where required. Signs of this
nature shall be located within five feet of the rear edge of the sidewalk
or within 10 feet behind the proposed curbline of the street in those
areas not having a sidewalk.
D. One construction/development sign, provided that the area of any such
sign shall not exceed 24 square feet and such sign shall be removed
within 20 days after the final inspection by the Borough Building
Inspector. In addition to the construction/development sign, the
following temporary signage is permitted in association with a new
residential development. [Amended 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1000]
(1) Temporary on-premises signs associated with the proposed
development may be erected along the project frontage/right-ofway
during the construction period, provided that the area of such
signs shall not exceed six square feet per sign and that no more
than one sign per 200 feet of frontage shall be permitted along the
existing right-of-way.
E. A sign which identifies an individual building containing multiple
dwelling units. The sign may identify only the property number, street
address and/or the name of the building for a multiple family dwelling.
(1) Number: no more than one sign shall be provided for any one
building unless the building is located on a corner lot, in which case
a sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(2) Type: awning, freestanding, projecting, or wall.
(3) Size: maximum of eight square feet.
(4) Height of freestanding sign: maximum of five feet.
(5) Illumination: unilluminated or indirectly illuminated only.
§ 186-79 WATER § 186-80
185:797
A. Parallel signs for nonresidential uses, subject to the following
conditions: [Amended 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1000]
(1) No portion of the signs shall be less than 10 feet above the
proposed finished grade. If not projecting more than three inches
from a wall of a building, the sign need not conform to the ten-foot
height limit.
(2) The total area of all signs shall not exceed 15% of the area of the
first floor of the building face, including window and door area and
cornices, to which they are attached.
(3) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs and
included in this computation; temporary window signs shall not be
included in this computation but shall nevertheless not exceed 40%
of the total window area on each street.
(4) One parallel sign may be erected for each street-level use
occupying a single structure on the same premises.
(5) If a parallel sign is utilized at a premises, then the premises shall
not also have a roof sign.
B. Freestanding signs in the case of planned commercial development
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) They shall be limited to one sign indicating the name of the
development or similar information. In the event that such
development fronts on two or more streets, a sign may be placed
for each street frontage.
(2) No portion of the sign shall be more than 20 feet above the ground.
(3) The area of the sign shall not exceed one square foot for each two
feet of linear lot frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(4) Freestanding signs shall be so landscaped as to screen any utility
and/or service equipment associated with them.
C. Freestanding signs for nonresidential use in the case where planned
commercial development has not been applied due to configuration of
lots, size of lots or where individual lots are not considered part of a
planned commercial development, subject to the following conditions:
(1) They shall be limited to one such sign per structure. If more than
one use is carried on in a single structure, then only one such sign
may be erected; said sign may indicate the presence of all uses in
the structure.
(2) No portion of the sign shall be more than six feet above the ground.
(3) The area of the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet or one square
foot for each two feet of premises frontage, whichever is less.
§ 186-80 PERKASIE CODE § 186-80
185:798
(4) In the event that the premises fronts on more than one street, one
sign may be placed along each street frontage.
(5) In the C-2 District, signs located along the Ridge Road frontage
shall meet the following height and area standards instead of the
standards of § 186-80C(2) and (3): No portion of the sign shall be
more than 12 feet above the ground, and the area of the sign shall
not exceed 30 square feet.
D. Projecting signs are prohibited in the C-1 District.
E. Projecting signs for nonresidential uses are permitted in the C-2
District, subject to the following conditions: [Amended 2-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 1000]
(1) No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet nor more
than 20 feet above the proposed finished grade, and no such sign
shall be less than two feet from the plane of the face of the curb.
(2) When a building is occupied by one use, the area of such signs shall
not exceed 16 square feet or one square foot for each two feet of
premises frontage, whichever is less.
(3) When a building is occupied by more than one use, each business
may have a projecting sign; the area of such signs shall not exceed
eight square feet.
(4) In the event there are multiple uses occupying a single structure,
one projecting sign may be erected for each use occupying a single
structure on the same premises.
(5) In the event that the premises fronts on more than one street, one
projecting sign may be placed along each street frontage. Where
multiple uses occupy a single structure, each projecting sign shall
be located on the same street frontage as the entrance for the
associated use.
(6) If a projecting sign is utilized at a premises, then the premises shall
not have a freestanding sign.
F. Sandwich board signs are permitted in commercial districts in
accordance with the following:
(1) Such sign shall be displayed outside only during business hours
and taken inside after business hours.
(2) Only one such sign shall be permitted per property frontage.
(3) Such signs shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic nor interfere with
the opening of vehicle doors or obstruct sight lines along streets,
sidewalks, or driveways.
(4) Such signs shall be a maximum of two feet by three feet per side,
exclusive of the stand.
§ 186-80 WATER § 186-81
185:799
§ 186-81. Signs permitted in industrial districts.
Except for residential signs as governed by § 186-79, supra, or home
occupation signs as permitted § 186-18H(4)(j), no sign shall be permitted
except as hereinafter set forth:
A. On-premises signs.
(1) Parallel signs for permitted nonresidential uses, provided that:
(a) No portion shall be less than 10 feet above the proposed
finished grade and extend more than six inches from the
building wall. If not projecting more than three inches from a
wall of a building, the sign need not conform to the ten-foot
height limit.
(b) The total area of all signs shall not exceed 15% of the area of
the building face, including window and door area and
cornices, to which they are attached.
(c) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs and
included in this computation; temporary window signs shall
not be included in this computation but shall nevertheless not
exceed 40% of the total window area on each street.
(d) One parallel sign may be erected for each use occupying a
single structure on the same premises.
(e) If a parallel sign is utilized at a premises, then the premises
shall not also have a roof sign.
(2) Freestanding signs in the case of planned industrial development
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) They shall be limited to one sign indicating the name of the
development or similar information. In the event that such
development fronts on two or more streets, a sign may be
placed for each street frontage.
(b) No portion of the sign shall be more than 20 feet above the
ground.
(c) The area of the sign shall not exceed one square foot for each
two feet of linear lot frontage or 100 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(d) If a freestanding sign is utilized at a premises, then the
premises shall not also have a projecting sign.
(3) Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses in the case where
planned industrial development has not been applied due to
configuration of lots, size of lots or where individual lots are not
considered part of a planned industrial development, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 186-81 PERKASIE CODE § 186-81
185:800
(a) They shall be limited to one such sign per structure. If more
than one use is carried on in a single structure, then only one
sign may be erected; said sign may indicate the presence of all
uses in the structure.
(b) No portion of the sign shall be more than 20 feet above the
ground.
(c) The area of the sign shall not exceed 100 square feet or one
square foot for each two feet of premises frontage, whichever
is less.
(d) In the event that the premises fronts on more than one street,
one sign may be placed along each street frontage.
(e) If a freestanding sign is utilized at a premises, then the
premises shall not also have a projecting sign.
(4) Roof signs shall conform in all respects to the conditions specified
for freestanding signs in this section, except that no portion of a
roof sign shall be more than 10 feet above the roof. Roof signs shall
not be established less than 100 feet from an R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3
or A District, unless the advertising surface of the roof sign is not
visible therefrom.
(5) Projecting signs are prohibited in the I-1 District.
(6) Projecting signs for nonresidential uses are permitted in the I-2
District, subject to the following conditions:
(a) All projecting signs shall be reviewed for structural soundness
by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer prior to erection and
issuance of a building permit.
(b) No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet nor
more than 20 feet above proposed finished grade, and no such
sign shall be less than two feet from the plane of the face of
curb.
(c) The area of such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet or one
square foot for each two feet of premises frontage, whichever
is less.
(d) In the event that the premises fronts on more than one street,
one sign may be placed along each street frontage.
(e) If a freestanding sign is used at a premises, then the premises
shall not also have a projecting sign.
B. Off-premises signs, commercial outdoor advertising signs. Only one
commercial outdoor advertising sign may be erected per premises
fronting on a public right-of-way, provided that:
(1) Yard setbacks.
§ 186-81 WATER § 186-81
185:801
§ 186-81.1. Awning or canopy sign.
(a) Right-of-way. No outdoor advertising sign or any part thereof
shall be erected or maintained within 50 feet of the future
right-of-way of a public street.
(b) Side or rear yards. No outdoor advertising sign or any part
thereof shall be erected or maintained within 50 feet of any
side or rear property line.
(2) No such sign shall be erected within 500 feet of any other such sign
or freestanding sign.
(3) The following minimum landscaping shall be planted adjacent to
each such sign:
(a) Five five-foot-to-six-foot-high evergreen trees planted within a
forty-foot radius on the sides and rear of the base of the sign.
(b) Four eight-foot-to-ten-foot-high flowering trees planted within
a fifty-foot radius on the sides of the base of the sign.
(c) One three-foot-to-four-foot-high shrub per three lineal feet of
frontage or 40 shrubs, whichever is greater, to be planted in
front of the sign.
(4) Area and height.
(a) No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted to exceed a
maximum area of 50 square feet, including border and trim,
but excluding supports.
(b) No outdoor advertising sign shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(5) Commercial outdoor advertising signs/billboards shall not have
internally illuminated, light emitting diode (LED), or electronic or
digital displays.
A. Whenever a canopy, awning or similar structure is affixed with any
lettering, design or symbol intended to advertise a business, the area of
such lettering, design or symbol only shall conform with the size
requirements for a projecting sign in that district. The area shall be
determined by measuring the smallest rectangle or other shape that
encompasses all of the letters, designs or symbols. Use of any particular
color scheme around any letter, design or symbol shall not be
considered part of the lettering, design or symbol for purposes of
determining the area.
B. Whenever any awning or canopy is intended to contain lettering,
designs or symbols intended to advertise a business, an appropriate
permit shall be obtained for a sign per the provisions of this chapter.
§ 186-81 PERKASIE CODE § 186-81.1
185:802
ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 186-82. Definitions.
See § 186-5C, Definitions, in Article II for the following terms:
nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure, nonconforming use.
§ 186-83. Continuation of existing uses.
The lawful use of any structure or land existing at the effective date of this
chapter may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this article. This
provision applies to any use of land or structure lawful under the Perkasie
Borough Zoning Ordinance of 1961.
§ 186-84. Alteration of structures.
Nonconforming structures may be altered, reconstructed or enlarged,
provided that such alteration, reconstruction or enlargement does not
increase the extent of the nonconformity existing on the effective date of
this chapter. In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by
a nonconforming use, such alteration, extension or enlargement shall also
meet the requirements of § 186-86, Alteration of uses.
§ 186-85. Nonconforming lots.
Nonconforming lots are subject to the applicable provisions of Articles V,
Zoning Districts, and VI, Dimensional Regulations.
§ 186-86. Alteration of uses.
Nonconforming uses shall not be altered, reconstructed, extended or
enlarged except in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 186-87. Reconstruction or repair of damaged structures.
A. Such alteration, reconstruction, extension or enlargement up to 25%
shall be permitted by the Zoning Officer. For alterations,
reconstruction, extensions or enlargements between 25% and 50%,
they shall be permitted only by special exception under the provisions
of Article XI Hearings, Variances and Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Such alteration, reconstruction, extension or enlargement shall be only
upon the same lot as in existence at the date the use became
nonconforming.
C. Any increase in volume or area of the nonconforming use shall not
exceed an aggregate of more than 50% (of said volume or area) during
the life of the nonconformity.
§ 186-82 WATER § 186-87
185:803
§ 186-88. Discontinuance or abandonment of use.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one
year and such use has been abandoned, such use shall not be thereafter
reestablished and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 186-89. Change of use.
A. No nonconforming structure or structure occupied by a nonconforming
use damaged by fire or other natural causes to the extent of more than
60% of the structure shall be repaired, reconstructed or used except in
conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
B. Structures with damage to the extent of 60% or less of the structure
may be reconstructed, repaired or used for the same nonconforming
use, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The reconstructed structure shall not exceed the height, area or
volume of the damaged structure, except as provided in §§ 186-84
to 186-86, Alteration of structures.
(2) Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of
damage and shall be carried on without interruption.
A. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be
permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use
only under the following conditions:
(1) Such change shall be permitted only by special exception under the
provisions of Article XI, Hearings, Variances and Zoning Hearing
Board.
(2) The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot
reasonably be changed to a permitted use.
(3) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming
use with respect to:
(a) Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger
car and pedestrian traffic.
(b) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare or
vibration.
(c) Storage and waste disposal.
(d) Appearance and consistency with the Borough's historic
character and architecture.
(e) Lighting.
§ 186-87 PERKASIE CODE § 186-89
185:804
§ 186-90. Extension of use displacing a conforming use.
No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
§ 186-91. Change of district boundaries.
Any uses, structures, or lots that become nonconforming due to a change of
zoning district boundaries shall be regulated under this Article X.
§ 186-92. Nonconforming signs.
See § 186-76 in Article IX, Signs.
§ 186-93. Flood District nonconformities.
Refer to Chapter 94, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Borough
of Perkasie.
(4) The new use must comply with all applicable regulations for that
use, including parking requirements, as set forth in this and all
other Borough ordinances.
§ 186-89 WATER § 186-93
185:805

ARTICLE XI
Hearings, Variances and Zoning Hearing Board
§ 186-94. Purpose of Zoning Hearing Board.
In order that the objectives of this chapter may be more fully and equitably
achieved and a means for competent interpretation of the chapter provided,
the Borough Council shall maintain a Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 186-95. Board membership; terms of office; alternate members.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five members, appointed by
resolution by the Borough Council for terms of five years and shall be so
fixed that the terms of office of no more than one member of the Board
shall expire each year.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Borough Council of
Perkasie Borough of any vacancies which occur. Any appointments
made to fill vacancies on the Zoning Hearing Board shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
C. Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the Borough Council, taken after 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
in the case of original appointments.
D. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the
Borough nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough.
E. Alternate members.
(1) The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one, but no
more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an
alternate member shall be three years.
(2) Alternate members shall hold no other office in the Borough,
including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning
Officer, nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough. Any
alternate member may participate in any proceeding or discussion
of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Zoning Hearing Board unless designated as a voting
alternate member.
(3) The Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board may designate
alternate members of the Board to replace any absent or
disqualified member and if, by reason of absence or disqualification
of a Zoning Hearing Board member, a quorum is not reached, the
Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as many
§ 186-94 WATER § 186-95
185:807
§ 186-96. Officers; quorum; rules of procedure.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not
less than a majority of all the members of the Zoning Hearing Board, but the
Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct
a hearing on its behalf, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (the Act), as amended. The Zoning Hearing Board may
make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with
ordinances of the Borough and laws of the commonwealth.
§ 186-97. Meetings of Board.
All meetings other than executive sessions shall be open to the public and
shall be at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board
shall specify in its rules of procedure.
§ 186-98. Records and decisions.
§ 186-99. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough, the Zoning Hearing
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the
Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to reach a quorum. Any
alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to
serve on the Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving
the matter or case for which the alternate member was initially
appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board has made a final decision
of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate member shall
be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all alternates.
A. Minutes shall be recorded of all proceedings which shall contain
evidence and data relevant to every case considered, together with the
votes of the members and the final disposition of each case.
B. Every decision of the Board shall bear the signature of a majority of the
members of the Board on the original thereof.
C. All decisions of the Board shall be permanently filed with official
Borough records in the Borough building. The Board shall notify the
Borough Council, the Planning Commission and the Zoning Officer of all
decisions and resolutions within seven days after the decision is made.
D. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which records
shall be the property of the Borough, and shall submit a report of its
activities to Borough Council upon request of Borough Council.
§ 186-95 PERKASIE CODE § 186-99
185:808
may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may
be fixed by Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of Borough Council.
Alternate members of the Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed
by Borough Council, for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate
of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of Borough Council.
§ 186-100. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to §§ 186-111 and
186-1141D of this chapter.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefore, or the issuance of any cease and desist order.
D. Applications for variances pursuant to § 186-101 of this chapter.
E. Applications for special exceptions pursuant to § 186-102 of this
chapter.
F. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to developments
not involving applications for subdivisions or land developments, as
defined by the Act, as amended.
G. Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance.
H. Appeals from a determination by the Zoning Officer involving the
interpretation of any provision of this chapter, including the
determination of the exact location of any district boundary if there is
uncertainty with respect thereto; or where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement or determinations made by the Zoning Officer in
the enforcement of this chapter.
I. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Act, as amended.
§ 186-99 WATER § 186-101
185:809
§ 186-101. Variances.
The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of the zoning chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and
may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may
grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where
relevant in a given case:
§ 186-102. Special exceptions.
Where this chapter has provided for stated special exceptions to be granted
or denied by the Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the
Board shall hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in
accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting a special
exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
§ 186-103. Additional factors to be considered.
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of the zoning chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of the zoning chapter and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
F. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 186-101 PERKASIE CODE § 186-103
185:810
§ 186-104. Procedures for filing appeals and special exception
applications.
A. In considering and passing upon applications for special exceptions and
variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors and procedures
specified in all sections of this chapter, including Article IV, Use
Regulations and Restrictions, and § 186-55, Transportation impact
study. In the case of an application for a special exception or variance
related to a use or activity within the Floodplain District, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall refer to Chapter 94, Floodplain Management, of
the Code of the Borough of Perkasie.
B. Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the Board
has determined that the granting of such will not result in additional
threats to the public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with the
local laws or ordinances.
A. General rules and procedures for appeals and applications:
(1) Any appeal shall be made by filing the same with the Zoning Officer,
within 30 days after the date of the Zoning Officer's adverse
decision.
(2) All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing
on standard forms prescribed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) All appeals and applications shall refer to the specific provisions of
this chapter involved.
(4) All appeals and applications shall set forth names and addresses of
all adjoining owners, including those across public roads from the
subject property.
B. Appeals concerning the interpretation of any provisions of this chapter
shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed.
C. Appeals for variance from the strict application of this chapter shall
include the zoning permit application denied by the Zoning Officer,
together with a statement with any supporting evidence regarding the
requirements listed in § 186-101.
D. Applications for special exceptions shall include a zoning permit
application with all information required therein and a statement with
any supporting evidence regarding the merits of the proposed use at
the proposed location and how the proposal complies with the general
and specific requirements of this chapter.
§ 186-103 WATER § 186-105
185:811
§ 186-105. Hearings.
Hearings pursuant to this chapter shall be held by the Zoning Hearing
Board, the Borough Council, or hearing officer, as the case may be, in
accordance with the following requirements.
A. Public notices shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Borough
Council shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at least 14
days in advance of said hearing. In addition to the written notice
provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
B. The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees by resolution with
respect to hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation
for the secretary and members of the Board, notice and advertising
costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the
hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the
Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
C. The first hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or
hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An
applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100
days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board
or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant
may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by
the applicant and Borough, be granted additional hearings to complete
their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer.
The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be
made by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case
may be, in addition to the Borough, may, prior to the decision of the
hearing, waive decisions or findings by the Board accept the decision or
findings of the hearing officer as final.
§ 186-105 PERKASIE CODE § 186-105
185:812
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice and where all parties have
opportunity to participate. The Board or hearing officer shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from its solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party of his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, where no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on the provisions of any act of the commonwealth or
any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied upon and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
§ 186-105 WATER § 186-105
185:813
§ 186-106. Filing of appeals and requests for variances and special
exceptions.
Appeals under § 186-100 of this chapter may be filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency
of the municipality or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under
§ 186-101 and for special exception under § 186-102 of this chapter may be
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with
the permission of such landowner.
§ 186-107. Time limitations.
appropriate in light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by
a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision
or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to
the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's
decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the
hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under § 186-100A where
the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by
this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required
hearing as provided in § 186-104C, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a
decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the
failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as herein above
provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final has been approved by an appropriate municipal
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
§ 186-105 PERKASIE CODE § 186-107
185:814
§ 186-108. Stay of proceedings.
Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 186-106 and during its
pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant
to any challenged chapter, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or
of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed
in accordance with the provisions of Section 915.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 186-109. through § 186-110. (Reserved)
§ 186-111. Validity of chapter; substantive questions.
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner
to appeal from an adverse decision by a zoning officer on a challenge
to the validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to Section 916.2 of the
Act, as amended, shall preclude an appeal from a final approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits
or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest
shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 186-100A of this chapter or;
(2) To the Borough Council under § 186-114.1D of this chapter,
together with a request for a curative amendment.
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of
another by an ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desire to
challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
§ 186-100A of this chapter.
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B shall be governed
by the following;
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Zoning Hearing Board
that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the
reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to
challenge the validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by
curative amendment, his application to the Borough Council shall
contain, in addition to the requirements of the written request
hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the use or
development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or
development permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such
plans or other materials shall not be required to meet the standards
§ 186-107 WATER § 186-111
185:815
prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the
issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice
of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for
evaluating the challenged ordinance or map in light thereof.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the landowner from first
seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Borough Council
under Subsection A(2), the request also shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendments to the ordinance proposed by the
landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Borough Council, the Borough
Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.
(4) The Borough Council may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its
behalf and to present its witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be,
shall determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is
defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by the
Borough Council is found to have merit, the Council may accept a
landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision, or may
adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the challenged
defects. If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found
to have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
include recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance
which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the
Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council, as the case may be,
shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material
submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources
and natural features, the degree to which these are protected
or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development
and any adverse environmental impacts.
§ 186-111 PERKASIE CODE § 186-111
185:816
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(6) The Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of
the last hearing.
(7) If the Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case
may be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to in Subsection C(6), a denial of the request is
deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
shall commence its hearings within 60 days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time. The
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with §§ 186-104F through J
of this chapter.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments, may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in
Subsection C;
(2) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment;
(3) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing
on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by
the landowner and municipality.
G. Where, after the effective date of this chapter, a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application
by the Borough Council pursuant to § 186-114.1D of this chapter or a
validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
§ 186-100A of this chapter or the Court acts finally on appeal from
denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge and the
proposal or challenge so approved requires a further application for
subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years
from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary
approval pursuant to Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 186-111 WATER § 186-111
185:817
§ 186-112. Court appeals.
All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to this chapter
shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district wherein
the land is located and shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the
decision, or in the case of a deemed decision, within 30 days after the notice
of said deemed decision is given as set forth in § 186-105K of this chapter.
Such appeals shall be made in accordance with the Act, as amended.
of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie. Within the two-year period,
no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision and
land development or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied
in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as
granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge.
Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment application
or the validity challenge is approved but does not require further
application under any subdivision or land development ordinance, the
developer shall have one year within which to file for a building permit
within the one-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the
zoning, subdivision and land development or other governing ordinance
or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the
right of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the
sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods, the Court
shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary.
H. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative amendment and
a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's
decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire
Zoning Ordinance and Map, but only for those provisions which
specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment and
challenge.
I. A landowner who has challenged on substantive grounds the validity of
a zoning ordinance or map either by submission of a curative
amendment to the governing body under Subsection A(2) or to the
Zoning Hearing Board under § 186-100A shall not submit any additional
substantive challenges involving the same parcel, group of parcels or
part thereof until such time as the status of the landowner's original
claim has been finally determined or withdrawn; provided, however,
that if after the date of the landowner's original challenge the
municipality adopts a substantially different zoning ordinance or zoning
map, the landowner may file a second substantive challenge to the new
or different zoning ordinance or zoning map under Subsection A.
§ 186-111 PERKASIE CODE § 186-112
185:818
ARTICLE XII
Administration
§ 186-113. Administration by Zoning Officer or Building Inspector.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council, or by the
Building Inspector or other person specifically assigned to such service by
Borough Council.
§ 186-114. Powers and duties of enforcing officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or other assigned person and each
shall have the power to:
A. Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits.
B. Refer zoning permit applications for all uses permitted by right or
special exception as enumerated in Article V, Zoning Districts, to the
Borough Manager for processing.
C. Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with other Borough ordinances and with the laws of the
commonwealth and the federal government. Permits for construction or
uses requiring a special exception or variance shall be issued only upon
order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits requiring approval of the
Borough Council shall be issued only after receipt of a recommendation
from the Council.
D. Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and forward
these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
E. Following refusal of a permit, to receive applications for interpretation,
appeals and variances and forward these applications to the Zoning
Hearing Board for action thereon.
F. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
G. Institute civil enforcement proceedings in accordance with §§ 186-124
and 186-125.
H. In addition to other remedies and with the approval of the Borough
Council or when directed by it, institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; restrain, correct or
abate such violation; prevent the occupancy of or use of any building,
structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
in or about the premises in case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained
or any building, structure, landscaping or land is used in violation of
§ 186-113 WATER § 186-114
185:819
§ 186-114.1. Jurisdiction for final adjudications.
The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render
final adjudications in the following matters:
§ 186-115. Duties of Manager on zoning permit applications.
this chapter or of any ordinance or other regulation made under
authority conferred hereby.
I. Revoke by order a zoning permit issued under a mistake of fact or
contrary to the law or the provision of this chapter.
J. Record and file all applications for zoning permits with accompanying
plans and documents. All applications, plans and documents shall be a
public record.
K. Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all
land in the Borough.
L. Upon the request of the Borough Council, the Planning Commission or
the Zoning Hearing Board, present facts, records or reports which they
may request to assist them in making decisions.
A. All applications for subdivisions and land developments pursuant to
Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land Development. Any provision in
Chapter 164, Subdivision and Land Development requiring that final
action concerning subdivision and land development applications be
taken by the Planning Commission rather than the Borough Council
shall vest exclusive jurisdiction in the Planning Commission in lieu of
the Borough Council for purposes of the provisions of this subsection.
B. Applications for conditional uses pursuant to § 186-128 of this chapter.
C. Applications for curative amendments pursuant to § 186-111 of this
chapter.
D. All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances pursuant to
§ 186-121.
A. In the case of application for zoning permits for uses indicated in
§ 186-114B, the Borough Manager shall refer subject applications to
the Borough Planning Commission, Borough Engineer, Zoning Officer
and, when applicable, to the Borough Council and Zoning Hearing
Board for signatures indicating approval or disapproval of the
application.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the application to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter. In reviewing such
applications, the Planning Commission shall follow the same procedure
employed in reviewing subdivision plans. The Planning Commission
shall submit its recommendations and findings to the Borough Council
within 30 days of the receipt of the application from the Zoning Officer.
§ 186-114 PERKASIE CODE § 186-115
185:820
§ 186-116. Zoning permits required; approval of completed work.
§ 186-117. Zoning permit applications.
Should the Planning Commission fail to submit a report and
recommendations to the Borough Council within 30 days from receipt
of the application from the Zoning Officer, the application shall be
deemed acceptable to the Planning Commission.
C. The Borough Manager will ensure that upon action by the Borough
Council, the Zoning Officer and the applicant are informed of the
Council's decision.
A. Hereafter no structure, except for signs stipulated in § 186-76, fences,
retaining walls under four feet in height, play structures and groundlevel
patios not under roof made with concrete pavers or bricks, shall
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved and no building
used or occupied or changed in use until a zoning permit has been
secured from the Zoning Officer.
B. Upon completion of changes in use or construction, reconstruction,
alteration or moving of structures, the applicant shall notify the Zoning
Officer of such completion.
C. No certificate of occupancy, temporary or permanent, shall be issued
for any new use or construction, including any new dwelling in a new
development, until such time as all of the following improvements have
been installed to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer:
(1) Street signs;
(2) Traffic control signs;
(3) Asphalt base course for roadways; and
(4) Streetlights.
D. No permit shall be considered as completed or as permanently effective
until the Zoning Officer has noted on the permit that the work or
occupancy and use have been inspected and approved as being in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
E. All structures for which permits have been obtained and the
construction of which or a portion of which has been begun or for which
a contract or contracts have been let pursuant to a permit issued prior
to the passage of this chapter may be completed and used in
accordance with the plans on which said permit was granted.
A. All applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the
owner, tenant, vendee under contract of sale or authorized agent on a
form supplied by the Borough and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer.
The application shall include the following information:
§ 186-115 WATER § 186-117
185:821
(1) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
(2) A site layout drawn to scale, showing the location, dimensions and
height of proposed buildings, structures or uses and any existing
buildings in relation to property which is scheduled to be developed
in successive stages. Such plans shall show the relationship of the
portion scheduled for initial development to the proposed layout of
the entire property.
(3) The locations, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces and
yards and buffer yards, including methods to be employed for
screening.
(4) The site layout plan shall indicate all existing trees which are to be
saved, the tree protection zone boundary and the method by which
protection will occur. In addition, tree protection techniques, in
accordance with § 164-41.1 of the Subdivision and Land
Development chapter, shall be indicated on the plan and shall be
adhered to during construction.
(5) The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used
for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading and provisions to be made for lighting such areas.
(6) The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs, if
applicable.
(7) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be
devoted to pedestrian use.
(8) Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and
industrial wastes, water supply and storm drainage.
(9) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, including the proposed density in
terms of number of dwelling units per acre of land.
(10) A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations
in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in
producing noise, heat, vibration, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, fire hazards or other safety hazards.
(11) Description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess
noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or
other safety hazards.
(12) In the case of application for interpretation, variances, and special
exceptions, the additional information specified in Article XI,
§ 186-104.
(13) Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning
Commission or Borough Council to enable them to determine the
§ 186-117 PERKASIE CODE § 186-117
185:822
§ 186-118. Fees.
All applicants for zoning permits, special exceptions and interpretation and
variance appeals shall, at the time of making application, pay to the Zoning
Officer for use of the Borough a fee in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Borough Council upon the enactment of this
chapter or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of the Borough
Council.
§ 186-119. Expiration of permit upon failure to commence;
extensions.
Any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of a
building or other structure, including a sign authorized by a zoning permit,
shall be commenced and any change in use of a building or land authorized
by a zoning permit shall be undertaken within six months after the date of
issuance of the permit. If not, the permit shall be considered null and void.
However, in the case of erection or construction of a building, the right to
proceed with construction may be extended annually without payment of
additional fees for an aggregate period of no more than two years, provided
that the construction pursuant to said permit has commenced within the
first six-month period.
§ 186-120. Flood District administration.
In the case of an application for a special exception or variance related to a
use or activity within the Floodplain District, refer to Chapter 94, Floodplain
Management, of the Code of the Borough of Perkasie.
§ 186-121. Amendments.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map. When doing so,
compliance of the proposed development with the terms of this
chapter.
B. No permit for any new use or construction which will involve the on-site
disposal of sewage or waste and no permit for a change in use or an
alteration which will result in an increased volume of sewage or waste
to be disposed of on the site shall be issued until a certificate of
approval has been issued by the Bucks County Department of Health.
C. From a period beginning 30 days before the public hearing on an
ordinance which proposes a change in regulations, district boundaries
or classifications of property until the Council shall have acted on the
ordinance within the time required by statute, the Zoning Officer shall
accept no application for permits within the area involved in said
change for any use which would be forbidden in the proposed
ordinance.
§ 186-117 WATER § 186-121
185:823
the Borough Council shall proceed in the manner prescribed in §§ 186-121
through 186-127.
§ 186-122. Initiation of amendments.
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may
be initiated by Borough Council on its own motion, by the Planning
Commission or by petition of one or more owners of property to be affected
by the proposed amendment, subject to the following provisions:
§ 186-123. Public hearing on and notice of amendment.
A. Proposals originated by the Borough Council. The Borough Council
shall refer every proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal originated by the Council to the Planning
Commission. Within 30 days of submission of said proposal, the
Planning Commission shall submit to Borough Council a report
containing Commission's recommendations, including any additions or
modifications to the original proposal.
B. Proposals originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may at any time transmit to the Borough Council any
proposal for the amendment, supplement, change, modification or
repeal of this chapter.
C. Proposals originated by a citizen's petition. Each petition by one or
more owners of property to be affected by a proposal for amendment,
supplement, change or modification shall be signed and acknowledged
and submitted in writing to the Secretary of the Borough Council. On
receipt of said petition, the Borough Council shall transmit a copy of the
petition to the Planning Commission. Within 30 days of its submission to
the Planning Commission, the Commission shall submit to the Borough
Council a report containing the Commission's recommendation,
including any additions or modifications of the original proposal.
D. The Borough shall submit each amendment to the Bucks County
Planning Commission in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
E. An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county
law library or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners.
A. No such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repealer
shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. Notice shall be published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
§ 186-121 PERKASIE CODE § 186-123
185:824
§ 186-124. Enforcement notice.
publication shall be not more than 30 days or less than seven days from
the date of the hearing.
B. If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of
said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Borough at
points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the perimeter of the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area
shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
C. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
D. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be forwarded to the Bucks County Planning
Commission.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this section and to institute civil enforcement proceedings
as provided for in § 186-125 when acting within the scope of his or her
employment.
B. If it appears that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the Zoning
Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice to the owner of record of the parcel on which the
violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following;
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) That the owner of record or other person against whom the
Borough intends to take action has five days to commence steps to
comply with this chapter and 30 days within which to complete
such steps to be in compliance with this chapter, unless such times
are extended in writing by the Zoning Officer, for cause shown.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the date of the
§ 186-123 WATER § 186-124
185:825
§ 186-125. Enforcement remedies.
§ 186-126. Complaints of violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint
in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall properly record such complaint and
immediately investigate and report thereon to the Borough Council.
§ 186-127. Borough not liable for flood damage.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon scientific studies.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams or bridge
openings constricted by debris. In such instances, areas outside the Flood
District may be subject to flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not
enforcement notice or not later than the expiration of any extension
granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer.
(6) That the failure to comply with the enforcement notice within the
time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board, constitutes a violation with sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the municipality, shall pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs plus reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District
Justice determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter
each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition of the defendant, may grant
an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity other than the Borough the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 186-124 PERKASIE CODE § 186-127
185:826
create liability on the part of the Borough of Perkasie or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 186-128. Conditional use administration.
A. Applicability. The Borough Council shall have the power to approve
conditional uses when this chapter specifically requires the obtaining of
such approval and for no other use or purpose.
B. Conditions and standards. In granting a conditional use, the Borough
Council shall make findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this
chapter. The Borough Council shall not approve a conditional use
except in conformance with the conditions and standards outlined in
this chapter.
C. General requirements and standards. The Borough Council shall grant
a conditional use only if it finds adequate evidence that any proposed
development will meet all of the following general requirements as well
as any specific requirements and standards listed herein for the
proposed use. The Borough Council shall, among other things, require
that any proposed use and location be:
(1) In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and consistent with
the spirit, purposes and the intent of this chapter.
(2) In the best interests of the Borough, the convenience of the
community, the public welfare and be a substantial improvement to
the property in the immediate vicinity.
(3) Suitable for the property in question, and designed, constructed,
operated and maintained so as to be in harmony with and
appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity.
(4) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter
and all Borough ordinances.
(5) Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety with
adequate access arrangements to protect streets from undue
congestion and hazard.
(6) In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land
development practice where applicable.
D. The Borough Council may impose whatever reasonable conditions it
deems necessary to ensure that any proposed development will secure
substantially the objectives in this chapter.
E. Review by the Planning Commission. The Borough Council shall request
an advisory opinion from the Borough Planning Commission on any
application for a conditional use; the Planning Commission is to submit
§ 186-127 WATER § 186-128
185:827
§ 186-129. Mediation.
Parties to proceedings authorized in this chapter may utilize mediation as
an aid in completing any such proceedings in accordance with Section 908.1
of the Municipalities Planning Code.
a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of the public hearing
held by the Borough Council on an application.
F. Conditional use applications shall be governed by the following:
(1) The landowner shall make a written request to the Borough Council
that it hold a hearing on his application. The request shall contain a
statement reasonably informing the Borough Council of the
matters that are at issue.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by plans and other material
describing the use or development proposed. Such plans and other
materials shall provide a sufficient basis for evaluating the
applicant's request. Information required by this chapter shall
accompany the application.
(3) The Borough Council shall hold a hearing pursuant to public notice
upon the request, commencing not later than 60 days after the
request is filed, unless the applicant requests or consents in writing
to an extension of time.
G. The Borough Council shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 186-104.
H. The applicant for any hearing on a conditional use request before the
Borough Council shall, at the time of making application, pay a fee in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough
Council or as such schedule may be amended from time to time.
I. The burden of proof in a conditional use application shall be on the
applicant to establish that all of the conditions are met and in keeping
with the intent of this chapter.
§ 186-128 PERKASIE CODE § 186-129
185:828
ARTICLE XIII
Airport Hazard Regulations
§ 186-130. Airport hazard regulations.
A. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
Airport Zoning Act of 1984, P.L. 164, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq., as
amended and the Municipalities Planning Code of 1968, P.L. 805, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq., as amended. It is hereby found that an obstruction has
the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the
Pennridge Airport, located in East Rockhill Township, and property or
occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may reduce the size
of areas valuable for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft;
thus, tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Pennridge Airport
and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of
being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Pennridge Airport.
(2) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and
general welfare of persons using the Pennridge Airport that the
creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air
navigation be prevented.
(3) It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or making and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political
subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
B. Airport hazard regulations definitions. In addition to the definitions in
Article II, Definitions, of this chapter, and for the purposes of this
section, the terms, words, and phrases found hereunder shall have the
following meanings as applied, and limited to, § 186-130, Airport
hazard regulations.
AIRPORT — Pennridge Airport (CKZ); any area of land or water which
is used, or intended to be used, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft
and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for
airport buildings or air navigation facilities or rights-of-way, together
with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As used herein, the
term "airport" includes public airports but excludes private airports and
private heliports.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and
which is not open or intended to be open to the public as defined in
74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
(1)
§ 186-130 WATER § 186-130
185:829
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of the airport's useable
landing area measured in feet from sea level which is 567 feet above
mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or manmade, or
use of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft
in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to the
landing or taking off of aircraft.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — An area of land or water upon which an
airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this
chapter.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the
extended runway centerline extending outward and upward from the
end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach
height limitation slope set forth in § 186-130D. In plan, the perimeter
of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach
zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES —
These zones as set forth in § 186-130C.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have
a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this section and shown on the airport zone map; the datum
shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan, coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed or
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than
12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type navigation
equipment for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach
procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 186-130D.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately
owned and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5102.
(2)
§ 186-130 PERKASIE CODE § 186-130
185:830
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary
surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military
runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface,
or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that
runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in § 186-130C.
The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — For the purpose of this section, an object, including a
mobile object, constructed or installed by man including but without
limitation buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and
overhead transmission lines in addition to those objects defined in
Article II, Definitions.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at
ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway
centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where
they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional
surfaces, for those portions of the precision approach surface which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend
a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the
approach surface and at 90° to the extended runway centerline.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
C. Airport hazard zoning boundaries. In order to carry out the provisions
of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones
which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces,
transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they
apply to the Pennridge Airport. Such zones are shown on the Pennridge
Airport Imaginary Surfaces Map which is attached to this chapter and
made a part hereof.204 An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined
as follows:
(1) Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/
4 mile nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. The inner
edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline
of the runway.
204. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 186-130 WATER § 186-130
185:831
(2) Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath
the transitional surfaces.
(3) Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging
arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual
and 10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs
by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does
not include the approach and transitional zones.
(4) Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
D. Airport zone height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained and no
tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a
height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such
zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each
of the zones in question as follows:
(1) Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/
4 mile nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Slopes 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
centerline.
(2) Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation which is 567 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height
limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface.
(3) Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation
or at a height of 717 feet above mean sea level.
(4) Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation.
(5) Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any
structure or growth of any tree to a height up to 35 feet above the
surface of the land.
E. Use Restriction. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
§ 186-130 PERKASIE CODE § 186-130
185:832
chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards,
or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff
or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
F. Nonconforming uses or structures.
(1) The regulations prescribed in this section shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any
nonconforming structure or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of a nonconforming structure, except as provided in
§ 186-130G. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in
the construction, alteration, or intended use of any nonconforming
structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date of this chapter and is diligently executed.
(2) Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner
of any existing nonconforming structure is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning
Officer of Perkasie Borough pursuant to guidelines and regulations
adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United
States Department of Transportation to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated
and maintained at the expense of the owners of the Pennridge
Airport.
G. Special airport hazard permits.
(1) Applicability. Except as specifically provided hereunder, no
material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure or
use shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree shall be
planted in any airport hazard zone herein created unless a permit
therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the Zoning
Officer. Each application shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination
is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a
use inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall be granted
unless a variance has been granted in accordance with this section.
(2) Airport hazard exceptions. Nothing contained in any of the
following exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending
to permit the construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth
of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by any
applicable section of this section.
§ 186-130 WATER § 186-130
185:833
(a) In the area lying within the limit of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no special airport hazard permit shall be required
for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographical features, such tree or structure
would extend above the height limit prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no special airport hazard permit shall be required
for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when such tree or structure because
of terrain, land contour, or topographical features would
extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach
zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transitional zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal, no special airport
hazard permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground except when
such tree or structure because of terrain, land contour or
topographical features would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such transitional zones.
(3) Existing uses.
(a) No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment
or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation
than it was on the effective date of this section or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a
permit is made. Before any nonconforming structure may be
replaced, substantially altered or rebuilt or nonconforming
tree allowed to grow higher or replanted, a special airport
hazard permit must be secured authorizing the replacement or
change.
(b) Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt, or any tree allowed to grow
higher or replanted, a special airport hazard permit must be
secured authorizing the replacement or change.
(c) Whenever the Zoning Officer of Perkasie Borough determines
that a nonconforming use, structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically
deteriorated or decayed, no special airport hazard permit shall
be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed
the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the
zoning regulations.
(4) Variances. Any person desiring to erect any structure, or increase
the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use
§ 186-130 PERKASIE CODE § 186-130
185:834
of property, not in accordance with the airport hazard regulations
prescribed herein, shall apply to the Zoning Hearing Board of
Perkasie Borough for a variance in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter. In addition to the requirements for a
variance contained in this chapter, the application for an airport
hazard variance shall be accompanied by a written determination
from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the
proposal upon the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances may be allowed
where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement
of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the
relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not
create an airport hazard, will do substantial justice and will be
in accordance with the spirit of this chapter. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may
be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the owner or manager of the
Pennridge Airport for comments as to the aeronautical effects of
the variance. If the owner or manager of the Pennridge Airport
does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt,
the Zoning Hearing Board may act on its own to grant or deny said
application.
(5) Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted
may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or
tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's
expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the Zoning Hearing Board this condition may be modified
to require the owner to permit the Pennridge Airport, at its own
expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary markings
and lights.
(6) Required notification. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
either the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board who may
decide to grant a permit or variance under this chapter shall notify
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation of its decision. This
notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the
Department of Transportation at least 10 days before the date upon
which the decision is to issue. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as impairing the rights of any person to judicial review
as provided under Article XI, Hearings, Variances and Zoning
Hearing Board, of this chapter.
§ 186-130 WATER § 186-130
185:835
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
833 8-16-2000 Stormwater
management
Ch. 158
834 7-17-2000 Parks and
recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment;
admission to
parks and
swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 124, Arts. I
and II
835 9-18-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
836 8-21-2000 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
837 9-18-2000 Street and
easement
acceptance
NCM
838 9-18-2000 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
839 11-20-2000 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
840 12-19-2000 Tax rate for 2001 NCM
841 1-15-2001 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
842 Not adopted
843 2-19-2000 Incurrence of
debt
NCM
844 5-21-2001 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
845 Not adopted
§ 186-130 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:836
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
846 7-16-2001 Floodplain
management
Ch. 94
847 8-20-2001 Sewers: sewer
use amendment
Ch. 147, Art. III
848 Not adopted
849 Rescinded
850 12-17-2001 2002 tax rate NCM
851 4-15-2002 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
852 12-17-2001 Joint municipal
agreement for
law enforcement
services
NCM
853 1-21-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
854 Not adopted
855 3-18-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
856 4-15-2002 Dedication of
rights-of-way
NCM
857 6-17-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
858 7-15-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
859 9-16-2002 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
860 Not adopted
861 10-21-2002 Stormwater
management:
Tohickon Creek
Watershed
Ch. 158, Part 1
862 Incurrence of
debt
NCM
863 Not adopted
864 Not adopted
865 12-16-2002 2003 tax rate NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:837
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
866 12-16-2002 Electrical
standards and
service
amendment
Ch. 85
867 1-20-2003 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
868 2-20-2003 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
869 Not adopted
870 6-16-2003 Emergency
service cost
reimbursement
Ch. 11, Art. I
871 7-21-2003 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
872 Not adopted
873 9-15-2003 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
874 8-18-2003 Storage,
collection and
disposal of
garbage, rubbish
and refuse
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
875 Not adopted
876 12-15-2003 2004 tax rate NCM
877 12-15-2003 Delaware Valley
Health Insurance
Trust
NCM
878 2-2-2004 Electrical
standards and
service
amendment
Ch. 85
879 6-21-2004 Uniform
construction code
Ch. 78
880 8-16-2004 Joint municipal
agreement for
law enforcement
services
NCM
881 10-18-2004 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:838
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
882 6-20-2005 Street and
easement
acceptances
NCM
883 10-18-2004 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
884 10-18-2004 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
885 10-18-2004 Parks and
recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. I
886 12-20-2004 2005 tax rate NCM
887 1-17-2005 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
888 2-21-2005 Stormwater
management:
East Branch
Perkiomen
Watershed
Ch. 158, Part 2
889 2-21-2005 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
890 4-18-2005 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
891 3-21-2005 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
892 12-19-2005 Acquisition of
water and sewer
system projects
of the Perkasie
Borough
Authority
NCM
893 6-20-2005 Authorization to
enter
intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
894 7-18-2005 Manager
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:839
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
895 10-17-2005 Sidewalks and
curbs
amendment;
street openings,
excavations and
pavement cuts
amendment
Ch. 160, Arts. I, II
(repealer only)
and V
896 11-25-2005 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
897 11-21-2005 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
898 12-15-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
899 12-19-2005 Electrical
standards and
service
amendment
Ch. 85
900 1-16-2006 Emergency and
municipal
services tax
Ch. 170, Art. VI
901 2-20-2006 Storage,
collection and
disposal of
garbage, rubbish
and refuse
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
902 2-20-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
903 4-17-2006 Outdoor fires and
burning
Ch. 92, Art. II
904 4-17-2006 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
905 4-17-2006 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
906 6-19-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
907 7-17-2006 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
908 7-17-2006 Subdivision and
land development
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:840
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
909 7-17-2006 Incurrence of
debt
NCM
910 8-21-2006 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
911 8-21-2006 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
912 8-21-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
913 8-21-2006 Incurrence of
debt
NCM
914 9-18-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
915 10-16-2006 Streets and
sidewalks: use of
public rights-ofway
Ch. 160, Art. II
916 12-18-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
917 2-19-2007 Emergency and
municipal
services tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. VI
918 5-21-2007 Incurrence of
debt
NCM
919 8-20-2007 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
920A 8-20-2007 Storage,
collection and
disposal of
garbage, rubbish
and refuse
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
920 10-15-2007 Stormwater
management:
Tohickon Creek
watershed
amendment; East
Branch
Perkiomen
watershed
amendment
Ch. 158, Parts 1
and 2
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:841
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
921 10-15-2007 Police in
Municipal
Retirement
System
Ch. 29, Art. 1
922 10-15-2007 Emergency and
disaster
management and
cost recovery;
emergency
service cost
reimbursement
repealer
Chs. 10; 11
(reference only)
923 11-19-2007 Garbage, rubbish,
and refuse:
collection and
transportation
Ch. 96, Part 2
924 11-19-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. VI
925 12-17-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
926 3-17-2008 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
927 5-19-2008 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
928 11-12-2008 Electrical service
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
929 11-17-2008 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
930 12-15-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
931 1-19-2009 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
932 1-19-2009 Real estate
registry
amendment
Ch. 142
933 2-16-2009 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
934 4-20-2009 Perkasie Borough
Authority
amendment
See Ch. 19, Art. I
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:842
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
935 8-28-2009 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
936 8-28-2009 Electrical service
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
937 9-21-2010 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
938 9-21-2010 2010 tax rate NCM
939 1-18-2010 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
940 9-21-2010 Cable television
amendment
Ch. 72
941 4-19-2010 Storage,
collection and
disposal of
garbage, rubbish
and refuse
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
942 5-17-2010 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
943 6-21-2010 Municipal
Retirement
System
Ch. 29, Art. II
944 8-16-2010 Storage,
collection and
disposal of
garbage, rubbish
and refuse
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
945 10-18-2010 Curfew for
minors
Ch. 79
946 Not adopted
947 11-15-2010 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
948 12-20-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
949 2-21-2011 Perkasie Regional
Authority
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 950
950 6-20-2011 Perkasie Regional
Authority
amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
(footnote only)
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:843
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
951 7-18-2011 Dogs running at
large
amendment;
parks and
recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II;
Ch. 124, Art. I
952 8-15-2011 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
953 8-15-2011 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
954 10-17-2011 Curfew for
minors
amendment
Ch. 79
955 12-20-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
956 3-19-2012 Sewer use
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. III
957 3-19-2012 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
(specifications for
reconstruction
and/or repair of
curb and
sidewalks)
Ch. 160
958 7-2-2012 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
959 8-20-2012 Intergovernmental
cooperation:
Delaware Valley
Workers'
Compensation
Trust
Ch. 15, Art. II
960 12-17-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
961 2-4-2013 Salaries and
compensation:
Tax Collector
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. III
962 2-19-2013 Parks and
recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. I
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:844
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
963 2-19-2013 Zoning Ch. 186
964 9-16-2013 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
965 9-16-2013 Stormwater
management:
Tohickon Creek
Watershed
amendment; East
Branch
Perkiomen
Watershed
amendment
Ch. 158, Parts 1
and 2
966 9-16-2013 Brush, grass,
plants and weeds
Ch. 65
967 10-21-13 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
968 12-16-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
969 12-16-2013 Electrical
standards and
service: electrical
service
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
970 Number not
assigned
971 4-7-2014 Garbage, rubbish
and refuse:
storage,
collection and
disposal
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
972 4-3-2014 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186 (map
only)
973 4-21-2014 Streets and
sidewalks: street
openings,
excavations and
pavement cuts
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. V
974 8-18-2014 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
975 7-21-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:845
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
976 7-21-2014 Police Pension
Plan
Ch. 29, Art. I
977 8-18-2014 Municipal
Pension Plan
Ch. 29, Art. II
978 10-6-2014 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
979 11-17-2014 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
Ch. 164
980 12-1-2014 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
981 12-15-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
982 12-15-2014 Electrical service
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
983 1-19-2015 Planning
Commission
amendment
Ch. 35
984 2-16-2015 Floodplain
management
Ch. 94
985 3-16-2015 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
986 3-16-2015 Acceptance of
dedication
NCM
987 4-6-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
988 Not adopted
989 10-5-2015 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
990 11-2-2015 Fire prevention:
Knox Boxes
Ch. 92, Art. III
991 12-21-2015 Electrical service
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
992 12-21-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
993 3-7-2016 Parks and
recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. I
994 Not adopted
995 3-21-2016 Stormwater
management
Ch. 158
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:846
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
996 8-15-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
997 8-1-2016 Garbage, rubbish
and refuse:
storage,
collection and
disposal
amendment
Ch. 96, Part 1
998 11-7-2016 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
999 11-7-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
1000 2-6-2017 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 186
1001 12-19-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
1002 2-6-2017 Salaries and
compensation:
Tax Collector
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. III
1003 3-6-2017 Trees amendment Ch. 175
1004 3-6-2017 Parks and
recreation: Parks
and Recreation
Board
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. III
1005 5-15-2017 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
1006 7-17-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 186
1007 10-16-2017 Intergovernmental
Cooperation:
Section 904
Recycling Grants
Ch. 15, Art. III
1008 12-18-2017 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
1009 12-18-2017 2018 Tax Rate NCM
1010 3-19-2018 Electrical
Standards and
Service:
Electrical Service
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
185:847
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1011 3-19-2018 Streets and
Sidewalks: Use of
Streets
Amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
1012 4-2-2018 Taxation: 601
Spruce Street
Investment
Partners, LLC
(Delbar) LERTA
Program
Void
1013 4-2-2018 Taxation:
Perkasie Borough
Airport LERTA
Program
Void
1014 8-6-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
1015 10-1-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
1016 10-1-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
1017 12-17-2018 2019 Tax Rate NCM
1018 1-7-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 180
§ DL-1 PERKASIE CODE § DL-1
185:848