The Charter
Chapter C
PINE TOWNSHIP HOME RULE CHARTER
The Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
C:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.1) of the Second
Class Township Code,1 the codification of a complete body of ordinances for
the Township of Pine, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 138,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Pine, which shall be known
and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Pine," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, and it is the
intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Pine and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
1. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66601.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 1, 1988.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township, or other instruments
or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
§ 1-4 PINE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances; new
provisions.
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.2
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections, articles and chapters were added
or amended: §§ 24-5, 24-7, Ch. 38, Ch. 44, §§ 48-3A, 48-7, 48-8, 48-25C, Ch. 52, §§ 62-40,
62-43, 62-48, 68-10, 68-14B, Ch. 72, § 78-31F and H(1), 78-41, 78-55B, 84-5, 84-8, 84-9,
84-37, 84-43, 84-50, 84-57, 84-66, 84-68, 84-76, 84-79, 84-86, 84-88, 84-148, 84-149,
84-156A, 90-8C, Ch. 92, §§ 94-3, 98-6, 98-7, Ch. 104, §§ 110-1, 110-2, 110-3, 110-5, Ch.
116, §§ 120-5B, 120-8A and B, 120-17, 128-5B(3), (4), (5), (6) and (7), 128-6, 128-9A and
B, 128-11, 128-17, 128-18B, 128-19C, 128-20, Art. III of Ch. 128, §§ 123-35, 128-37A,
128-38B, 128-40B, 128-41A, 128-42A, 128-43, 128-44, 134-4 and 138-8. The following
provisions were deleted: Subsections 604 and 805 of Ord. No. 122, adopted 5-17-1982; and
Section 8A of Ord. No. 104, adopted 12-6-1976; Ord. Nos. 142, adopted 5-15-1985; 145,
adopted 3-19-1986; and 161, adopted 10-21-1987.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Manager, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Manager,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager, or someone authorized
and directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of
A. Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
§ 1-7 PINE CODE § 1-11
1:6
the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all ordinances adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
Article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, Article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after December 21, 1988.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Board of Supervisors for inclusion
in the Code of the Township of Pine. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted ... during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." During the
course of routine supplementation, specific amendment dates will
be inserted where pertinent in the text of the various chapters. The
listing below sets forth each chapter and, where applicable, each
section affected by any such legislation adopted during codification.
The complete text of such amendments is on file in the office of the
Township Manager where it may be inspected during regular office
hours.]
Chapter/Section Adoption Date Legislation
38, Planning Commission 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
44, Building Construction 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
52, Fire Prevention 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
72, Streets and Sidewalks 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
92, Amusement Devices 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
116, Parks and Recreation 12-21-1988 Ord. No. 173
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cooperative and intermunicipal
agreements — See Ch. 10.
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Impact Fee Advisory Committee — See Ch. 20.
Township Manager — See Ch. 24.
Meetings — See Ch. 26.
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
28.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
Human Resource Policy — See Ch. A146.
§ 1-15 PINE CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 2-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of Pine."
§ 2-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words, when used in this chapter, shall, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL — Those documents specifying
operational matters of municipal units, including, but not necessarily
limited to, descriptions of the duties and responsibilities of subordinate
units, rules and regulations and appropriate administrative procedures,
records and reports.
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE — All personnel in those units of the
municipality which are under the authority of the Township Manager.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine,
Pennsylvania.
CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Township of Pine,
Pennsylvania.
LAW — All applicable laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Pine, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity.
PUBLISH — To print in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality either the entire document or a brief summary thereof
with a listing of places where copies of the entire document have been
filed and times when they are available for public inspection.
RESIDENCE — An abode in which an officer or employee permanently
resides.
SECRETARIAT — Prepare agenda, packet and necessary items for
meetings, transmit correspondence, provide technical support,
information and recommendations, carry out the policies of the
committee, commission, board and council, disseminate to and receive
input from the public and communicate public input to the respective
committee, commission, board or council.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The duly appointed Manager, Secretary and
Treasurer of the Township of Pine, Pennsylvania, who shall also act as
the Township's chief administrative officer.
UNIT — All governmental entities of the municipality.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:11
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular; the masculine gender shall include the feminine,
and the feminine shall include the masculine.
§ 2-2 PINE CODE § 2-2
1:12
ARTICLE II
Board of Supervisors; Organization and Procedure
§ 2-3. General; attendance.
§ 2-4. Organizational meeting; presiding officer of Board.
§ 2-5. Meetings.
A. The number of Board members, their terms, election and qualifications
and the filling of Board vacancies shall be as provided in the Charter,
Article III, §§ C-301, C-302 and C-303, and Article XII, § C-1204.
B. A Supervisor may be found to have neglected his or her official duties
and be subject to the forfeiture of such office if he or she fails to attend
three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings (including publicly
advertised work session meetings in which formal actions do not
typically occur) or two consecutive regularly scheduled business
meetings (publicly advertised meetings) wherein formal actions are
typically taken) of the Board of Supervisors. If a Supervisor is either
physically absent from the Township of Pine or unable to personally
attend a meeting due to medical disability, such Supervisor (if he or she
so desires) shall be permitted to participate in a meeting via speaker
telephone at his or her own expense. Such participation by speaker
telephone shall not, however, constitute attendance by such Supervisor
pursuant to the provisions of this section unless such participation was
requested by the Township either to establish a necessary quorum for
the meeting or to otherwise benefit its needs; in such instances the
Township shall bear the telephone expense. In the event of a failure of
attendance, as specified herein, the Board of Supervisors may declare
the office of the absent Supervisor to be vacant and proceed to fill such
office in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article XII,
§ C-1204 of the Township's Charter. [Added 9-20-1999 by Ord. No.
271]
A. The day in January, time and place of the organizational meeting of the
Board shall be set by the Board annually in December of the preceding
year.
B. The first order of business at the Board's organizational meeting shall
be the election of a Chairman and a Vice Chairman of the Board and
such other officers required by the Charter or as the Board may deem
appropriate. Until such election is accomplished, the Board shall
appoint a Chairman Pro Tem who shall have all the powers of the
Chairman.
C. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall exercise the
duties of the Chairman. In the absence of both the Chairman and the
Vice Chairman, the Board shall appoint a Chairman Pro Tem who shall
have all the powers of the Chairman.
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:13
§ 2-6. Meetings to be public.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public as provided by P.L. 388,
No. 84, July 3, 1986 (the Sunshine Act), 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.,3 as amended.
§ 2-7. Agenda.
A. Provisions governing public notice of meetings shall be provided by law
and the Charter, Article IV, § C-401.
B. At its organization meeting, the Board shall adopt a resolution
establishing the dates, times and places for its regular and agenda
meetings for the year.
C. The Board may hold executive sessions as permitted by law. No official
action shall be taken by the Board on any matter in executive session
except as permitted by applicable law.
D. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman of the Board or upon
written request of a majority of the members of the Board or upon
petition of citizens as provided in the Charter, Article IV, § C-403(2). A
written notice shall be mailed or delivered to each Board member at
least 24 hours before a special meeting and specifying the business to
be transacted.
E. The Board may hold and take action at an emergency meeting at any
time. Such emergency meetings may be called by the Township
Manager or by any member of the Board, provided that a quorum is
present as provided in the Charter and a majority of the Board
determines that the holding of such meeting and the taking of
emergency action at that time is necessary to protect or promote the
public health and safety of the municipality. Any action taken at an
emergency meeting shall be ratified by the Board at its next regular or
special meeting.
A. The proposed agenda for any meeting of the Board shall be prepared by
the Township Manager or his/her designee. Any Board member has the
right to add additional agenda items as deemed appropriate.
B. The proposed agenda for any stated meeting shall be forwarded to all
Board members and be available to the public at least three days prior
to the stated monthly meeting. In addition, the agenda for stated
monthly meetings, adjourned monthly meetings, special meetings and,
where possible, emergency meetings shall be posted at the Municipal
Building and the Wexford Volunteer Fire Station on Rt. 910. These items
will also be made available by calling the Info Line at 935-5060.
Supporting materials, including the full text of any ordinances or
resolutions to be considered, shall be provided to all Board members at
3. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 2-5 PINE CODE § 2-7
1:14
§ 2-8. Conduct of business.
§ 2-9. Rules of procedure.
the same time as the agenda and shall be available to the public also at
the Municipal Building.
C. The title of any ordinance or resolution to be considered shall be
published as part of the agenda.
D. The published agenda may be amended at the meeting to add or change
an item by majority agreement of the Board members present.
A. At the time appointed for any meeting of the Board, the Chairman or, in
his absence, the Vice Chairman or, in the absence of both the Chairman
and the Vice Chairman, the Chairman Pro Tem shall take the Chair and
call the meeting to order. If a quorum is present, as provided in the
Charter, the presiding officer shall proceed with the order of business
prescribed for the meeting. If, upon the call of the roll, a quorum is not
present, the Chairman, Vice Chairman or the Chairman Pro Tem who is
presiding shall order a recess for a period of 15 minutes, and if a
quorum has not developed within that time, the Board members present
shall take no action, in accordance with the Charter, Article IV, § C-402.
B. Unless a majority of the Board votes otherwise, the order of business
for each regular meeting shall be as follows: [Amended 4-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 248]
(1) Call to order.
(2) Pledge of allegiance.
(3) Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
(4) Reports of the Township's municipal officials, committees or special
advisory groups, as necessary.
(5) Citizen comments.
(6) Unfinished business.
(7) New business.
(8) Adjournment.
C. If there is an item of obvious controversy or of wide public concern that
has initiated a greater-than-normal attendance at the meeting, the
presiding officer is given the authority to enter that item as the first
item of new business or unfinished business on the agenda.
A. The presiding officer shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of
business at each Board meeting and shall preserve order and decorum
at such meetings.
§ 2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9
1:15
§ 2-10. Public participation.
B. The Board, at its organization meeting, shall adopt such additional rules
governing its procedures as it deems appropriate. The presiding officer
shall announce all decisions of the Board and shall decide all questions
of order without debate, subject, however, to an appeal by any Board
member. Any ruling by the presiding officer relating to questions of
order may be overruled by a majority of the Board members present.
C. Every Board member desiring to speak shall address the Chair and,
upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine remarks to the
question under debate, avoiding all indecorous language or reference
to personalities. A Board member, once recognized, shall not be
interrupted when speaking unless it is for the purpose of calling such
person to order. If a Board member, while speaking, is called to order,
that member shall cease speaking until the question of order is
determined. When two or more Board members request the floor at the
same time, the presiding officer shall name the one entitled to the floor.
The presiding officer may, when he deems it necessary, place a limit on
either the length of time or the number of times, or both, that a Board
member may speak on any matter.
D. No member of the Board shall speak more than 10 minutes upon the
same motion in the same meeting, nor for more than five minutes at a
time, without the consent of the majority of the Board members
present.
E. The presiding officer shall have the authority to call for a recess or an
adjournment to another time when the lack of public decorum so
interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting as to warrant such
action.
A. Citizens desiring to address the Board at its stated meetings may do so
by providing written notice to the Township Manager at least seven
days prior to the day of the meeting, and such registration shall include
the name and address of the participant, group affiliation, if applicable,
and the topic to be addressed, or without such notice if recognized by
the presiding officer.
B. Citizens of the Township may be provided the opportunity to address
the Board on any agenda item without written notice. All participants
must be recognized by the presiding officer and must preface their
comments by announcing their name, address and group affiliation, if
applicable. The presiding officer may limit the time to five minutes for
each citizen to speak. Such discussion shall occur prior to the vote on
the agenda item.
C. Each citizen who wishes to speak shall address the presiding officer
and, upon recognition and receiving permission to speak, shall confine
his remarks to the agenda item or matter specified in his notice,
avoiding all indecorous language or reference to personalities.
§ 2-9 PINE CODE § 2-10
1:16
§ 2-11. Committees of the Board.
The Board may, at any time, provide for standing and ad hoc committees
to assist with the carrying out of its function or any function permitted
by law. The presiding officer shall appoint the Chairperson for each such
committee. Each committee so designated by the Board shall elect its
officers and provide for written rules governing its procedure. Any such
committee appointed by the Board shall, thereafter, report to the Board at
the regular stated meetings of that body. Any such committee may, at the
discretion of the Board, be later altered or abolished.
§ 2-12. Official actions of the Board.
Official actions of the Board shall be taken by ordinance, resolution or
motion, as provided in the Charter, Article IV, § C-404.
§ 2-13. Ordinances.
D. When a group of persons wishes to address the Board on the same
subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request
that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the Board and to
limit the number of persons addressing the Board on the same matter
so as to avoid unnecessary repetition.
E. It shall be the policy of the municipality that participants in public
meetings of the Board shall be citizens or taxpayers of the Township or
their counsel or authorized representatives. Others permitted to
address the Board include anyone having registered a legitimate
interest in any contemplated action of the Board; anyone representing a
group in the community; any representative of a firm or company
eligible to bid on materials or services solicited by the Township; any
employee of the Township; or the counsel or authorized representative
of the previously described persons.
F. Any person making offensive, insulting, threatening, insolent,
slanderous or obscene remarks or who becomes boisterous or who
makes threats against any person or against public order and security
while in the Board chamber shall be forthwith barred by the presiding
officer from further attendance at the meeting unless permission to
continue shall be granted by the majority vote of the Board members
present.
G. No placards, signs or banners will be permitted within the meeting
room and on public property.
H. Citizens may petition the Board to hold a special meeting as provided
for in the Charter, Article IV, § C-403(2).
A. Action requiring an ordinance. In addition to requirements provided by
law or the Charter, Article IV, § C-404, acts of the Board shall be by
ordinance which:
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13
1:17
(1) Adopt or amend an Administrative Code or establish, alter or
abolish any unit, department, committee, commission, board or
council of the municipality.
(2) Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
for which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
(3) Establish salaries of elected officials.
(4) Authorize the borrowing of money.
(5) Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
(6) Purchase or convey lands or buildings.
B. Ordinance form and procedure. Every proposed ordinance shall be
introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No
ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly
expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Township of
Pine, Pennsylvania, ordains..." After the ordinances are first codified as
required by the Charter, any ordinance that repeals or amends an
existing ordinance shall refer to the ordinance, sections or subsections
to be repealed or amended and shall indicate the matter to be omitted
and shall clearly indicate new matter.
C. Copies of ordinances. Copies of ordinances shall be available at the
Municipal Building during regular business hours to all persons
requesting them upon payment of a reasonable reproduction charge
which represents the municipality's cost (including personnel time) to
reproduce the same.
D. Emergency ordinances. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the Board may adopt one or more
emergency ordinances, which may be adopted without prior notice and
may be made effective immediately. An emergency ordinance shall be
introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally,
except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance
and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that
an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. After
its adoption, the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed
for other ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such
later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall
automatically stand repealed as of the 10th day following the date on
which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the
ordinance in the manner specified in this subsection if the emergency
still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption
of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this
subsection for adoption of an emergency ordinance.
E. Authentication and recording; codification.
§ 2-13 PINE CODE § 2-13
1:18
§ 2-14. Independent audit.
The Board shall provide for an independent annual audit of all Township
accounts as provided for in the Charter, Article VI, § C-604.
§ 2-15. Compensation and expenses. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord.
No. 310]
Members of the Board shall receive no other compensation, direct or
indirect, for the performance of their duties, other than the salary
authorized and adopted pursuant to § 2-13A(3) hereof. However, nothing in
this section shall preclude the right of the municipality to provide accident
or liability insurance coverage for members of the Board when on municipal
business or when in the performance of their official duties, limited to the
duration of their term. In addition, nothing in this section shall preclude
the right of the municipality to provide life insurance coverage for each
member of the Board (with benefits thereof payable to such beneficiary or
beneficiaries as selected by each individual member of the Board), limited
to the duration of his/her term. Members of the Board shall be entitled to
reimbursement for actual expenses incurred, provided that the expenditure:
§ 2-16. Township administration.
The appointment, supervision, tenure and duties of the Township Manager,
Township Solicitor and Township Engineer shall be as provided in the
Charter, Article V, §§ C-501, C-502 and C-503.
(1) Authentication. Ordinances duly approved and signed shall be
attested to by the Township Manager.
(2) Recording. The Township Manager shall record all ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Board and, at the end of each year, with
the advice of the Township Solicitor, shall compile, bind and index
the same or copies thereof.
(3) Codification. Codification shall be as provided for in the Charter,
Article IV, § C-405.
A. Is related to the performance of official duties.
B. Was authorized in advance by the Board at a public meeting.
C. Is included in an itemized list which contains documentary proof of
such expense presented prior to payment.
§ 2-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16
1:19

ARTICLE III
Township Manager
§ 2-17. Powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
municipality and shall have those powers and duties prescribed by law, the
Charter and ordinances, including the power and duty to:
A. Authorize a department head or other officer responsible to the
Township Manager to appoint and remove subordinates serving under
that department head or officer.
B. Designate an officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or
position in the administrative service under the control of the Township
Manager which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the
absence or disability of the incumbent.
C. Prescribe such rules and regulations as shall be deemed necessary or
expedient for the conduct and operation of administrative departments
and revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the
administrative service by whomever prescribed unless contained in an
ordinance or resolution or motion adopted by the Board.
D. Investigate or inquire either personally or through a person designated
by the Township Manager into the operations of any department and,
subject to the approval and authorization of the Board, employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations or
inquiries.
E. Overrule or set aside any action taken by a department head and
assume the duties of the department.
F. Establish committees within the administrative services and appoint
officers and employees as shall be necessary for the purpose of
considering and resolving administrative problems.
G. Assign any employee of the administrative service to any department
requiring the services of that employee; provided, however, that such
assignment is appropriate.
§ 2-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Departmental Organization
§ 2-18. Administrative organization.
The administrative service of the municipality shall be under the Township
Manager and be comprised of the following departments and heads thereof:
Department Head
Department of Administration Township Manager
Department of Code Enforcement/
Planning
Zoning Officer/Development
Inspector
Department of Parks and Recreation Recreation Director
Department of Public Works Director of Public Works
Such other departments and heads as may be created by amendments to
this code.
§ 2-19. Department heads.
All department heads shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, suspended or
removed by the Township Manager, except as otherwise provided by law
or the Charter, in accordance with the Human Resource Policy4 and with
approval of the Board. Prior to the demotion, suspension or removal of a
department head, the Township Manager shall file written charges with the
Board setting forth the reasons for the action. A copy of any written charges
shall be supplied to the affected official. If requested within 10 days of the
filing of charges, the charged official shall be entitled to a public hearing
before the Board. Department heads shall be chosen solely on the basis of
such executive, administrative and technical qualifications as are pertinent
to the function, duties and operations of their respective departments and
as are prescribed by law. For the purposes of interpreting the Charter,
this chapter and the Human Resource Policy, the department heads are
appointed officials.
§ 2-20. Duties of department heads.
Department heads, when directed by the Township Manager, shall:
A. Direct, personally and through subordinates, the performance of all
functions, duties and operations assigned to and required of the
department and its subordinate unit by law, the Charter or ordinance
and such other activities as may be required by the Township Manager
that are not in conflict with law, the Charter or ordinance.
B. Develop and prescribe the internal organization of the department and
its subordinate units, subject to the approval of the Township Manager,
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. A146, Human Resource Policy.
§ 2-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:23
and in accordance with applicable provisions of law, the Charter or
ordinance.
C. Assign duties and responsibilities to subordinates within the
department and modify those assignments consistent with and in
response to the changing exigencies of service, subject to the approval
of the Township Manager.
D. If so directed by the Township Manager, develop and prescribe, in
written form, an administrative manual for the department, subject to
the approval of the Township Manager.
E. Prepare and submit departmental budget requests in accordance with
schedules, forms and policies as prescribed by the Township Manager.
F. Prepare and submit at least monthly regular reports prescribed by the
Township Manager.
G. Cooperate with and furnish to any department or units of the
municipality any information, service, labor, material or equipment that
may be necessary to perform a municipal function.
H. Be aware of and coordinate the activities of the department with
appropriate area-wide, regional and intergovernmental programs; keep
the Township Manager informed of the activities and policies of such
programs as they affect the department or the municipality; and make
analyses and recommendations regarding such activities and policies
when appropriate.
I. Administer and evaluate intergovernmental contracts and agreements
as these relate to departmental functions.
J. Develop and maintain internal administrative and budgetary controls
and productivity and performance standards to assure maximum levels
of quality and quantity of service within budgetary limitations.
K. Keep abreast of developments in administrative policies, management
techniques and technological advances and make recommendations to
the Township Manager concerning action by the Board or
administrative regulations for the technologies deemed to be in the best
interests of the department and municipality.
L. Keep abreast of all laws, municipal ordinances and administrative
regulations relating to the functions of the department.
M. Serve as a member of any committee or provide staff services to any
authority, board or commission to which the department head may be
assigned by the Township Manager.
N. Develop personnel planning and employee development policies for the
department, including the planning and execution of appropriate
training and education programs.
§ 2-20 PINE CODE § 2-20
1:24
§ 2-21. Department of Administration.
O. Establish and enforce rules and regulations for the use of municipal
facilities and services and issue such licenses and permits as may be
required by ordinance.
P. Develop and recommend to the Township Manager rate structures for
those services for which user fees are charged.
A. Function. The Department of Administration shall be responsible for
performing staff functions for the Board and assisting departments and
other units of the municipality in carrying out their duties.
B. Department head. The Department of Administration shall be headed
by the Township Manager.
C. Duties. The duties of the Township Manager, as the head of the
Department of Administration, shall be to:
(1) Develop a Human Resource Policy5 for approval by the Board.
(2) Administer the personnel system of the municipality subject to the
provisions of law, the Charter, the Human Resource Policy and
policies established by the Board, including such matters as:
(a) Recruiting and selecting personnel for municipal employment
as determined by the Human Resource Policy.
(b) Developing and maintaining the position classification and pay
plans.
(c) Participating in and administering labor relations programs,
including contract negotiations, contract administration and
related programs.
(d) Developing and maintaining personnel rules and regulations.
(e) Assisting departments in developing and conducting employee
training and development programs.
(f) Assisting departments in preparing personnel planning
programs.
(g) Developing and maintaining records reflecting all aspects of
municipal employees.
(3) Provide assistance in the development of operating budgets, longterm
fiscal programs and related budgetary and administrative
analysis, including:
(a) Developing a budget calendar, forms and procedures subject to
the provisions of law, the Charter or ordinance.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. A146, Human Resource Policy.
§ 2-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-21
1:25
(b) Participating in budget analysis and hearings relative to
budget requests, budget amendments and budget allocations.
(c) Maintaining budget expenditure control during the course of
the fiscal year and keeping the Board informed on the progress
and development of plans, policies and programs as they relate
to the budget.
(d) Reviewing, analyzing and making improvements in the
administrative organization and procedures throughout the
municipality.
(e) Assisting departments and other units of the municipality in
the development of administrative manuals and in the solution
of administrative and organizational problems.
(f) Performing such research and studies as the Board may direct.
(4) Be responsible for the administration of activities pertaining to the
receipt, expenditure, accounting, investment, custody and control
of municipal funds and assets, except to the extent that such
activities are expressly charged by law, the Charter or ordinance to
the Tax Collector or legal counsel. Such duties shall include such
matters as:
(a) Maintaining a uniform accounting system in accordance with
generally accepted principles of governmental accounting,
which involves keeping a full and regular set of fiscal records,
in detail by double entry, of all fiscal operations of the
municipality; keeping a separate account for each item of
appropriation made by the Board, showing the amount of the
appropriation, any allotments of that appropriation, the
amounts paid from it and the balance of the appropriation and
any allotments thereof; keeping a current statement of
indebtedness; and requesting all municipal departments,
offices and agencies to report and remit all receipts as often as
deemed desirable.
(b) Preauditing fiscal transactions of all municipal units in
accordance with generally accepted principles of government
auditing.
(c) Disbursing all payments for authorized expenditures, which
must be done only with checks or drafts signed by the
Township Manager or the Assistant Treasurer and a member of
the Board. In the absence of the Township Manager and/or the
Assistant Treasurer, additional members of the Board shall
sign checks or drafts.
(d) Depositing moneys in depositories authorized by resolution.
(e) Providing for the prudent investment of moneys.
§ 2-21 PINE CODE § 2-21
1:26
§ 2-22. Assistant Township Manager.
(f) Providing custody of fidelity bonds of officers and employees,
except his or her own, which shall be in the custody of the
Assistant Treasurer, and providing custody of all deeds,
mortgages, contracts, judgments, notes, debts, securities,
bonds, insurance policies and other forms of negotiable
instruments owned by the municipality.
(g) Supervising the lease, rental, sale or other use or disposition of
property no longer required by any municipal unit.
(5) Administer the purchasing system, subject to the provisions of law,
the Charter or ordinance, including such matters as:
(a) Preparing and evaluating standards and specifications for
materials, services and equipment.
(b) Purchasing materials, services and equipment for the
municipality.
(c) Storing materials and equipment not delivered directly to the
departments and other units of the municipality.
(d) Maintain an inventory control system for all real and personal
property.
(e) Determining whether materials, services and equipment
purchased meet specifications.
(f) Evaluating and managing all insurance contracts, including
fidelity bonds, to ensure the lowest possible cost to the
municipality.
(g) Negotiating total cost purchasing contracts covering initial
purchase, maintenance and repurchase whenever possible to
ensure the lowest possible cost to the municipality.
(6) Be responsible for the provision of engineering services to the
municipality, by utilizing the services of the Township Engineer
who is appointed by the Board.
(7) Be responsible for the provision of legal services to the
municipality, by utilizing the services of the Township Solicitor who
is appointed by the Board.
(8) Perform such other duties for the municipality as the Board may,
from time to time, direct.
A. Function. The Assistant Township Manager shall assist the Township
Manager in the operation of the Department of Administration.
B. Duties. The duties of the Assistant Township Manager shall be to:
§ 2-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:27
§ 2-23. Department of Code Enforcement/Planning.
(1) Assist the Township Manager in the performance of those duties
set forth in § 2-21C of this Administrative Code.
(2) Serve as Assistant Secretary and Assistant Treasurer to the
municipality.
(3) Serve as Acting Township Manager in the event of the absence or
unavailability of the Township Manager, until such time as the
Board shall officially appoint an Acting Township Manager.
(4) Perform such other duties for the municipality as the Board may,
from time to time, direct.
A. Function. The Department of Code Enforcement/Planning shall be
responsible to promote the health, safety and welfare of all present and
future residents of the municipality through the enforcement of
building, zoning and life safety codes.
B. Department head. The Department of Code Enforcement/Planning shall
be headed by a Zoning Officer/Development Inspector who shall be
responsible to the Township Manager for the performance of the
functions of the Department.
C. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer/Development Inspector shall be
to:
(1) Be responsible for the protection of persons and property within
the municipality through:
(a) Enforcement of zoning, subdivision, building, electrical,
plumbing, heating, housing, demolition and such other related
structural and land use codes as may be enacted by law or
ordinance.
(b) Issuance of such licenses and permits as may be required by
law or ordinance.
(c) Serving as secretariat to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(d) Serving as secretariat to the Environmental Advisory Council.
(2) Prepare short- and long-range planning and community
development programs for the municipality, including:
(a) Performing the various duties and exercising the several
powers as prescribed by law, specifically the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,6 such as conducting zoning
studies, both initial preparation and periodic comprehensive
revision of the regulations and map; preparing subdivision
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 2-22 PINE CODE § 2-23
1:28
§ 2-24. Department of Parks and Recreation.
standards and regulations and conducting periodic reviews
and suggesting revisions; conducting renewal studies and
community renewal programs; identifying renewal areas;
determining development standards; and recommending use
changes.
(b) Preparing, reviewing and maintaining plans for human
services, including health care, education, employment,
recreation and other social services, and coordinating such
plans with the plans for the physical and economic
development of the municipality.
(c) Preparing, reviewing and maintaining the Comprehensive Plan
of the municipality, including data collection, mapping and
analysis.
(d) Serving as secretariat to the Planning Commission.
(3) Provide fire prevention and fire code enforcement in the
municipality, utilizing the services of the Fire Marshal who is
appointed by the Board and will serve as a liaison between the
Zoning Officer/Development Inspector and the volunteer fire
companies.
(4) Provide building inspection services in the municipality, utilizing
the services of the Building Inspector who is appointed by the
Board and will serve as a liaison between the Zoning Officer/
Development Inspector and the Environmental Advisory Council.
(5) Perform such other duties for the municipality as the Township
Manager may, from time to time, direct.
A. Function. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible
for operating the parks of the municipality and developing, conducting
and supervising recreation programs.
B. Department head. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be
headed by a Recreation Director who shall be responsible to the
Township Manager for the performance of the functions of the
Department.
C. Duties. The duties of the Recreation Director shall be to:
(1) Plan, develop, design and administer, in cooperation with other
appropriate municipal departments, municipal parks and
recreation facilities owned, acquired or designated by the
municipality.
(2) Organize, equip, staff and conduct recreation programs for citizens
of the municipality.
§ 2-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:29
§ 2-25. Department of Public Works.
(3) Apply for alternate forms of funding for the overall needs of the
municipality, such as grants, local fund-raising, donations and lowinterest
loans.
(4) Serve as secretariat to the Parks and Recreation Committee.
(5) Perform such other duties for the municipality as the Township
Manager may, from time to time, direct.
A. Function. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the
construction, operation and maintenance of those physical structures,
facilities, land, parks and equipment that are owned and maintained by
the municipality and to provide stormwater, transportation and similar
operations and services.
B. Department head. The Department of Public Works shall be headed by a
Director of Public Works who shall be responsible to the Township
Manager for the performance of the functions of the department.
C. Duties. The duties of the Director of Public Works shall be to:
(1) Provide, construct and maintain the parks, streets, bridges, curbs
and gutters of the municipality, including the provision of street
cleaning, snow removal and ice control services.
(2) Provide, construct and maintain storm sewer structures, facilities
and appurtenances.
(3) Provide, construct and maintain installation and maintenance of
traffic control devices and directional signs and signals and street
name signs.
(4) As appropriate, clear or plant and maintain trees and other
vegetation along municipal rights-of-way and all other property of
the municipality.
(5) Maintain and supervise custodial services for municipal buildings
and facilities.
(6) Repair and maintain all municipal vehicles.
(7) Plan, develop, design and administer, in cooperation with other
appropriate departments and agencies of other government,
expansion and modification of facilities for which the Department is
responsible.
(8) Perform such other duties as the Township Manager may, from time
to time, direct.
§ 2-24 PINE CODE § 2-25
1:30
ARTICLE V
Committees, Commissions, Boards and Councils
§ 2-26. Creation.
§ 2-27. Membership.
§ 2-28. Organization.
A. The following committees, commissions, boards and councils presently
in existence are hereby continued:
(1) Parks and Recreation Committee.
(2) Planning Commission.
(3) Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) Environmental Advisory Council.
(5) Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
B. Except where otherwise provided by law, the Charter or ordinance, all
committees, commissions, boards and councils shall be advisory in
nature and perform no administrative function for the municipality.
A. The appointment of members to all committees, commissions, boards
and councils shall be as provided by law and by the Charter, Article VIII,
§§ C-801 and C-802.
B. Any vacancy on a committee, commission, board or council shall be
filled by the Board for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such
members shall be appointed within 90 days from the date the vacancy
occurs.
C. The members of any committee, commission, board or council shall
serve without compensation, except as otherwise provided by law, the
Charter or ordinance. When authorized by the Board, members may be
reimbursed for any reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties.
D. Unless otherwise regulated by law or by the Township's Charter, each
member of a committee, commission, board or council shall be either a
resident of the Township of Pine or an owner of land within the
Township of Pine at the time of appointment and shall be so at all times
during his or her term. Unless otherwise prohibited by law or by the
Township's Charter, the Board of Supervisors may, upon good cause
shown, by majority vote waive the requirements for membership set
forth in this Subsection D in individual instances. [Amended 8-4-1997
by Ord. No. 254]
A. Each committee, commission, board and council, in accordance with
Article VIII, § C-803, of the Charter, shall provide for rules and
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28
1:31
§ 2-29. Parks and Recreation Commission. [Amended 12-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 247]
regulations governing its operation. Such rules and regulations shall
provide for the keeping of records pertaining to its duties, the conduct
of meetings and public hearings and a periodic reporting to the
residents of the municipality and the Township Manager. All such rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Township Manager.
B. The Township Manager shall attach each committee, commission,
board and council to an appropriate unit of the administrative service
for necessary staff, liaison and administrative assistance.
A. Function. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be generally
responsible for the periodic review of parks and recreation programs
for the purpose of recommending changes and for advising the
Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors, the Department of Parks
and Recreation and the Recreation Director on recreation needs, use of
facilities and programs and fee structures relating thereto.
B. Responsibilities. The general responsibilities of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall include the following: [Amended
1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 368]
(1) To define the objectives of public recreation services and make
plans and general policies harmonizing with them.
(2) To maintain the highest quality of recreation service.
(3) To help secure a comprehensive recreation and park plan in order
to provide an adequate system of recreation areas and facilities.
(4) To interpret the need for and importance of recreation and park
services to the general public and to the Board of Supervisors, and
to elicit support.
(5) To serve as a forum for the introduction of new ideas, programs,
policies and procedures.
(6) To advise on the acceptance of any gift, grant, bequest or donation
for the recreation and park program.
(7) To assist in establishing a sound fiscal plan and budget to achieve
recreation goals.
(8) To assist in developing a comprehensive recreation program and
advise on operation and maintenance.
(9) To assist in developing and maintaining an ongoing public relations
program.
(10) To evaluate the services of the recreation and park system in
relating to its objectives.
§ 2-28 PINE CODE § 2-29
1:32
(11) To take an active role in promoting and implementing related
legislation at the local, state and federal level.
C. Duties. The general duties of the Parks and Recreation Commission are
as follows. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall: [Amended
1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 368]
(1) Make recommendations to the Township Manager, the Board of
Supervisors and the Recreation Director on rules, regulations and
practices concerning the utilization of programs and facilities,
schedule of fees for programs and facilities and operation of
concessions at parks and recreation facilities.
(2) Advise the Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors and the
Recreation Director on needed facilities and programs.
(3) Coordinate any parks and recreational facilities and programs with
other municipalities.
(4) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors a
comprehensive park, recreation and open space plan for the
Township of Pine. The plan should be reviewed and updated as
necessary and in the event that conditions or recreational demands
change. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consider
public input in its creation, review and update of the plan, and such
plan shall be maintained on file in the Township's offices.
(5) Recommend feasible methods to reach the long- and short-range
goals set forth in the comprehensive park, recreation and open
space plan.
(6) Respond, in writing, to the request of the Board of Supervisors for
parks and recreation information and provide written reports
regarding all activities and recommendations of the Parks and
Recreation Commission to the Board of Supervisors at the Board of
Supervisors' meetings at least once per month.
(7) Seek funding sources for parks and recreation activities through
grants, donations and local fundraising programs.
(8) Affirmatively seek new information on parks and recreation from
local, national and international sources, paying particular
attention to the latest developments, and inform the Board of
Supervisors of said developments.
(9) Review a proposed annual parks and recreation budget for
submission to and consideration by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the Township's annual budget adoption process.
(10) Carry out such additional duties as may be assigned from time to
time by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 2-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:33
(11) Provide written reports to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
Parks and Recreation Commission's reviews of proposed
subdivisions, land developments or planned residential
developments, as per the applicable provisions of Chapters 78 and
84, respectively, of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(12) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors, as necessary,
any Master Plan for the development of present or future Township
parks.
(13) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors, as necessary,
a development plan for Pine Community Park and other present or
Township parks (with said plans to be reviewed periodically).
(14) Review and issue recommendations upon applications received for
permits to utilize athletic fields within Pine Community Park.
D. A Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be
appointed by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors at its annual
organizational meeting each year. The Board of Supervisors may accept
a recommendation from the members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission regarding the appointment of such Chairperson.
E. Two persons shall be elected as Vice Chairpersons of the Parks and
Recreation Commission. Such Vice Chairpersons shall be elected (one
each) from the membership of each of the Commission's permanent,
standing committees at such committees' first meeting in any calendar
year. The officers shall so serve until new officers are appointed and
elected at the first such meetings of the following year. Officers may be
reappointed or re-elected, but shall not serve more than two
consecutive terms in any one office. Either Vice Chairperson shall
perform the duties of the Chairperson in the event of his/her absence.
F. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet no less often than
once per month.
G. The Chairperson shall be directly responsible to the Board of
Supervisors for all activities of the Commission and shall give a report
to the Board of Supervisors at its regular monthly meeting.
H. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have the following
permanent, standing subcommittees consisting of five identified
persons on the Recreation Subcommittee and four identified persons on
the Parks Subcommittee (as such may be specified by the Board of
Supervisors). Each Subcommittee shall have responsibility for
advancing and relating the general functions set forth in the preceding
section to the below-specified duties and shall have the specific
following responsibilities: [Amended 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 273]
(1) The Recreation subcommittee shall have direct responsibility for
volunteer recruitment and parks and recreation programming.
Such programming shall include, but need not be limited to,
§ 2-29 PINE CODE § 2-29
1:34
§ 2-30. Planning Commission.
recreation programs (e.g., summer recreation program, line
dancing, Easter egg hunt, volleyball tournaments, Halloween
hayrides etc.) and community recreation (e.g., basketball,
volleyball, soccer, baseball, football, swimming and athletic
tournaments).
(2) The Parks Subcommittee shall have direct responsibility for park
and facility development, trails, greenways, operations and
management.
(3) The Recreation Subcommittee and the Parks Subcommittee shall
consist of five and four identified persons, respectively, (none of
whom may serve on more than one of the Subcommittees) and shall
have a Chairperson elected by it (who shall also serve as a Vice
Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Commission) and shall
meet no less often than once per month.
(4) In addition to the Chairperson of each above-named subcommittee
serving as a Vice Chairperson and member of the Parks and
Recreation Commission, each such subcommittee shall also
designate one other of its members to serve as an at-large member
of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
I. The Township's Board of Supervisors may create such other
subcommittees, on an ad hoc basis, as it deems necessary to assist the
Parks and Recreation Commission in either its administration of special
events or for the effective carrying out of its duties and responsibilities.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the members of such other
subcommittees and prescribe their officers, duties and required
meetings.
A. Function. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members and
make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors upon all plans
related to land development in the municipality. It shall function as the
planning agency for the municipality.
B. Duties. The duties of the Planning Commission shall be to:
(1) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
Comprehensive Plan, community development and planning, and it
shall hold public meetings and public hearings to this end.
(2) Review and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
concerning the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map, the Zoning
Ordinance,7 subdivision and land development plans, building
standards regulations for the municipality and all other plans for
community development.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 2-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-30
1:35
§ 2-31. Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 2-32. Environmental Advisory Council.
(3) Perform such other lawful duties as the Board shall, from time to
time, direct.
A. Function. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five members and
shall be responsible for implementing the duties and responsibilities
outlined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.8
B. Duties. The Zoning Hearing Board shall perform those duties
prescribed by law, including the duties to:
(1) Conduct hearings and render decisions on appeals from the Zoning
Officer.
(2) Hear challenges to the validity of any ordinance or map.
(3) Hear requests for variances and render decisions thereon,
attaching such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of law, the Charter or
ordinance.
(4) Hear and decide upon requests for special exceptions pursuant to
criteria and standards adopted by the Board.
A. Function. The Environmental Advisory Council shall consist of five
members and shall advise the Board of Supervisors and the Planning
Commission on matters concerning the protection, conservation,
management, promotion and use of natural resources, including air,
land and water resources pursuant to Act No. 148 of December 21,
1973.9
B. Duties. The duties of the Environmental Advisory Council shall be to:
(1) Identify environmental problems and recommend plans and
programs for the promotion and conservation of the natural
resources and for the protection and improvement of the quality of
the environment.
(2) Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas.
(3) Promote a community environmental program.
(4) Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps and other
unique natural areas for the purpose of obtaining information on
the proper use of such areas.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2322 et seq.
§ 2-30 PINE CODE § 2-32
1:36
§ 2-33. Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
(5) Advise the appropriate local governmental agencies and the Board
of Supervisors in the acquisition of property, both real and
personal, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, easement, devise or
lease, and in matters dealing with Act 148 of 1973.10
(6) Upon formal request from the Board of Supervisors or Planning
Commission, review any proposed municipal or park development,
or any private development in excess of five acres, for purposes of
rendering an advisory opinion as to the effect such development
will have upon the environment.
A. Function. The Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall consist of 11
members and shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
regarding the necessity for and the possible implementation of a
transportation impact fee pursuant to the provisions of Act 209 of 1990
and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.11
B. Duties. The duties of the Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall be as set
forth in Act 209 of 1990.12
10.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2322 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., respectively.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 2-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:37

ARTICLE VI
Special Boards
§ 2-34. Continuance.
§ 2-35. Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Board.
A. The following special board presently in existence is hereby continued:
(1) Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Board.
B. Membership. Membership in the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint
Police Board shall be as per existing agreement between the Township
of Pine, Marshall Township and the Borough of Bradfordwoods, and any
amendments thereto.
A. Functions. The functions of this Board shall be as per the Pine-Marshall-
Bradfordwoods Police Agreement dated December 19, 1985, and
amendments.
B. Duties. The duties of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police
Board are as follows:
(1) The Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Police Department shall be
under the jurisdiction of a joint board to be known as the "Pine-
Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Board."
(2) Subject to the provisions of Article VII and Article IX of the Pine-
Marshall-Bradfordwoods Police Agreement, the Pine-Marshall-
Bradfordwoods Joint Police Board shall be responsible for the
operations of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Police Department.
Such operation shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Number of employees.
(b) Equipment.
(c) Salary scale.
(d) Purchases for and on behalf of the Police Department.
(e) All applicable policies and procedures.
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35
1:39

ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 2-36. Oath of office.
The Township Manager and all appointed officials, members of committees,
commissions, boards, councils or offices, before commencing their official
duties, shall take and sign an oath of office to support the Constitution of
the United States and of Pennsylvania and to perform the duties of their
office with fidelity, in such form as shall from time to time be prescribed by
law. Such oath shall be taken and signed before a Judge, District Justice or
notary public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This oath shall be filed
in written form with the Township Manager prior to assuming office.
§ 2-37. Code of Ethics.
All elected and appointed officials, members of committees, commissions,
boards, councils or offices, before commencing their official duties, shall
affirm to a Code of Ethics adopted herewith by the Township of Pine.
A. The signed affirmation of such Code of Ethics in the following form shall
be filed with the Township Manager:
Affirmation of Code of Ethics of Township of Pine
Date:
As a(n) (indicate position) of the Township of Pine, I believe and
affirm:
1. That the proper operation of government requires that officials and
employees be independent and impartial in their judgments and
actions; that government decisions and policies be made in the
proper channels of the government structure; that office or position
not be used for personal gain: and that the citizens have confidence
in the integrity of their government and officials and employees.
2. That the realization of these ends is impaired wherever there
exists, or appears to exist, an actual or potential conflict between
the private interest of a municipal official or employee and the
duties of office; and that the public interest requires ethical
standards with respect to official duties.
3. Therefore, as a(n) of the Township of Pine, I assert my
solemn belief that the primary responsibility for maintaining a high
level of ethics among municipal officials and employees falls upon
those in public service.
4. Consequently, I believe it is my duty to:
(a) Respect the rule of law, the concepts of equal treatment for all,
human dignity and ethical conduct in the performance of my
duties.
(b) Observe and act in accordance with the Code of Ethics adopted
by the Township of Pine.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:41
Affirmation of Code of Ethics of Township of Pine
Signed
B. The Board hereby adopts the following as the Code of Ethics for the
Township of Pine to apply to all elected and appointed officials,
members of committees, commissions, boards, councils or offices,
individually and collectively referred to as a "representative" of the
municipality in said Code of Ethics:
Code of Ethics
Township of Pine
1. General. Every representative of the municipality shall endeavor to
treat all residents of the municipality with impartiality, fairness and
equity and shall avoid conflicts between his private self-interest
and the public interest. No representative shall grant or make
available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or
favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make
available to the public at large.
2. Conflict of interest. No representative of the municipality shall
participate in any decision, vote or recommendation involving the
municipality in which such person shall have a conflict or conflict
of interest as such is defined in the Public Official and Employee
Ethics Law, Act 170 of 1978, as amended by Act 9 of 1989.13
3. Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance of
official duties may require a representative of the municipality
to become involved in a conflict of interest, as defined above,
such person shall disclose publicly the nature of such interest
and disqualify himself from participation in any decision, vote or
recommendation regarding the matter in conflict.
4. Municipal employment. No representative of the municipality shall
hold any other office or employment with the municipality during
his/her term of office as provided for in the Charter, Article III,
§ C-307.
5. Gifts and favors. No representative of the municipality shall accept
any gift, favor, gratuity, loan or promise from which he might
personally benefit that would not be offered or given to him if
he were not an official or employee, except that food or drink
consumed at an occasional meal or meeting at which municipal
business is conducted shall not be considered a gift or favor. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit gifts to the municipality,
nor shall it prevent individual departments of the municipality from
enforcing more restrictive provisions regarding gifts and favors.
13.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.
§ 2-37 PINE CODE § 2-37
1:42
§ 2-38. Administration to be through Manager.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter or this Administrative Code,
or for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the Board shall deal
with appointed officials and employees in the administrative service solely
through the Township Manager, and neither the Board nor any Board
member shall give orders to such appointed officials or employees either
publicly or privately.
§ 2-39. Disclosure of financial interests.
All elected and appointed officials, members of committees, boards,
commissions or offices shall, before assuming their duties and thereafter on
or before May 1 of each year during their term of office or employment and
of the year after leaving such a position or within 15 days of being appointed
if after May 1, file a statement of financial interests with the Township
Manager, which shall be available for public inspection. Said statement of
financial interest shall be in the form and include those items set forth in the
statement of financial interests form for candidates prescribed by the State
Ethics Commission in conformity with the Public Official and Employee
Ethics Law, Act 170 of 1978, as amended by Act 9 of 1989.14
§ 2-40. Prohibited conduct.
The Board hereby prohibits the following actions and conduct. For the
purposes of this section, elected and appointed officials, members of
committees, boards, commissions or offices are referred to, individually and
collectively, as "representative."
Code of Ethics
Township of Pine
6. Confidential information. No representative of the municipality
shall use or permit the use of any confidential information acquired
by him through his position to advance the financial or similar
special interest of himself or any other person or entity.
A. No candidate or employee for election, appointment, employment or
promotion to any municipal position as a representative shall directly or
indirectly give or promise, render or pay any money, service or other
valuable thing to any person for the purpose of influencing or obtaining
the support, aid or vote for or in connection with the individual's
election, appointment or promotion.
B. No representative or employee shall in any manner receive benefit from
the profits or emoluments of any contract, job or service for the
municipality or accept any service or thing of value, directly or
14.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.
§ 2-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40
1:43
§ 2-41. Bonds of officials and employees.
§ 2-42. Inquiries and investigations.
indirectly, upon more favorable terms than those granted to the public
generally, from any person dealing with the municipality.
C. No representative or employee shall solicit or receive any
compensation, gratuity or other thing of value for any act done in the
course of public service, except compensation established by law for
the position or employment held in the municipality.
D. No representative or employee shall compel an employee or a citizen to
contribute to any fund other than required by law or ordinance.
E. No individual shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to any municipal
employment or office because of race, sex, political or religious
opinions or affiliation.
F. No individual shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark,
rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment
under the personnel provisions of the municipality or in any manner
commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial
execution of such provisions.
A. The following municipal officials shall each, before entering upon the
duties of their respective offices, give bond to the municipality which
may be part of a blanket bond, duly approved by the Township Solicitor
and conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their
respective duties and for proper application and payment of all money
or property for which they are responsible by virtue of their offices, in
the amount the Board of Supervisors deems appropriate and
established annually:
Township Manager
Assistant Township Manager
Road Superintendent
Zoning Officer/Development Inspector
Recreation Director
Township Engineer
Township Solicitor
B. After reviewing recommendations of the Township Manager, the Board
shall prescribe bonds for other officers, agents or employees of the
municipality, including Board members, for whom the Board deems that
coverage is necessary.
C. The expense for all fidelity bonds shall be borne by the municipality.
§ 2-40 PINE CODE § 2-42
1:44
§ 2-43. Powers of police.
Police employed by the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force
shall be ex officio constables of the commonwealth and shall have the
powers and prerogatives conferred on police officers by law. Police, when
acting as constables, shall have the authority to serve and execute all
criminal processes for the violation of municipal ordinances which may be
issued, and the fees and costs collected in such capacity shall be paid into
the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Fund.
§ 2-44. Equivalent functions.
Where law or ordinance prescribes certain functions to be performed by a
designated department head under the former form of government, such
function shall be performed by the equivalent department head to which the
respective functions have been assigned by this Administrative Code.
A. The Board and the Zoning Hearing Board shall each have the power to
conduct inquires and investigations in aid of the exercise of their
powers and performance of their duties.
B. The Board and the Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents
and other evidence at investigative hearings, and for that purpose may
issue or cause to be issued subpoenas, signed by appropriate officials or
commission members and served as provided by law.
C. The official presiding at any hearing shall have the power to administer
oaths to witnesses.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, that person
shall, upon conviction thereof at a summary proceeding, be sentenced
to pay a fine as may be ordained, and, in default of the payment of such
fines and costs, shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 15 days.
E. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the official
or board issuing the same may, by petition, apply to the Court of
Common Pleas of the County of Allegheny for its subpoena to compel
the attendance of such person before the official, the commission or the
court. Under failure to attend, the Township Solicitor shall request that
such person be held in contempt of court and be punished therefor.
F. No person subpoenaed, as aforesaid, shall be required to respond to the
same until mileage and witness fees, equal to those then established by
law or ordinance, shall have first been furnished to the witness.
§ 2-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44
1:45

ARTICLE VIII
Repealer; Effect Upon Existing Provisions
§ 2-45. Repealer; effect upon existing ordinances.
§ 2-46. Effect on provisions of Second Class Township Code.
The municipality shall be governed by the provisions of its Home Rule
Charter, this Administrative Code, any of its preexisting ordinances not
hereby repealed or otherwise inconsistent with the Charter and any other
laws duly applicable to a home rule municipality. In the event that an
issue or situation is not specifically provided for in such legislation, then
the municipality shall follow the procedures and dictates of Pennsylvania's
Second Class Township Code, P.L. 103 (Article I, Section 101) of May 1,
1933, and P.L. 1481 (§ 1) of July 10, 1947, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq., as
amended, unless the Board of Supervisors shall direct otherwise.
A. All ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore enacted which are
inconsistent with any provision of this Administrative Code are, to the
extent of such inconsistencies, hereby repealed. The remaining
ordinances of the municipality as codified in the Code of the Township
of Pine, adopted December 21, 1988, and as amended, shall remain in
effect unless otherwise specifically repealed through formal action of
the Board of Supervisors.
B. The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof by this Administrative Code
or by any other ordinance shall not revive any former ordinance or part
thereof which may have been repealed by such repealed ordinance or
part thereof.
§ 2-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-46
1:47
Chapter 3
ATTORNEY FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 128. Collection of real estate taxes — See Ch.
A148.
§ 3-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Tax, Tax Claim, Tax Lien, Municipal
Claim and Municipal Lien Attorney Fees and Servicing Charges, Expenses
and Fees Ordinance."
§ 3-2. Expenses approved.
§ 3-3. Attorney fees approved.
A. Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title
search in an amount not to exceed $250 shall constitute a reasonable
expense for each title search necessary for the initiation of each
proceeding and compliance with Pa. R.C.P. 3129. The sum not to exceed
$50 shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bringdown or update
of the title search in connection with entry of judgment, issuance of
execution, listing for sale or other action.
B. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement
action, such as for postage, non-sheriff's service of process,
investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
necessary expenses shall constitute reimbursable expenses as part of
each claim recovered.
A. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to the
municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid claims. The property
owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for each phase
of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect of each
phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of the
proceeding shall carry over and be due on a cumulative basis, together
with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
(1) Filing of municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation and filing of a
municipal claim as defined under the Act.
(2) Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in
assumpsit as provided in the Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute
§ 2-46 PINE CODE § 3-3
3:48
reasonable attorney fees for the initiation of each proceeding and
shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of scire
facias or complaint in civil action, sheriff's direction for service,
notice pursuant to Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1 and the preparation and filing
of the praecipe to settle and discontinue the proceeding. The above
does not include:
(a) Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to court.
(b) Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a
special order of court is necessary to serve original process or
any other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees as
follows:
[1] Investigation of defendant(s) whereabouts and
preparation of affidavit of diligent search: $100.
[2] Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative
service and delivery of the order of court, along with
appropriate directions to the sheriff for service: $200.
(3) Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees in connection with entry of judgment which shall
include preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter judgment,
notices of judgment, affidavit of nonmilitary status and the
praecipe to satisfy judgment.
(4) Writ of execution; sheriff's sale of property or execution upon
assumpsit judgment. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for preparation of all documents necessary for each
execution upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall
include the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of
execution, all sheriffs documents, preparation and service of
notices of sheriffs sale, staying the writ of execution, and
attendance at one sheriffs sale.
(a) Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for each continuance of sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
(5) Sale pursuant to § 31 of the act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of $700
shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the sale of property
pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281, including preparation
and service of necessary documents, court appearances,
attendance at sale and preparation of proposed schedule of
distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
§ 3-3 ATTORNEY FEES § 3-3
3:49
§ 3-4. Procedure.
(6) Sale pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of $500
shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for a sale of property
pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282, including the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of proposed sheriff's schedule of distribution.
(7) Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
(8) Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees
for the preparation, filing and presentation of motions, other than
for alternative service, which shall include, but are not limited to,
motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption and
motions to continue the sheriff's sale.
B. Hourly rate matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20, which fees shall be awarded to the municipality, its agents,
counsel or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in all
other matters not specifically referenced in § 3-3A above, undertaken in
connection with the collection of claims, each as recorded and charged
in units of 1/10th of an hour for all time devoted to enforcement and
collection of the municipality's claims. Counsel, whether duly employed
or duly appointed by the municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not
deviate from this fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance
amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but are not limited to,
any matters where any defense, objection, motion, petition or
appearance is entered in any phase of any proceeding by or on behalf of
any Defendant or other interested party.
(1) Senior attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185 per
hour.
(2) Junior attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160 per
hour.
(3) Paralegals: $100 per hour.
(4) Law clerks: $65 per hour.
A. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the municipality, its agent, counsel or assigns.
B. Fees to be accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all
efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice or after the 10th
day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
§ 3-3 PINE CODE § 3-4
3:50
§ 3-5. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the municipality authorized to pursue collection
of claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the municipality's
agents or assigns and, if not collected in due course with the debt as by
voluntary payment, shall be included in any claims filed on behalf of the
municipality or by its agents or assigns in the course of enforcement
including any claims originally filed with the prothonotary, any claims
filed with the sheriff or in any other claims filed or statements provided
where attorney fees are due.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and
become part of the claim or claims in each proceeding as provided by
the Act and as provided herein.
A. The following schedule of charges, expenses and fees (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "servicing fees") is hereby approved and
adopted by the municipality pursuant to §§ 1, 2 and 3 of the Act of May
16, 1923, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106, which amounts
are the direct result of each person's or property's failure to pay claims
promptly. The servicing fees established, assessed and collected
hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, § 3-3 attorney fees
and § 3-2, expenses associated with legal proceedings initiated by or on
behalf of the municipality to collect its claims.
B. Servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment without
the initiation of enforcement proceedings. It is the intent of this § 3-5 to
pass the cost of servicing on to the delinquent person or property as
part of each claim. The recovery of servicing fees established herein
shall not be contingent upon the initiation of enforcement proceedings.
However, such servicing fees are due even where enforcement
proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to pass the cost
and expense associated with delinquent collection on to the delinquent
person or property and to make the municipality whole on all claims
collected.
C. Schedule. The following schedule of fees shall constitute reasonable
and appropriate servicing fees for each indicated service. The servicing
fees shall be added to and become part of the municipality's claims,
together with the face, penalties, interest, costs and attorney fees and
shall be payable in full before the discharge or satisfaction of any claim.
The schedule of fees is separate and distinct from any amounts imposed
by the sheriff, prothonotary, court or any other public office in
connection with the collection of the municipality's claims.
(1) Assignments: $5 per claim.
(2) Filing tax liens: $5 per item.
(3) Satisfactions: $5 per claim.
§ 3-4 ATTORNEY FEES § 3-5
3:51
§ 3-6. Effective date and retroactivity.
(4) Tax claim revivals (i.e., S&A): $10 per claim.
(5) Act 1/Act 20 compliance: $35 per case.
(6) Filing municipal claim and filing municipal claim revivals: $15 per
claim.
(7) Municipal claim/short title examination: $35 per claim.
(8) Sheriff sale claim certificates: $50 per case.
(9) Claim certifications: $10 per year.
(10) Servicing, including staffing, computers, office space, telephones,
equipment, and materials:
(a) For all delinquent and liened taxes, tax liens, municipal claims
(filed or unfiled) and municipal liens: 10% of gross collections.
(11) Postage and court costs: Actual cost.
A. This chapter shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth below15
and with respect to attorney fees pursuant to §§ 3-3 and 3-4 shall apply
to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens, municipal claims, municipal liens,
writs of scire facias, judgments or executions filed on or after December
19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
B. In no event shall the municipality's right to charge and collect
reasonable attorney fees pursuant to § 3-3 of this chapter be impaired
by the fact that any claim may also include an attorney commission of
5% for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any attorney fees
assessed and collected under this chapter or any prior ordinances
pursuant to Act 1 shall be in addition to any five-percent commission
previously included in any claim or judgment thereon.
C. Attorney fees and expenses incurred in pending enforcement
proceedings prior to the effective date of this chapter, pursuant to a
prior ordinances adopted under Act 1, but not collected, shall remain
due and owing in accordance therewith and shall be incorporated in
any future statement, claim, pleading, judgment or execution. Attorney
fees and expenses in any pending or new action incurred after the
effective date of this chapter shall be incurred, charged and collected in
accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in this chapter.
D. The charges, expenses and fees set forth in § 3-5 of this chapter relate
to all unpaid claims in favor of the municipality, its agents and assigns,
and shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
15.Editor's Note: The "date of enactment set forth below" is 6-7-2004, the adoption date of
Ord. No. 318.
§ 3-5 PINE CODE § 3-7
3:52
§ 3-7. Assignment.
The municipality assigns the provisions of this chapter to any assignee
of its claims unless the assignment limits the assignee's ability to collect
such amounts. The municipality and its duly authorized agents and their
counsel shall retain all rights to charge reasonable attorney fees, charges,
expenses and fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in
actions commenced under the Act and for servicing any claims retained by
the municipality.
Chapter 4
AUTHORITY, MUNICIPAL
§ 4-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Supervisors of the Township of Pine in the County
of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and said Board of
Supervisors hereby signifies its intention to organize an Authority under the
Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.16
§ 4-2. Projects to be undertaken.
The project which is to be undertaken by said Authority is any project
designated as such under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, P.L. 382.
No other Authority has been organized under the Act of 1945, P.L. 382,
or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,17 by the Township of
Pine or is in existence in or for said Township of Pine, the incorporating
municipality.
§ 4-3. Authorization.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized and directed to
organize said joint Authority and to execute Articles of Incorporation and
file the same with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as
provided by law.
§ 4-4. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention and in conformity with the
provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full as follows.18
Chapter 5
16.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 301 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5601 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: This Act was repealed by the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended. See
now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
18.Editor's Note: A copy of the Articles of Incorporation is on file in the Township offices.
§ 3-7 AUTHORITY, MUNICIPAL § 4-4
4:53
BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 46. Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 5-1. Creation.
A Board of Appeals, consisting of three members as set forth herein, is
hereby created for the Township of Pine.
§ 5-2. Appointment and qualifications of members.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall, by majority vote, appoint three
residents of the Township of Pine to the Board of Appeals.
B. The first such appointments to the Board of Appeals shall be as follows:
one member (Jeffrey Krill) for a term expiring December 31, 2005; one
member (George Haberman) for a term expiring December 31, 2006;
and one member (Michael Pfeifer) for a term expiring December 31,
2007.
C. Appointments following the initial terms specified above shall be for
periods of three years. Appointments to fill any vacancies in
membership shall be made by the Board of Supervisors for the
remainder of the vacant position's unexpired term. Members may be
reappointed by the Board of Supervisors for successive terms without
limitation. The term provisions of this section notwithstanding, all
members of the Board of Appeals shall hold their office at the pleasure
of the Board of Supervisors and may be removed at any time, with or
without cause, by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
D. If the Township of Pine, at any time hereafter, cannot find a resident of
the Township of Pine who satisfies the requirements of this chapter to
serve on the Board of Appeals, then the Board of Supervisors may
appoint a qualified person who resides outside of the Township of Pine.
E. Members of the Board of Supervisors or the Township's Building Code
Administrators shall not serve as members of the Board of Appeals.
F. Members of the Board of Appeals should exhibit and possess the
following qualifications:
(1) Training and experience sufficient to understand and to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction. Such training and
experience may consist of licensure as an architect or engineer,
experience in the construction industry, and training or experience
as an inspector or plan reviewer.
(2) Good judgment and an ability to work cooperatively with others.
§ 4-4 PINE CODE § 5-2
5:54
§ 5-3. Jurisdiction and procedure; fees.
(3) Ability to inspire the confidence, respect and support of the
community.
(4) Time to attend the meetings and hearings of the Board of Appeals
and to undertake and complete its assignments.
G. A member of the Board of Appeals shall not cast a vote nor participate
in a hearing on any appeal, request for variance, or request for
extension of time in which the member has a personal, professional, or
financial interest.
A. Pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Act19 and Section 403.121 of the
Code,20 the Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on: appeals, requests
for variances and requests for extensions of time. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Act or the
Code has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Act or the
Code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be
used.
B. The Board of Appeals shall meet as is necessary and shall schedule its
meetings and hearings (and also provide public notice thereof) in
accordance with Pennsylvania's Sunshine Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 701 to
716).
C. The Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals, requests for variance,
or requests for extension of time which relate to accessibility under the
Act, as jurisdiction regarding accessibility is exclusive to the
Department of Labor and Industry's Accessibility Advisory Board
pursuant to Section 403.142 of the Code.
D. The members of the Board of Appeals shall elect one of their members
to serve as its Chairperson to preside at its meetings and hearings.
Such Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and to issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
E. Attendance of two members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of its business and the disposition of any
appeal, request for variance, or request for extension of time.
F. Fees and costs assessable by the Township of Pine (including filing fees
for each separate appeal, request for variance, and request for
extension of time) and pertinent to the activities of the Board of Appeals
shall be paid in advance by the owner or owner's agent, as same are set
forth in the current standard Township fee schedule (Chapter A144 of
19.Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Construction Code Act (35 P.S. § 7210.101 to 7210.1103).
20.Editor's Note: The Uniform Construction Code in 34 Pa. Code, Ch. 401 to 405. See also Ch.
46, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 5-2 BOARD OF APPEALS § 5-3
5:55
§ 5-4. Appeals, variances and extensions of time.
the Code of the Township of Pine) and herein. Such fees and costs
shall include, but are not limited to, the actual costs incurred by the
Township for publicly advertising any hearing which may be requested.
No refund of such fees and costs shall be made in the event that a party
withdraws the matter from consideration by the Board of Appeals.
A. An owner or owner's agent may seek a variance or an extension of time
or appeal a Building Code Official's decision by filing a petition with the
Township's Building Code Official or other person so designated by the
Board of Appeals to receive same. All such requests shall be made on
forms provided by the Township of Pine.
B. The postmark date or the date of personal delivery will establish the
filing date of the appeal, request for variance, or extension of time.
C. An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to the Board of
Appeals will automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to
correct until the matter is resolved; provided, however, that an action
under Section 403.84 of the Code (relating to unsafe building, structure
or equipment) may not be stayed.
D. The Board of Appeals shall decide an appeal, variance request or
request for extension of time by reviewing documents and upon written
brief or argument, unless the owner or owner's agent requests a
hearing on same. In the event of such request, the Board of Appeals
shall schedule a hearing and shall notify the owner and the owner's
agent and the Township's Building Code Official of the date, time, and
location of the hearing. The parties to the hearing shall be the owner,
the owner's agent, the Township, and any other person or entity
permitted to appear by the Board of Appeals. At any such hearing the
formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded from the hearing. All
parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and afforded
the opportunity to present and respond to evidence and argument and
to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. If necessary,
an initial hearing may be continued by the Board of Appeals to a
subsequent date or dates. At the request of any party, a stenographic
record may be kept of any hearing. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be paid by the party who requests the keeping of
such record. The cost of a transcript of the hearing shall be paid to the
stenographer by the respective party requesting same. Should the
Board of Appeals request a transcript of the hearing, the cost of its copy
of the transcript shall be paid by the Township.
E. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing within 60 days from the date
of a request for same, unless the owner or owner's agent has agreed in
writing to an extension of such time for hearing.
§ 5-3 PINE CODE § 5-4
5:56
Chapter 6
BUDGETARY RESERVE ACCOUNT
§ 6-1. Account created.
There is hereby created for the Township of Pine a Budgetary Reserve
Account.
F. The Board of Appeals shall consider only the following factors when
deciding an appeal under Section 501(c)(2) of the Act:
(1) Whether the true intent of the Act or Code was incorrectly
interpreted.
(2) Whether the provisions of the Act do not apply.
(3) Whether an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
G. The Board of Appeals may consider the following factors when ruling
upon a request for extension of time or a request for variance:
(1) The reasonableness of the Code's application in a particular case.
(2) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the Code or an unsafe condition.
(3) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance.
(4) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance.
(5) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(6) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree of
protection to the Code.
H. Following its consideration of a matter, the Board of Appeals may:
(1) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(2) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(3) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
I. The Board of Appeals shall provide a written notice of its decision to the
owner or the owner's agent, and to the Township within 45 days of the
submission of documents and written brief or argument or, in the event
of a hearing, within 45 days of the end of the last hearing.
§ 5-4 BUDGETARY RESERVE ACCOUNT § 6-2
6:57
§ 6-2. Authority to deposit funds.
The Township Manager/Treasurer is hereby directed to deposit all funds
received from the State Treasurer pursuant to Act 77 of 199321 for the
period of the first calendar year in which the additional one-percent sales
tax is in effect into such Budgetary Reserve Account.
§ 6-3. Expenditure of funds.
Such Budgetary Reserve Account created by this chapter shall be
maintained by the Township of Pine, and the funds therein shall be retained
by the Township until such time as the Township's Board of Supervisors
shall by resolution direct their expenditure, whether total or partial, in
connection with an unanticipated fiscal emergency of the Township of Pine.
§ 6-4. Unanticipated fiscal emergencies.
An unanticipated fiscal emergency as set forth in § 6-3 hereof may be
defined to include but shall need not be limited to an unbudgeted or
underbudgeted expense relating to:
Chapter 8
CABLE SERVICE RATES
§ 8-1. Adoption of rate regulation standards.
The rate regulation standards of the Federal Communications Commission
("FCC") in Subpart N - Cable Rate Regulations, 47 CFR 76.900 et seq., as
may be amended, are hereby adopted for the review and determination of
reasonable and lawful rates for basic service, installation and equipment in
the Township of Pine.
§ 8-2. Review and evaluation.
A. The construction or extension of public water or public sewer lines to
serve residents within the Township.
B. The construction, repair or maintenance (including winter
maintenance) of public roads within the Township.
C. The purchase, lease, repair or maintenance of vehicles or other
equipment necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
D. Such other unanticipated fiscal emergency as may be defined by the
Board of Supervisors in its resolution.
A. Upon certification of the Township of Pine by the FCC to regulate rates
for basic service, installation and equipment, the Board of Supervisors,
through its designate, the Township Secretary, shall notify all cable
21.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
§ 6-2 PINE CODE § 8-2
8:58
Chapter 9
operators providing service within the Township of said certification
and shall direct each cable operator to file with the Township its current
schedule of rates and supporting FCC forms and worksheets for basic
service, installation and equipment. If a cable operator elects to use
a cost of service showing, the operator shall submit cost-of-service
accounts in detail sufficient to support such a showing. Each cable
operator shall submit such number and form of copies as the Township
Secretary shall determine in the notice.
B. Upon receipt of any rate schedule referenced in Subsection A or of any
rate schedule proposing any change in such rates, the Board of
Supervisors, through its designate, the Township Secretary, shall
schedule, give public notice and give notice to the cable operator of a
period during which the Superintendent will receive written comments
from the public and the cable operator on the reasonableness of the
rates. The Board of Supervisors shall also schedule and preside at a
public hearing for the receipt of oral comments. The Board of
Supervisors, through its designate, the Township Secretary, shall give
public notice of the hearing and notice thereof to interested parties and
the cable operator. The Board of Supervisors may arrange for the
cablecast of the hearing on a public access cable channel. The public
hearing for oral comments shall normally be held and the close of the
period for written comments shall be scheduled within 30 days of
receipt of the rate filing.
C. The Township Secretary shall review the rate filing and the comments
received and present an evaluation thereof to the Board of Supervisors.
The Township Secretary shall present the evaluation within 30 days of
receipt of the rate filing. If the Township Secretary determines that the
thirty-day period is insufficient to review the filing, the Township
Secretary shall recommend that the Board of Supervisors act to extend
the period established for the review as permitted by the Act and the
FCC's regulations to prevent the proposed rates from becoming
effective by operation of law.
D. If the Board of Supervisors extends the period for the Township's
review of a rate filing pursuant to Subsection C, the period for written
comments and the public hearing may be scheduled by the Board of
Supervisors at a date later than the thirty-day period in Subsection B,
provided that such period and hearing shall be held at such time that
the comments received will be available for the Board of Supervisors
consideration in making the evaluation. The close of the comment
period and hearing for the initial rate filing of a cable operator that is
providing service upon the effective date of the Township's certification
by the FCC shall not be scheduled more than 120 days from the
effective date of the certification.
E. The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirements of this section
for promotional rate reductions.
§ 8-2 COMPENSATION § 8-2
9:59
COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 32.
§ 8-2 PINE CODE § 8-2
9:60
ARTICLE I
Supervisors
[Adopted 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 294]
§ 9-1. Compensation established.
The Supervisors of the Township of Pine shall each be compensated for their
duties by payment to each of an annual salary of $2,500, which salary shall
be payable quarterly by the Township of Pine.
§ 9-2. When effective.
In accordance with applicable law, the salary set forth in § 9-1 hereof shall
become effective for each individual Supervisor only at the beginning of
the next term of that Supervisor. Until the beginning of their next term,
each individual Supervisor shall continue to receive the previously enacted
annual salary of $1,875.
§ 9-1 COMPENSATION § 9-2
9:61
Chapter 9A
CONTRACTS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 2.
§ 9-2 PINE CODE § 9-2
9A:62
ARTICLE I
Bidding Practices and Procedures
[Adopted 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 335]
§ 9A-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
BEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A responsible bidder who, in a competitive
bidding situation, submits a bid which, as finally determined by the Board
of Supervisors, is the best bid available in terms of: price; product and/
or service quality; experience and/or functional capabilities of the bidder;
adherence to specifications; timeliness or delivery; financial capabilities and
financial responsibility of the bidder; serviceability and maintenance; and
other factors that the Board of Supervisors may establish.
PREQUALIFIED RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A bidder who is considered
responsible either through previous experience in business dealings with
the Township or through the Township's investigation of the credit,
capabilities, reliability, experience, and performance of the bidder.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine.
§ 9A-2. Applicability.
Contracts of the Township involving (or reasonably expected to involve)
sums in excess of an amount equal to $100,000 shall be: subject to the
requirements and procedures of this article; made in writing; and executed
on behalf of the Township by the Chair of the Board of Supervisors (or, in
his/her absence, the Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors), and attested
by the Township Manager/Secretary.
§ 9A-3. Exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no contract in an amount specified
in § 9A-2 shall be authorized, let, or otherwise awarded by the Township
except with the best responsible bidder after competitive bidding in
accordance herewith. The provisions of this article shall not be applicable
to contracts: let in conjunction with specifications prepared, issued, and
advertised by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other
governmental entity, authority, agency, or political subdivision (i.e., "piggybacked"
contracts); for acquisition or use of real property; for professional
or unique services; for emergency repairs of public works (including public
roads and their appurtenances) of the Township; for the repair and/or
maintenance of public works (including public roads and their
appurtenances); or made with other governmental entities, authorities,
agencies, or political subdivisions.
§ 9A-1 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 9A-4
9A:63
§ 9A-4. Prequalification of bidders and establishment/maintenance
of a prequalified responsible bidders list.
The Board of Supervisors shall cause to be established and maintained
a prequalified responsible bidders list for each type of goods or services
to be purchased by the Township in an amount or amounts specified in
§ 9A-2 of this article. Inclusion on the prequalified responsible bidders list
shall signify that the person or entity named thereon is considered by the
Township to be responsible, either through previous satisfactory experience
in business dealings with the Township or through a previous satisfactory
investigation by the Township of the credit, reliability, performance,
experience, and capabilities (including both functional and financial
capabilities) of the named person or entity.
§ 9A-5. Prequalification investigation.
The prequalification investigation by the Township specified in § 9A-4 of
this article shall consist of submission by a prospective bidder of certain
information specified by the Township and its satisfactory verification by
the Township. Such specified information to be submitted shall include (but
need not be limited to):
A. Names and addresses of all owners and/or officers of the prospective
bidder and its organizational structure (e.g., sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, etc.).
B. Number of years (if any) of the prospective bidder's prior operation.
C. Information regarding the financial condition and responsibility of the
prospective bidder, which shall include a complete financial statement
with balance sheet, income statement and cash flows and all required
disclosures. If such financial statement has been audited, the auditor's
report shall be included.
D. A list of all work completed by the prospective bidder within the last
three years, including the nature of the work and for whom performed,
the amount of the contract for the work; and the responsible contact
person (reference).
E. Number of employees and detail on key personnel as to years of their
service with the prospective bidder and their prior experience and
skills.
F. Identities of the specified key personnel who shall be assigned to work
with the Township.
G. A list describing all equipment owned by the prospective bidder.
Equipment utilized (but not owned) by the prospective bidder should be
separately listed and described (along with information as to the
manner in which it is procured, e.g., lease, rental, etc.).
§ 9A-4 PINE CODE § 9A-5
9A:64
H. A current insurance certificate indicating the provision of the minimum
coverages and limits specified below:
(1) General liability.
(a) Each occurrence: $1,000,000.
(b) Damage to rented premises: $100,000.
(c) Medical expenses (any one person): $10,000.
(d) Personal and advertising injury: $1,000,000.
(e) General aggregate: $2,000,000.
(f) Products Comp/Op Agg: $2,000,000.
(2) Automobile liability.
(a) Combined single limit (each accident): $1,000,000.
(3) Excess/umbrella liability (each occurrence).
Contract Amount Coverage Required
$100,000 to $250,000 $1,000,000
$250,001 to $999,999 $2,000,000
$1,000,000 to $7,999,999 $5,000,000
$8,000,000 and over $10,000,000
(4) Workers' compensation and employers' liability: $500,000.
I. Evidence of any officer's or employee's bonding.
J. Identities of any sureties which have provided bonding to the
prospective bidder within the past five years; whether any claims have
been initiated against any such bonds and, if so, the disposition of any
such claims; and a "bondability certificate."
K. Information regarding any complaints concerning workmanship,
quality of work, timeliness, or other related matters concerning the
prospective bidder made within the last three years and which resulted
in either a termination of contract or a contractual penalty imposed.
L. Information regarding current litigation or arbitration proceedings
(and any such proceedings initiated within the past three years)
involving performance or quality of work concerning the prospective
bidder.
M. Information regarding any prevailing wage complaints previously filed
against the prospective bidder.
N. A list of all subcontractors and suppliers utilized by the prospective
bidder within the last two years; whether any such subcontractors and
§ 9A-5 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 9A-5
9A:65
§ 9A-6. Failure to prequalify or disqualification of bidders.
A person or entity may be refused inclusion on the prequalified responsible
bidders list or disqualified from bidding upon contracts specified in this
article or may have their bid upon same rejected for reasons including but
not limited to the following:
§ 9A-7. Consequence of disqualification.
Upon failure to prequalify or disqualification, as specified in § 9A-6 of this
article, a person or entity shall not be permitted to contract with the
Township for those contracts specified in § 9A-2 of this article.
§ 9A-8. Invitation to bid.
When it is determined that a purchase is to be made through competitive
bidding in accordance with the requirements of this article, invitations
to bid shall be sent by the Township via first class, pre-paid U.S. mail
(certified/return receipt requested) to all persons or entities appearing
on the prequalified responsible bidders list for the item/service to be
purchased. Such invitation to bid shall include:
suppliers have filed claims against the prospective bidder; and the
disposition of any such claims.
O. For contracts involving construction projects, a completed Contractors'
Qualification Form (American Institute of Architects Form Document
No. 305).
A. Failure to adequately respond to the prequalification investigation
information requests established by the Township pursuant to this
article.
B. Determination by the Township, following its prequalification
investigation, that the person or entity does not possess the experience,
skill, equipment, personnel, insurance, or financial capability necessary
to satisfactorily perform a contract of the scope and/or magnitude
specified in this article.
C. Documentation of unsatisfactory performance by the person or entity or
of unsatisfactory goods of services provided to the Township or other
municipalities or private entities.
D. False or misleading statements about a service or a product.
E. Collusion with another person or entity in an attempt to regulate the
price, quality, or availability of goods or services to the detriment of the
Township.
A. A basic description of the item or service to be purchased.
B. The quantity to be purchased.
§ 9A-5 PINE CODE § 9A-8
9A:66
§ 9A-9. Notification requirements.
A copy of the invitation to bid may be placed in a legal advertisement
published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township and may also be posted and announced via the Internet by the
Township directly, or through its designated online service provider, if any.
The legal advertisement or Internet posting shall appear no later than 30
days prior to the scheduled bid opening.
§ 9A-10. Specifications.
Specifications shall be prepared for all purchases specified in this article
to be made through competitive bidding. Specifications shall consist of a
specific, complete and accurate description of the item or service to be
purchased, the performance requirements and conditions and the terms of
purchase. Specifications shall be clearly worded but shall not be so specific
or strict as to effectively eliminate acceptable products from competition.
If a maintenance bond is to be required before a contract is awarded,
the amount, manner and form shall be prescribed in the specifications. All
specifications for construction contracts with the Township shall include
requirements for a bid bond and for performance, labor and materialman's
bonds.
§ 9A-11. Bid deposits or bond.
A bid deposit or bond may be required for any purchase of products or
services made by the Township which are subject to the provisions of this
article and shall be provided in an amount, manner and form prescribed by
the Township Manager. The bid deposit of the best responsible bidder, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors, shall be forfeited to the Township
if the product or service purchased is not delivered and/or performed, as
the case may be, as required in the specifications.
§ 9A-12. Bid procedure.
All bids shall be firmly sealed in an envelope and labeled so as to indicate
the specific purchase for which the bid is submitted and, also, the scheduled
date and time of the bid opening. Bids shall be opened promptly at the
C. The method by which specifications and bid documents may be
obtained.
D. The date, time and place of the bid opening.
E. The number of persons or entities appearing on the Township's
prequalified responsible bidders list for the item or service to be
purchased.
F. Any other specific conditions and requirements, including those which
may be related to the particular proposed purchase or project, as
established by the Township.
§ 9A-8 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 9A-12
9A:67
appointed time by a bid committee consisting of persons designated by the
Board of Supervisors or (if no such designation is made) by at least two
members of the Township's administrative staff. All bid openings shall be
open to the public. Any bids received after the bid opening has commenced
shall be returned to the bidder unopened. Upon completion of bid opening,
the bid committee and/or Township's administrative staff shall: confer upon
the bids, receive any necessary input thereon from the Township's
consultants or advisors, analyze the bids for conformance with the
specifications, and thereafter recommend to the Board of Supervisors the
best responsible bid.
§ 9A-13. Bid award.
The Board of Supervisors shall review the recommendation of the bid
committee and/or the Township's administrative staff and may award a
contract to the best responsible bidder. All such awards shall be made by
vote of the Board of Supervisors at a properly advertised public meeting.
The Board of Supervisors shall at all times reserve the right to reject any
and all bids received or to waive any informalities in the bids received if
said informalities do not conflict with the Township's Home Rule Charter,
the Code of the Township of Pine, or other applicable law.
§ 9A-12 PINE CODE § 9A-13
9A:68
Chapter 10
COOPERATIVE AND INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS
§ 9A-13 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 9A-13
9A:69

ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 10-1-1984 by Ord. No. 138]
§ 10-1. Municipality to enter into agreement.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act22 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "trust") and
entering into the declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section; a copy of
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was adopted.
§ 10-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
article.
§ 10-3. Custody of funds designated.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
trust.
§ 10-4. Determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 10-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the trust.
22.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 10-1 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-4
9A:71
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 10-4 PINE CODE § 10-4
9A:72
ARTICLE II
Northern Regional Police Department of Allegheny County
[Adopted 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 37623]
§ 10-5. Provision of police services.
Effective beginning January 1, 2016, all police services within the Township
of Pine shall continue to be performed by the Northern Regional Police
Department of Allegheny County, an entity previously formed to facilitate
and administer the provision of joint, cooperative police services through
a single police department in and for the communities of the Township of
Pine, Marshall Township, the Borough of Bradford Woods and the Township
of Richland.
§ 10-5.1. Agreement.
The Township of Pine is hereby authorized to join with Marshall Township,
the Borough of Bradford Woods, and the Township of Richland, in
accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, as a participating municipality in the Northern Regional
Police Department of Allegheny County pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth in a new, revised joint police agreement by and among
the four previously mentioned municipalities. The terms and conditions
of the aforementioned joint police agreement are incorporated herein by
reference as fully as if set forth at length herein, and a copy of said
joint police agreement is attached to this article and labeled as Exhibit
A hereto.24 The appropriate officers of the Township of Pine are hereby
authorized to execute such joint police agreement on its behalf. Pursuant
to the requirements of the aforementioned Intergovernmental Cooperation
Act, the terms of the aforementioned joint police agreement and of this
article accordingly set forth: the conditions of the agreement; the duration
of the term of the agreement; the purposes and objectives of the agreement
(including the powers and scope of authority therein delegated); the
manner and extent of financing the agreement; the organizational structure
necessary to implement the agreement; the manner in which real or
personal property shall be acquired, managed, licensed, or disposed of;
and that the entity created by the said joint police agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee benefits, including social security, for its employees.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Northern Regional Police
Department of Allegheny County, adopted 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 329.
24.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-5 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-5.1
9A:73

ARTICLE III
Implementation Grant Funding
[Adopted 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 156]
§ 10-6. Authorization.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the Township of Pine
is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental cooperation agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A, with the County.25
§ 10-7. Chairman to execute agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Pine Township is hereby
authorized to execute the intergovernmental cooperation agreement with
the County on behalf of the Township of Pine.
25.Editor's Note: Exhibit A of Ord. No. 156 is on file in the Township offices and is available
for inspection during regular office hours.
§ 10-6 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-7
9A:75

ARTICLE IV
Local Government Risk Pool
[Adopted 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 21526]
§ 10-8. Municipality to enter into agreement.
The purposes and objectives of this article are set forth hereinabove,27
and the trust agreement and actions contemplated thereby and purposes
and objectives contained therein are otherwise legal as part of a pooled
arrangement with other governmental units, thereby achieving economic
and other advantages of intergovernmental cooperation. This municipality
shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the Act by becoming
a member of the fund and entering into the trust agreement, a copy of which
shall be filed with the minutes of the municipality.
§ 10-9. Authorization to enter agreement.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the trust agreement for the
purposes contained therein. These actions are to be taken by the member(s)
or employee(s) of this municipality designated for this purpose, pursuant to
general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this article.
§ 10-10. Custody of funds.
The fund shall be designated as having official custody of this municipality's
funds which are to be invested by the fund pursuant to the terms of the trust
agreement.
§ 10-11. Determinations.
As required by the Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement will be as set forth in the trust
agreement referred to in § 10-8.
B. This municipality's participation in the fund shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance and in accordance with the terms of the trust
agreement.
C. The fund shall be managed by a plan committee and executive
committee as set forth in the trust agreement and bylaws of said fund,
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Local Government Risk Pool,
adopted 6-21-1989 by Ord. No. 176.
27.Editor's Note: The preamble to this article is as follows: "WHEREAS, the fund is being
formed in accordance with the authorization contained in the Pennsylvania Workers'
Compensation Act (the "Act") as the same may be amended from time to time and was
amended on July 2, 1993, to authorize political subdivisions to join a fund and to join
together as a group to self-insure and pool workers' compensation liabilities; and
"WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act provides that any
municipality may enter into intergovernmental cooperation with another governmental
unit or political subdivision upon the passage of an ordinance by its governing body."
§ 10-8 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-11
9A:77
copies of which will be provided for review following the adoption of
this article.
§ 10-11 PINE CODE § 10-11
9A:78
ARTICLE V
North Hills Drug Task Force
[Adopted 7-18-1990 by Ord. No. 186; amended in its entirety
5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 249]
§ 10-12. Municipality to enter into agreement.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,28 the Township of Pine
is authorized to enter into intergovernmental cooperation agreement
regarding the North Hills Drug Task Force. A copy of an agreement to be
entered is attached hereto as Exhibit A.29
§ 10-13. Authorization.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Chief of Police of the
Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force are hereby authorized to
execute the intergovernmental cooperation agreements with the signatory
municipalities on behalf of the Township of Pine.
28.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Township Secretary and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 10-12 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-13
9A:79

ARTICLE VI
Winter Traffic Services
[Adopted 8-7-1995 by Res. No. 492]
§ 10-14. Authorization to enter into agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Pine Township is authorized
and directed to sign the attached agreement30 on its behalf, and the
Township Secretary is authorized to attest the same.
30.Editor's Note: The agreement for the obtaining of permits by the Township to traverse
bridges with posted weight limits as part of its provision of winter traffic services is on file
in the office of the Township Secretary and may be examined there during regular
business hours.
§ 10-14 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-14
9A:81

ARTICLE VII
Northern Tier Regional Library Association
[Adopted 11-20-1995 by Ord. No. 237; amended in its entirety
5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 250]
§ 10-15. Adoption of agreement.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, of July 12, 1972, No.
180, 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.,31 the terms and conditions of a modification
agreement amending the intergovernmental library agreement of
November 29, 1995, a copy of which such modification agreement is
attached hereto as Exhibit A,32 which exhibit is incorporated herein by
reference, are hereby adopted.
§ 10-16. When effective.
The aforesaid modification agreement amending the aforesaid
intergovernmental library agreement shall become effective as specified in
said modification agreement when adopted by ordinance enacted by the
Townships of Pine and Richland and the authorized corporate action of the
Board of Directors of the Northern Tier Regional Library Association.
31.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Township Secretary and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 10-15 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-16
9A:83

ARTICLE VIII
Merchant Services Program
[Adopted 4-6-1998 by Res. No. 547]
§ 10-17. Authorization to participate.
The Township of Pine is authorized to participate in the Merchant Services
Program.
§ 10-18. Approval of contract and agreement.
The Township of Pine approves the Public Unit Contract and the PLGIT
Participant Agreement33 substantially in the form presented to the public
meeting of the Township of Pine's Board of Supervisors on April 6, 1998.
§ 10-19. Authorized actions.
The officers of the Township of Pine are authorized to take any actions and
to exercise and to execute and deliver any documents (including, from time
to time, additional agreements) as may be necessary or proper to effectuate
Pine's participation in the Merchant Services Program and to carry out the
purposes of this resolution.
33.Editor's Note: The Contract and Agreement are on file in the Township offices and are
available for inspection during regular office hours.
§ 10-17 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-19
9A:85

ARTICLE IX
NEWCOM Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreement
[Adopted 4-6-1998 by Res. No. 549]
§ 10-20. Ratification of Addenda.
The attached Addenda Nos. 1 and 2 to the NEWCOM Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement of December 14, 199534 are hereby ratified and the
appropriate officials of the above named municipality are authorized and
directed to execute any other documents needed to carry said Addenda into
effect.
34.Editor's Note: The Agreement and Addenda are on file in the Township offices and may be
inspected during regular office hours.
§ 10-20 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-20
9A:87

ARTICLE X
Risk Management Worker's Compensation Pooled Trust
[Adopted 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 295]
§ 10-21. Authorization to execute and deliver documents.
The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and deliver
the following documents, which documents are attached hereto and made
part hereof and which may be inspected by any interested citizen at the
office of the Municipal Secretary:
§ 10-22. Duration of Agreement.
The duration of the term of the Agreement is four years from the date of
admission to the Trust as a participant.
§ 10-23. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are set forth in Article V of
the Agreement.
§ 10-24. Powers and scope of authority.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II,
Article V, Article VI, Article VIII and Article IX of the Agreement.
§ 10-25. Appropriation of funds for meeting obligations.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the
Agreement shall be appropriated from the general funds of the political
subdivision.
§ 10-26. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the Agreement
consists of the Trust, Trustees, Service Agents and Fiscal Agents created by
the Agreement.
§ 10-27. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
Property acquired for purposes of the Trust shall be acquired, managed and
disposed of under the terms of the attached Trust Agreement.
A. The Municipal Risk Management Workers' Compensation Pooled Trust
Agreement (hereafter the Agreement).
B. The participant's application.
§ 10-21 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-28
9A:89
§ 10-28. Entrance into contracts.
The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security for its
employees.
§ 10-28 PINE CODE § 10-28
9A:90
ARTICLE XI
Police Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 1-7-2002 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 10-29. Adoption of agreement.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301
et seq., the terms and conditions of the Mutual Aid Agreement for police
services with Cranberry Township, a copy of which is attached hereto as
Exhibit A35, are hereby adopted.
§ 10-30. When effective.
The aforesaid Mutual Aid Agreement shall become effective when adopted
by an appropriate ordinance enacted by Cranberry Township and, also,
by the other participating municipalities comprising the Pine-Marshall-
Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force.
35.Editor's Note: Exhibit A of Ord. No. 300 is on file in the Township offices and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 10-29 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-30
9A:91

ARTICLE XII
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 374]
§ 10-31. Agreement adopted.
§ 10-32. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 10-33. General conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 10-34. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Board of Supervisors adopts the Restated Trust Agreement and
agrees to participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the Restated Trust Agreement, and the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby
authorized to sign the Restated Trust Agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The Restated Trust Agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 230 Pearce Mill Road, Wexford, Pennsylvania
15090. The Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modification or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in
accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board
of Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in
the best interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-31 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-35
9A:93
§ 10-35. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be March
16, 2015.
§ 10-36. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-37. Organization.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 10-38. Provision of funds for operation.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 10-39. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 10-40. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-41. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 10-42. Additional actions.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of the
attached Restated Trust Agreement36 and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
36.Editor's Note: The Restated Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-35 PINE CODE § 10-43
9A:94
§ 10-43. Duration of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-44. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that (i) funds
to implement the Township's obligations under the agreement shall
come from the normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township
employee compensation and employee benefits, and (ii) no borrowing is
anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 10-43 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-44
9A:95

ARTICLE XIII
Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance Cooperative Trust
[Adopted 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 375]
§ 10-45. Agreement adopted.
§ 10-46. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of obtaining high quality, cost-effective medical, prescription, dental, life,
disability, vision and/or other employee welfare benefit insurance at a
reasonable cost to the Township and its employees.
§ 10-47. General conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 10-48. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Board of Supervisors adopts the Restated Trust Agreement and
agrees to participate in the Trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the Restated Trust Agreement, and the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby
authorized to sign the Restated Trust Agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The Restated Trust Agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 230 Pearce Mill Road, Wexford, Pennsylvania
15090. The Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modification or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in
accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board
of Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in
the best interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-45 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-49
9A:97
§ 10-49. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be March
16, 2015.
§ 10-50. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-51. Organization.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 10-52. Provision of funds for operation.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 10-53. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 10-54. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-55. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 10-56. Additional actions.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of the
attached Restated Trust Agreement37 and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
37.Editor's Note: The Restated Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 10-49 PINE CODE § 10-57
9A:98
§ 10-57. Duration of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 10-58. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees at least 90 days in advance to become effective on
either June 30 or December 31 of a given Plan year; or in the case of an
initial year of participation in the Trust shall participate for a minimum
of one year.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the Restated Trust Agreement
are that (i) funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
Restated Trust Agreement shall come from the normal and usual
budgeted amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits, and (ii) no borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 10-57 CONTRACTS, PUBLIC § 10-58
9A:99
Chapter 13
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire company — See Ch. 17. Emergency Operations Plan — See Ch. A147.
§ 10-58 PINE CODE § 10-58
13:100
ARTICLE I
Minimum Standards for Prehospital Care
[Adopted 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 207]
§ 13-1. Advanced life support.
The minimum standard of care of professional prehospital care and
transportation to be provided for all emergencies within the Township
of Pine which require emergency medical services shall be advanced life
support, as that term is defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
advanced life support services initiated within the Township of Pine shall be
rendered by providers licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 13-1 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 13-1
13:101
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 15-1. Establishment.
In accordance with the authority granted by Act No. 148 of 1973 of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 11501 et seq.38), there is hereby
established an Environmental Advisory Council for the Township of Pine
to advise the Township of Pine, its Board of Supervisors, its Planning
Commission and all other Pine Township elected or appointed boards and
officials on matters concerning the protection, conservation, management,
promotion and use of natural resources, including air, land and water
resources, located within Pine Township.
§ 15-2. Composition; appointment; vacancies. [Amended 2-22-2005
by Ord. No. 325]
The Environmental Advisory Council (the "Council") shall be composed of
seven residents of the Township who shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine. Any vacancies on the Council shall be
filled by appointments made by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Pine, and such appointments shall be for the remainder of the unexpired
term of the previously vacant position. The initial appointments to the two
additional positions on the Council created by the provisions of Ordinance
No. 325 shall be for terms ending December 31, 2006, and December
31, 2007, respectively, so as to continue the overall staggering of terms
established and otherwise required by Chapter 15 (§ 15-3) of the Code of
the Township of Pine.
§ 15-3. Terms of members; designation of Chairman.
A. Such appointed Council members shall serve for terms of three years,
except that initial appointments shall be so staggered so that the terms
of two persons shall expire in three years, the terms of two persons
shall expire in two years and the term of one person shall expire in one
year.
B. The Supervisors of Pine Township shall designate the Chairman of the
Council annually as of each January 1 for the ensuing calendar year.
38.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2322 et seq.
§ 13-1 PINE CODE § 15-4
15:102
§ 15-4. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.
Members of said Environmental Advisory Council shall receive no
compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for such expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their
duties. The Board of Supervisors of Pine Township shall have sole discretion
and authority to determine the appropriateness of expenses for which
reimbursement is requested.
§ 15-5. Powers.
§ 15-6. Scope of authority.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall not exercise any powers or
perform any duties which are conferred or imposed by law upon a state
agency; nor shall the Environmental Advisory Council exercise any powers
or perform any duties which are conferred upon the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Pine or which have been delegated or conferred by
said Board of Supervisors upon other local governmental agencies, officials
or boards. All action and work of the Environmental Advisory Council is
A. The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the power to:
(1) Identify environmental problems and recommend plans and
programs for the promotion and conservation of the natural
resources and for the protection and improvement of the quality of
the environment within the Township of Pine.
(2) Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas of
the Township of Pine.
(3) Promote a community environmental program.
(4) Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps and other
unique natural areas for the purpose of obtaining information on
the proper use of such areas.
(5) Advise the appropriate local governmental agencies and the Board
of Supervisors in the acquisition of property, both real and
personal, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, easement, devise or
lease, in matters dealing with the purposes of this chapter and Act
148 of 1973 (53 P.S. § 11501 et seq.39).
B. The Environmental Advisory Council shall also have the power, upon
formal request from the Pine Township Board of Supervisors or
Planning Commission, to review any proposed municipal or park
development or any private development in excess of five acres, for
purposes of rendering an advisory opinion as to the effect such
development will have upon the environment.
39.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2322 et seq.
§ 15-4 ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL § 15-6
15:103
strictly advisory only and shall not in any way be binding on the Board
of Supervisors of Pine Township or any of the Township's other local
governmental agencies, officials, boards or persons.
§ 15-7. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report, which shall be printed in the
Annual Township Report and which shall otherwise be available for public
inspection.
§ 15-8. Appropriation of funds.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine may appropriate funds
for the expenses incurred by the Environmental Advisory Council.
Appropriations may be expended for such administrative, clerical, printing
and legal services as may from time to time be required. The Board of
Supervisors of Pine Township shall have the sole authority and discretion
to determine the appropriateness of such expenses and may require that
proposed expenditures by the Council be submitted for advance approval
by the Board of Supervisors. The whole or any part of any funds so
appropriated by the Township in any year may be placed in a conservation
fund and allowed to accumulate from year to year and/or be expended in
any year.
Chapter 17
FIRE COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 13.
Fire districts — See Ch. 18.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
§ 17-1. Designation of official fire company.
The Wexford Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Pine, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby designated as
the officially recognized volunteer fire company for the Township of Pine.
§ 17-2. Authorization to provide services.
A. The Wexford Volunteer Fire Company is hereby authorized to provide
such services to the Township of Pine as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situate therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous material incidents and other
§ 15-6 PINE CODE § 17-2
17:104
§ 17-3. Authorization of additional activities.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company
as authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity, the
members of the Wexford Volunteer Fire Company are also authorized to do
the following things:
§ 17-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize the Wexford Volunteer Fire
Company as the official volunteer fire company of the Township of Pine and
to state additional authorized activities in which its officers and members
may engage for workmen's compensation purposes.
Chapter 18
FIRE DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
§ 18-1. Establishment territory included.
The Township of Pine shall have a single fire district to be known as the
"Pine Township Fire District." The Pine Township Fire District's territory
dangerous situations. The Wexford Volunteer Fire Company may also
provide nonemergency and public service functions, such as, again by
way of example and not of limitation, removing water from property
after storms and assisting in the removal, abatement and prevention
of damage or injury to persons or property, whether through natural
causes or man-made situations.
B. The Wexford Volunteer Fire Company may also conduct and participate
in such training activities and drills, either within or outside of the
Township of Pine, as may be deemed necessary by its officers to
maintain proficiency in providing services and may also respond to fire
and other emergency calls and provide services to municipalities
outside of the Township of Pine.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade,
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
company.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the fire company.
§ 17-2 FIRE DISTRICTS § 18-1
18:105
shall be the entire Township of Pine, and said district shall be bounded by
the geographic boundaries of the Township of Pine.
§ 18-2. Installation of fire hydrants.
The Board of Supervisors shall arrange with the supplier of municipal
water within the Pine Township Fire District for the installation of the
appropriate number of fire hydrants in connection to the water mains
so that the hydrants maintain the water pressure approved by the fire
insurance underwriters. The Board of Supervisors shall annually pay the
cost and charge of said fire hydrants to the supplier of municipal water
within the Pine Township Fire District.
§ 18-3. Assessment of costs and expenses.
The Board of Supervisors shall annually assess or cause to be assessed the
costs and expenses for the installation and maintenance of fire hydrants and
fire protection service within the Pine Township Fire District by an equal
assessment on all property or portions thereof, whether or not exempt from
taxation by existing law, as is within said district and which is within 780
feet of any fire hydrant located in said district.
§ 18-4. Collection of assessment.
Such assessments shall be collected in the same manner as taxes are
collected by the Township of Pine, and the Collector shall receive the same
commission as the Collector receives on the collection of Township real
estate taxes. The Township Treasurer shall receive all such assessments and
keep the same in a separate account.
Chapter 19
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 19-1. Purpose.
The intent of the Investment Policy of the Township of Pine is to define the
parameters within which funds are to be managed. In methods, procedures
and practices, the policy formalizes the framework for the Township's
investment activities that must be exercised to ensure effective and
judicious management of the Township's funds. The guidelines are intended
to be broad enough to allow the Board of Supervisors or their designees to
function properly within the parameters of responsibility and authority, yet
specific enough to adequately safeguard the Township's financial assets.
§ 19-2. Governing authority.
The Investment Policy shall be executed in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code, the Township of Pine Home
Rule Charter, Pennsylvania Act 72 of 1971 (pertaining to collateralization of
§ 18-1 PINE CODE § 19-2
18:106
deposits exceeding insurable limits) and all other applicable federal, state
and local requirements.
§ 19-3. Scope.
§ 19-4. Standards of care.
A. This Investment Policy applies to all financial assets of the Township of
Pine which are funds accounted for in the Township of Pine Annual
Financial Report and includes the following funds:
(1) General Fund.
(2) Recreation Fund.
(3) Transportation Impact Fund.
(4) Water/Sewer District Fund.
(5) Capital Projects Fund.
(6) Liquid Fuels Fund.
(7) Any new fund created by the legislative body, unless specifically
exempted.
B. The Investment Policy excludes the Deferred Compensation and
Municipal Employees' Pension Funds, for which the Township acts as
trustee or fiduciary. Investments in these funds are determined by the
individual employees, and the plan assets can only be used for the
employees or their beneficiaries. Consequently, these funds fall outside
the scope of this policy.
A. Prudence.
(1) The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall
be the "prudent person" standard. Officers and designated
employees acting in accordance with this investment policy and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal liability for an
individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided
deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and
appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
(2) The "prudent person" standard states that, "Investments shall be
made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of
their capital as well as the probable income to be derived."
B. Ethics and conflicts of interest.
(1) Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall
refrain from personal activity that could conflict with the proper
§ 19-2 FIRE DISTRICTS § 19-4
18:107
§ 19-5. General objectives.
The primary objectives of this Investment Policy, in order of priority, are:
execution and management of the investment program, or that
could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions.
(2) The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania State Ethics Commission
requires public officials and certain public employees to file a
statement of financial interests form pursuant to the provisions of
the Public Official and Employee Ethics Law, Act 170 of 1978 as
amended by Act 9 of 1989, 65 P.S. § 401 et seq. Officers and
employees making investment decisions must file the statement of
financial interests form no later than May 1 of each year.
C. Delegation of authority and responsibilities.
(1) While ultimate authority rests with the governing body (the Board
of Supervisors), the Township of Pine Code delegates authority to
the Township Manager. Chapter 2, Article IV, § 2-21C states that
the Township Manager, as head of the Department of
Administration, is responsible for "the administration of activities
pertaining to the receipt, expenditure, accounting, investment,
custody and control of municipal funds and assets." This
Investment Policy further establishes a Financial Management
Team, consisting of the following three individuals:
(a) Township Manager (Township Treasurer).
(b) Assistant Treasurer.
(c) Financial Administrator.
(d) Two members of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The Financial Management Team shall consult together in making
investment decisions and shall act responsibly as custodians of the
public trust. No team member may engage in an investment
transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy. Team
members acting in accordance with this investment policy and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal liability for an
individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided
that deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion
and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
(3) The governing body (Board of Supervisors) retains ultimate
fiduciary responsibility and decision making authority for
investments and cash management. The Board will receive
performance updates as requested and review the investment
policy annually.
A. Safety. Preservation of principal is the foremost objective. Investments
shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation
§ 19-4 PINE CODE § 19-5
18:108
§ 19-6. Specific objectives.
The Financial Management Team will consider the following factors when
making investment decisions:
of capital in the overall portfolio. The goal will be to mitigate credit risk
and interest rate risk.
B. Liquidity. Investments shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet all
operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated.
C. Return on investment. Funds shall be invested with the objective of
attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic
cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints of safety and
liquidity needs.
A. Diversification: The purpose of diversification is to reduce the overall
risk within the investment portfolio while attaining market/benchmark
rates of return. The Township of Pine shall diversify its investments
among institutions to prevent over-concentration in an entity. As a
guideline, no more than 50% of the Township's total financial assets
should be invested in a single financial institution or security type. This
percentage limit is a guideline to insure diversification; however, a
reasonable temporary imbalance will not significantly impair this
strategy as long as it is monitored regularly. [Amended 5-7-2018 by
Res. No. 990]
B. Maximum maturities: The Financial Management Team will attempt to
match maturity dates of investments as closely as possible with
anticipated cash flow requirements. In the General Fund, investments
will be limited to those with maturity dates of one year or less. In the
other funds, a longer maturity date may be used only if the rate of
return is advantageous and the maturity date coincides with the
expected use of the funds.
C. Performance standards:
(1) The financial assets of the Township will be managed in accordance
with the parameters specified within this policy, but the
expectation is that the assets should obtain a market average rate
of return during an economic environment of stable interest rates.
When interest rates are forecast to rise in the near future, the
"prudent person" standard dictates that care be taken not to tie up
large amounts of funds at a fixed interest rate that is expected to be
lower than the expected future market rate. Conversely, when
interest rates are forecast to decline, it is prudent to take
advantage of investments bearing an interest rate that is higher
than the expected future market rate.
(2) Financial performance should be gauged against an appropriate
benchmark, such as the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill Rate or the
monthly average federal funds rate.
§ 19-5 FIRE DISTRICTS § 19-7
18:109
§ 19-7. Authorized investments.
§ 19-8. Custodial credit risk, PA Act 72.
Custodial credit risk is the risk that, in the event of a bank failure, the
government's deposits may not be returned to it. Bank balances up to
$250,000 per bank are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC). Investments of Township financial assets shall first
conform to the requirements of the Second Class Township Code. In
addition, when the value of the Township's deposits exceeds the insurable
limits of the institution, the additional sums shall be secured by collateral
pledged by the depository pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 72 of 1971 (72
P.S. § 3836-1 et seq., "Standardizing the Procedures for Pledges of Assets")
which requires banks to pledge collateral for Township deposits in excess
of $250,000. Act 72 of 1971 was amended by Act 139 of 2000 to permit
the depository institution to secure its public deposits with a Federal Home
Loan Bank letter of credit rather than with a pledge of collateral.
§ 19-9. Investment Policy adoption.
The Township of Pine Investment Policy shall be adopted by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. The policy shall be reviewed at least annually and
modifications made thereto must be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Chapter 20
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
A. The Township shal restrict investments of idle funds to financial
instruments authorized by Pennsylvania state law as contained in the
Second-Class Township Code, as amended by Act No. 10 of 2016, H.B.
1296, Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Pa. 2016).40 [Amended 5-7-2018 by
Res. No. 990]
B. More specifically, the Board of Supervisors pre-authorizes the following
institution: Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (PLGIT).
Shares in PLGIT, which is a financial services organization sponsored by
seven statewide associations, including the Pennsylvania State
Association of Township Supervisors (PSATS). PLGIT fully complies
with all Commonwealth of Pennsylvania statutes and regulations for the
allowable investment of public funds.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 19-7 PINE CODE § 24-1
24:110
§ 24-1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created.
§ 24-2. Appointment.
Appointment of the Township Manager shall be by majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors at any time in which a vacancy in the office of
Township Manager occurs.
§ 24-3. Requirements.
Only a natural person who resides in the Township of Pine or moves into the
Township of Pine within six months of appointment shall serve as Township
Manager. The six-month provision may be extended at the sole discretion of
the Supervisors.
§ 24-4. Term.
Once appointed, the Township Manager shall serve until his successor
is elected, except if, by majority vote, the Board of Supervisors votes to
remove the person from the position of Township Manager.
§ 24-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
The Township Manager hall have such duties and responsibilities as are
directed and assigned by the Board of Supervisors. Such duties and
responsibilities may be recalled, altered or increased by resolution duly
adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 24-6. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Township Manager shall be set by
resolution adopted by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors and shall
be paid out of the general fund of the Township.
§ 24-7. Bond required. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
Any person serving in the position of Township Manager shall be required to
post a bond in an amount to be determined by the Township Auditor, which
shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the Township Manager's
duties.
Chapter 26
MEETINGS
§ 26-1. Purpose.
The Township Supervisors recognize that meetings conducted in
accordance with Section 512 of the Second Class Township Code41 require
§ 24-1 MEETINGS § 26-1
26:111
certain rules and regulations in order to ensure orderly transaction of public
business, while allowing for sufficient time for input from Township citizens,
taxpayers and interested parties.
§ 26-2. Delegation of responsibility.
The presiding officer at each Township Supervisors' meeting shall be the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, and all public
meetings conducted by the Board of Supervisors shall be in accordance with
the rules and regulations contained herein.
§ 26-3. Procedures.
It shall be the policy of the Township Supervisors that participants in public
meetings of the Township Supervisors shall be citizens or taxpayers of the
Township or their counsel or authorized representatives. Others permitted
to address the Supervisors include anyone having registered a legitimate
interest in any contemplated action of the Supervisors, anyone representing
a group in the community, any representative of a firm or company eligible
to bid on materials or services solicited by the Township, any employee of
the Township or the counsel or authorized representative of the previously
described persons.
§ 26-4. Participation.
A. All persons wishing to be placed on the agenda for participation in a
Township Supervisors' meeting shall register their intent in writing
with the Township Secretary at least seven days in advance of the
meeting, and such registration shall include the name and address of
the participant, group affiliation, if applicable, and the topic to be
addressed.
B. All participants in public meetings must be recognized by the presiding
officer and must preface their comments by announcing name, address
and group affiliation, if applicable.
C. No participant may speak more than once on the same topic unless all
others who wish to speak on that topic have already been heard.
D. All statements by participants shall be directed to the presiding officer,
and no such participant shall address or question Supervisors
individually.
E. Unless otherwise permitted by the presiding officer, participants shall
be limited to speak for a maximum of five minutes.
F. Unless otherwise permitted by the presiding officer, only those persons
who have been placed on the public meeting agenda in accordance with
these rules and regulations shall be permitted to participate in a
meeting of the Township Supervisors, The presiding officer may, at his
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 26-1 PINE CODE § 26-4
26:112
§ 26-5. Authority.
The presiding officer of the Township Supervisors shall have the authority,
during such public meetings, to engage in the following:
§ 26-6. Placards, signs and banners prohibited.
No placards, signs or banners will be permitted within the meeting room.
§ 26-7. Agenda; minutes.
The meeting agenda and all pertinent documents shall be available to the
press and public at such public meetings and at least three days prior to
the meeting at the Pine Township Municipal Building. The minutes and
records of such meetings shall be available for review, in accordance with
the dictates of Section 513 of the Second Class Township Code.42
discretion, permit the participation of persons not on the agenda. Such
participation by persons not on the agenda, if permitted by the
presiding officer, shall be subject to all other provisions of these rules
and regulations.
A. To limit the time for each public participant to speak, where such is in
the interest of allowing full public participation, in the interest of
maintaining order or in the interest of moving a particular issue to a
vote of the Supervisors.
B. To interrupt or terminate a participant's statement, when the statement
is too lengthy, directed at a particular person, abusive, obscene,
repetitive or irrelevant.
C. To request that any individual leave the meeting when that person does
not observe reasonable decorum and to request the assistance of law
enforcement officers in their removal of a disorderly person when that
person's conduct interferes with the orderly progress of the meeting.
D. To call for a recess or an adjournment to another time when the lack of
public decorum so interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting so
as to warrant such action.
E. To vary the placement of speakers throughout the meeting at his
discretion.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 26-4 MEETINGS § 26-7
26:113
Chapter 28
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 2. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 116.
§ 28-1. Creation.
A permanent Parks and Recreation Commission, consisting of between a
minimum of five and a maximum of nine total members thereof, as set forth
herein, is hereby created for the Township of Pine.
§ 28-2. Appointment and qualifications of members.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall, by majority vote, appoint residents of
the Township of Pine to serve on the Parks and Recreation Commission.
B. Appointments to members' initial terms shall generally be for a period
of three years; however, the Board of Supervisors may provide for
appointment to a shorter initial term (as necessary) so as to ensure that
the terms are staggered, with the terms of only 1/3 of the members to
expire at the end of any one year. Appointments to fill any vacancies in
membership shall be made by the Board of Supervisors for the
remainder of the vacant position's unexpired term. Members may be
reappointed by the Board of Supervisors, with such reappointments to
be for a term of three years.
C. One member of the Board of School Directors of the Pine-Richland
School District (who shall be a resident of the Township of Pine) may be
appointed by such Board of School Directors to serve as a member of
the Parks and Recreation Commission. In the event that such Board of
School Directors shall fail to make such appointment to the Parks and
Recreation Commission, then the Township's Board of Supervisors shall
have the authority to make the appointment of a resident of the
Township of Pine to serve in the place of a member of such Board of
School Directors.
D. The Township's Recreation Director shall be a member of the Parks and
Recreation Commission in an ex officio and nonvoting capacity.
E. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission should exhibit and
possess the following qualifications:
(1) Interest in and commitment to recreation and parks.
(2) Sensitivity to all residents of the community and their needs.
§ 26-7 PINE CODE § 28-2
26:114
§ 28-3. General functions and duties.
(3) Interest in and commitment to providing recreational and sports
opportunities to the youth of the community.
(4) Good judgment and an ability to work cooperatively with others.
(5) Ability to inspire the confidence, respect and support of the
community.
(6) Time to attend the meetings of the Parks and Recreation
Commission and to undertake and complete its assignments.
(7) Ability to understand, appreciate and administer the financial
aspects and components of a comprehensive parks and recreation
program for the community.
A. Function. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be generally
responsible for the periodic review of parks and recreation programs
for the purposes of recommending changes and for advising the
Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors, the Department of Parks
and Recreation and the Recreation Director on recreation needs, use of
facilities, and programs and fee structures relating thereto.
B. Responsibilities. The general responsibilities of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall include the following:
(1) To define the objectives of public recreation services and make
plans and general policies harmonizing with them.
(2) To maintain the highest quality of recreation service.
(3) To help secure a comprehensive recreation and park plan in order
to provide an adequate system of recreation areas and facilities.
(4) To interpret the need for and importance of recreation and park
services to the general public and to the Board of Supervisors, and
to elicit support.
(5) To serve as a forum for the introduction of new ideas, programs,
policies and procedures.
(6) To advise on the acceptance of any gift, grant, bequest or donation
for the recreation and park program.
(7) To assist in establishing a sound fiscal plan and budget to achieve
recreation goals.
(8) To assist in developing a comprehensive recreation program and
advise on operation and maintenance.
(9) To assist in developing and maintaining an ongoing public relations
program.
§ 28-2 MEETINGS § 28-3
26:115
(10) To evaluate the services of the recreation and park system in
relating to its objectives.
(11) To take an active role in promoting and implementing related
legislation at the local, state and federal level.
C. Duties. The general duties of the Parks and Recreation Commission are
as follows. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall:
(1) Make recommendations to the Township Manager, the Board of
Supervisors and the Recreation Director on rules, regulations and
practices concerning the utilization of programs and facilities,
schedule of fees for programs and facilities and operation of
concessions at parks and recreation facilities.
(2) Advise the Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors and the
Recreation Director on needed facilities and programs.
(3) Coordinate any parks and recreational facilities and programs with
other municipalities.
(4) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors a
comprehensive park, recreation and open space plan for the
Township of Pine. The plan should be reviewed and updated as
necessary and in the event that conditions or recreational demands
change. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consider
public input in its creation, review and update of the plan, and such
plan shall be maintained on file in the Township's offices.
(5) Recommend feasible methods to reach the long- and short-range
goals set forth in the comprehensive park, recreation and open
space plan.
(6) Respond, in writing, to the request of the Board of Supervisors for
parks and recreation information and provide written reports
regarding all activities and recommendations of the Parks and
Recreation Commission to the Board of Supervisors at the Board of
Supervisors' meetings at least once per month.
(7) Seek funding sources for parks and recreation activities through
grants, donations and local fundraising programs.
(8) Affirmatively seek new information on parks and recreation from
local, national and international sources, paying particular
attention to the latest developments, and inform the Board of
Supervisors of said developments.
(9) Review a proposed annual parks and recreation budget for
submission to and consideration by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the Township's annual budget adoption process.
(10) Carry out such additional duties as may be assigned from time to
time by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 28-3 PINE CODE § 28-3
26:116
§ 28-4. Officers, subcommittees, and additional responsibilities.
(11) Provide written reports to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
Parks and Recreation Commission's reviews of proposed
subdivisions, land developments or planned residential
developments, as per the applicable provisions of Chapters 78 and
84, respectively, of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(12) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors, as necessary,
any Master Plan for the development of present or future Township
parks.
(13) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors, as necessary,
a development plan for Pine Community Park and other present or
Township parks (with said plans to be reviewed periodically).
(14) Review and issue recommendations upon applications received for
permits to utilize athletic fields within Pine Community Park.
A. A Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be elected
by majority vote of the members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission at its annual organizational meeting each year.
B. One person shall be elected by the members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission as its Vice Chairperson, and such Vice
Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the event of
his/her absence.
C. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet no less often than
once per month.
D. The Chairperson shall be directly responsible to the Board of
Supervisors for all activities of the Parks and Recreation Commission
and shall give a report to the Board of Supervisors at its regular
monthly meeting.
E. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have responsibility for
volunteer recruitment and parks and recreation programming. Such
programming shall include, but need not be limited to, recreation
programs (e.g., summer recreation program, Easter egg hunt, movies
in the park, halloween party, etc.) and community recreation (e.g.,
basketball, volleyball, soccer, baseball, football, and other athletic
endeavors). The Parks and Recreation Commission shall also have
responsibility for park and facility development, trails, greenways,
operations, and management.
F. The Township's Board of Supervisors may create such other
subcommittees, on an ad hoc basis, as it deems necessary to assist the
Parks and Recreation Commission in either its administration of special
events or for the effective carrying out of its duties and responsibilities.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the members of any such other
subcommittees and prescribe its officers, duties and required meetings.
§ 28-3 MEETINGS § 28-5
26:117
§ 28-5. Removal of members.
If a member of the Parks and Recreation Commission misses three
consecutive regular meetings of the Commission or five total regular
meetings of the Commission in any one calendar year and such absences,
in the opinion of the Township's Board of Supervisors, adversely affect the
operations of the Parks and Recreation Commission, then the Township's
Board of Supervisors may remove that member prior to the expiration of
his/her term and appoint a new member to fill the vacancy thus created.
Chapter 32
PENSIONS
§ 28-5 PINE CODE § 28-5
32:118
ARTICLE I
Employee Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-18-1985 by Res. No. 287]
§ 32-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this plan and trust shall
have the meanings set forth in this article, unless a different meaning is
otherwise clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the monthly benefit
determined in accordance with the formula contained in § 32-4, which
amount shall be based upon the participant's years of credited service
determined as of such date and which shall represent as of any given
date the monthly benefit that would be payable at the participant's normal
retirement date (or the actuarial equivalent thereof), provided that the
participant satisfies any requirements set forth hereafter for entitlement to
receive such benefit. In no event, however, shall the accrued benefit exceed
the maximum limitation, determined as of the date of computation, provided
under § 32-10. All accrued benefits are subject to all applicable limitations,
reductions, offsets and actuarial adjustments provided by the plan prior to
the actual payment thereof.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984.43
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENTS — Notwithstanding any other provision of this
plan, wherever the plan provides for actuarially equivalent amounts,
"actuarial equivalent" shall mean two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present values shall be
determined by the use of the UP 1984 Group Annuity Mortality Table rates
and 6 1/2% compound interest per annum.
AVERAGE MONTHLY EARNINGS — The average monthly compensation
paid by the employer and to an employee (excluding therefrom overtime,
bonuses, commissions and any other extra or additional forms of
compensation) during the final sixty-month period of his employment with
the employer prior to retirement or other termination of employment with
the employer.
BENEFICIARY — Any person or legal entity designated by a participant to
receive benefits under the plan.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT — An employee's period of continuous
employment with the employer. For purposes of this section, an employee's
employment shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by any periods
of authorized leave of absence expressly granted by the employer nor
shall it be deemed interrupted by any period of absence during which he
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 32-1 PENSIONS § 32-1
32:119
served in the Armed Forces of the United States of America, provided
that the employee returns to his employment at the time and under the
circumstances required to give him reemployment rights under any federal
or state law. In the event that an employee does not return to employment
within the specified period or at the end of an authorized leave, he shall
be deemed to have terminated his employment when he originally left the
service of the employer.
CONTRACT or POLICY — Any insurance or annuity contract issued by an
insurance company in accordance with the requirements of the plan.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date when a participant retires or
terminates employment with the employer if such date is prior to the
participant's normal retirement date but on or after the later of the date
when he attains age 55 and the date when he completes five years of
service.
EMPLOYEE — Any nonuniformed person who is employed on a full-time
salaried basis by the employer; for this purpose, a full-time "employee" is
one who is regularly employed for at least 35 hours per week.
EMPLOYER — The Township of Pine, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date on which an
employee first completes an hour of service for the employer.
HOUR OF SERVICE —
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or
next following the date when a participant retires pursuant to the provisions
of § 32-6.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The later of the dates when an employee
attains age 65 or completes five years of service.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first of the month coincident with or
next following the date when an employee attains normal retirement age.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has commenced participation in this
plan in accordance with § 32-2 and has not for any reason ceased to
participate hereunder.
Each hour for which an employee is paid or entitled to payment for the
performance of duties for the employer.
A.
Each hour for which an employee is paid, or entitled to payment, by
the employer on account of a period of time during which no duties
are performed (irrespective of whether the employment relationship
has terminated) due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity, including
disability, layoff, jury duty, military duty or leave of absence.
B.
In the case of any dispute hereunder regarding completion of an "hour
of service," "hours of service" shall be determined and credited in
accordance with Department of Labor Regulations under 2530.200b-2.
C.
§ 32-1 PINE CODE § 32-1
32:120
PLAN — The Township of Pine Employees' Pension Plan, restated effective
as of January 1, 1985.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Pine or any individual or committee to whom the Board delegates such
function.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period commencing each January and
ending on the subsequent December 31.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1985, the date upon which this
amended and restated plan becomes effective.
TRUSTEE — The initial and any successor trustee or trustees of the trust.
TRUST FUND — The trust fund established pursuant to the agreement of
trust entered into pursuant to the plan by the employer and the trustee
specified herein, for the purpose of receiving and holding in trust the assets
held under the plan.
YEAR OF CREDITED SERVICE — The period of continuous employment
with the employer, calculated in whole years and completed months of
continuous employment.
YEAR OF SERVICE — Each completed twelve-month period of continuous
employment with the employer. Such twelve-month periods shall be
measured beginning on the employee's employment commencement date
and anniversaries thereof. "Years of service" shall be expressed in
completed years only and shall not take into account any partial years of
fewer than 12 completed months with respect to any employee.
§ 32-2. Eligibility.
§ 32-3. Contributions.
A. Eligibility for participation. Each employee who was a participant on
the day preceding the restatement date shall continue to be a
participant on and after the restatement date, subject to the terms and
conditions hereof. Each other employee shall be eligible to participate
in the plan on his eligibility date, provided that he is an employee of the
employer on such date. An employee's eligibility date shall be the first
day of any month on or after an employee's employment
commencement date upon which he has met the requirement of
attainment of age 21.
B. Reemployment. If the employment of an employee is terminated and he
is subsequently rehired, he shall become eligible to be a participant in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection A.
A. Employer contributions. The employer shall contribute an amount
sufficient to maintain the trust fund at an amount at least equal to that
certified from time to time by the plan's actuary as the amount
necessary to adequately fund the benefits provided hereunder.
§ 32-1 PENSIONS § 32-3
32:121
§ 32-4. Normal retirement pension.
§ 32-5. Early retirement.
B. Employee contributions. Employees shall neither be required nor
permitted to make contributions to the trust fund.
C. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall it be possible for the plan
assets to be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the
exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, except that
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer
if:
(1) The contribution was made due to a mistake of fact and the
contribution is returned within one year of the mistaken payment of
the contribution; or
(2) The plan is terminated, as provided in § 32-19D.
A. Upon retirement on his normal retirement date, a participant who
retires on or after the effective date shall be entitled to a monthly
retirement benefit, expressed in the form of a life annuity with 10 years
certain and commencing at normal retirement date which shall be
equal to 1 1/2% of his average monthly earnings multiplied by his years
of credited service.
B. The benefit amount of a participant who retired prior to the
restatement date shall not be in any way altered by this amended and
restated plan and shall continue to be determined on the basis of the
terms of the plan (or, where applicable, of the heretofore unfunded
pension program) in effect on the day preceding the effective date.
A. If a participant shall retire on an early retirement date, he shall be
entitled to receive, upon making an election therefor, either:
(1) A deferred pension commencing at normal retirement date equal to
his accrued benefit determined as of his early retirement date; or
(2) An immediate pension commencing on his early retirement date (or
on any date intervening between his early retirement date and his
normal retirement date) equal to the amount in Subsection A(1)
above reduced by 1/180 for each of the first 60 months by which the
early commencement date precedes the participant's normal
retirement date and by 1/360 for each of the 61st through 120th
months by which such early commencement date precedes his
normal retirement date.
B. Notice of early retirement. Each participant who desires to retire at a
date earlier than his normal retirement date, in accordance with § 32-5,
shall notify the employer and the committee prior to such date by
written notice setting forth his proposed retirement date.
§ 32-3 PINE CODE § 32-6
32:122
§ 32-6. Late retirement.
If a participant remains in the employ of the employer subsequent to his
normal retirement date, he shall continue to be eligible to participate
hereunder but he shall not be credited with any additional years of credited
service subsequent to his normal retirement date; provided, however, that
in no case shall a participant's late retirement date be later than the first
of the month coincident with or immediately following the date when he
attains age 70. A participant who retires on a late retirement date shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension which shall be the actuarial equivalent
of his normal retirement benefit determined in accordance with the formula
set forth in § 32-4 and based upon his years of credited service as of his
normal retirement date.
§ 32-7. Disability retirement.
§ 32-8. Death benefits.
A. If a participant who is an employee of the employer becomes totally and
permanently disabled, as defined in Subsection B, such participant's
disability retirement date shall be the date as of which he is first eligible
to receive social security benefits. A participant's disability retirement
benefit shall be equal to his accrued benefit determined as of the first
day of the month immediately preceding the last day on which he was
actively employed by the employer.
B. "Totally and permanently disabled" shall mean a condition of physical or
mental impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform any
and every duty of a gainful occupation for which he is reasonably fitted
through training, education and experience, which continues for a
period of at least six months and will be permanent and continuous for
the remainder of the participant's lifetime and due to which a
participant is certified by the Social Security Administration as being
eligible for social security disability benefits; provided, however, that no
participant shall be deemed to be "totally and permanently disabled" for
the purpose of this plan if his incapacity results from chronic alcoholism
or addiction to narcotics or was engaged in a felonious criminal
enterprise or resulted therefrom or resulted from an intentionally selfinflicted
injury or if such disability was incurred while in the armed
services of any country.
C. The employer may require proof of continued disability but not more
frequently than once in any six-month period. If any participant shall
refuse to submit to a medical examination or furnish proof of his
continued disability upon the request of the employer, his disability
payments shall cease.
D. Commencement of benefits. Monthly retirement benefits shall
commence on the first day of the month following the month in which a
participant retires on a retirement date pursuant to §§ 32-4, 32-5, 32-6
and 32-7 above.
§ 32-6 PENSIONS § 32-8
32:123
§ 32-9. Optional forms of benefit payment.
A. Preretirement surviving spouse benefit. If a married participant dies
while in the active service of the employer at a time when he is eligible
to retire on an early retirement date or if such a participant terminates
employment with the employer at a time when he is eligible to receive
early or normal retirement benefits and dies thereafter but prior to the
date when his benefits commence, then the spouse of such participant
shall be eligible to receive a monthly benefit, provided that the
participant and his spouse have been married throughout the one-year
period ending on the date of the participant's death. The monthly
benefit payable to the spouse shall be equal to the pension such spouse
would have been eligible to receive if the participant had retired under
the early retirement provisions of the plan on the first day of the month
in which his death occurs with a fifty-percent contingent annuitant
option in effect, with the spouse as contingent annuitant.
B. Postretirement death benefit. If a terminated participant shall die after
benefit payments have commenced, no death benefits shall be payable
under this section, and the death benefit payable, if any, shall be that
which is specified pursuant to the form of benefit payment in force for
the benefit of such person at the time of his death.
A. The automatic form of payment of retirement benefits shall be the form
specified in § 32-4 unless a participant elects to receive his benefits in
some other form as provided herein. If a participant who retires under
this article elects not to take his benefits in the automatic form of
payment, any such retirement benefit may be distributed by the trustee
in such manner as the plan administrator, in its sole discretion, shall
determine, after consultation with the participant. Such distribution, as
determined by the plan administrator, may be in any actuarially
equivalent optional method of settlement that is permitted by the plan
administrator. Any optional form of payment shall be the actuarial
equivalent of the automatic form of payment.
B. The provisions of this section shall be subject to the limitation that no
participant shall elect an interest option or an installment distribution
to be paid over a period which shall exceed the greater of:
(1) The life of the participant;
(2) The life expectancy of the participant;
(3) The joint lives of the participant and his beneficiary; or
(4) The joint life expectancy of the participant and his beneficiary.
C. A participant may not elect an optional form of pension providing
monthly benefits to a contingent annuitant who is other than his spouse,
or to a beneficiary, unless the actuarial present value of the payments
expected to be made to the participant is more than 50% of the
§ 32-8 PINE CODE § 32-9
32:124
§ 32-10. Maximum benefit limitations.
actuarial present value of the total payment expected to be made under
such optional form.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, no benefit provided
under this plan attributable to contributions of the employer shall
exceed, as an annual amount, the lesser of:
(1) Ninety thousand dollars, assuming a single life annuity or qualified
joint and survivor annuity (as defined for purposes of Code Section
415),44 subject to cost-of-living adjustments made from time to time
by plan amendments or automatically in accordance with and in
such amounts as are prescribed in or pursuant to regulations
promulgated under Section 415(d) of the code (which adjustments
shall not become effective prior to January 1 of the year for which
such adjustment is made); or
(2) One hundred percent of the participant's average compensation for
the three consecutive years of employment (or such lesser number
as may apply if the employee does not have three consecutive
years) in which he received the highest aggregate compensation
while a participant, and the rate of benefit accrual shall be frozen
or reduced accordingly, subject to the provisions of Subsection B
below.
B. The limitation provided in Subsection A above shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(1) For purposes of the above limitations, "compensation" shall mean
the participant's wages, salaries, fees for professional services and
other amounts received for personal services actually rendered in
the course of employment with an employer maintaining the plan
(including, but not limited to, commissions paid salesmen,
commissions on insurance premiums, tips and bonuses). The term
"compensation," as used in this section, shall not include items
such as the following:
(a) Contributions made by the employer to a plan of deferred
compensation to the extent that before the application of Code
Section 41545 limitations to that plan, the contributions are not
includable in the gross income of the employee for the taxable
year in which contributed. In addition, employer contributions
made on behalf of an employee to a simplified employee
pension described in Code Section 408(k) are not considered
as compensation for the taxable year in which contributed to
the extent such contributions are deductible by the employee
under Code Section 219(b)(7). Additionally, any distributions
44.Editor's Note: See the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
45.Editor's Note: See the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
§ 32-9 PENSIONS § 32-10
32:125
from a plan of deferred compensation are not considered as
compensation for Section 415 purposes, regardless of whether
such amounts are includable in the gross income of the
employee when distributed. However, any amounts received by
an employee pursuant to an unfunded nonqualified plan may
be considered as compensation for Code Section 415 purposes
in the year such amounts are includable in the gross income of
the employee.
(b) Other amounts which receive special tax benefits, such as
premiums for group-term life insurance (but only to the extent
that the premiums are not includable in the gross income of the
employee) or contributions made by an employer (whether or
not under a salary reduction agreement) towards the purchase
of an annuity contract described in the Internal Revenue Code
Section 403(b) (whether or not the contributions are
excludable from the gross income of the employee).
(2) For purposes of the above limitations, if the benefit under the plan
is payable in any form other than in the forms described therein
(without regard to ancillary benefits) or if the employees contribute
to the plan or make rollover contributions, the determination as to
whether the limitations have been satisfied shall be made by
adjusting the benefit so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the
benefit described in Subsection A. For the purpose of making the
adjustment in the form of the benefit to an actuarial equivalent, the
interest rate shall not be less than the greater of 5% or the rate
specified under the plan's definition of actuarial equivalent.
(3) If retirement income benefits commence prior to a participant's
attainment of age 62, the limitation contained in Subsection A(1)
shall be adjusted to the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit of
$90,000 commencing at age 62. The reduction under this
subsection shall not reduce the limitation of Subsection A(1) below
$75,000, if the benefit begins at or after age 55 or, if the benefit
begins before age 55, the amount which is the equivalent to the
limitation of $75,000 for age 55. For the purpose of making this
adjustment, the interest rate used shall not be less than the greater
of 5% or the rate specified in the plan's definition of actuarial
equivalent.
(4) If retirement income benefits commence after the participant's
attainment of age 65, the limitation described in Subsection A(1)
shall be adjusted so that such limitation (as so increased) equals an
annual benefit (beginning when such retirement income benefit
begins) which is the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit of
$90,000 commencing at age 65; provided, however, that in no case
shall such benefit exceed the limitation contained in Subsection
A(2). For the purpose of making this adjustment, the interest rate
assumption shall not be greater than the lesser of 5% or the rate
specified in the plan's definition of actuarial equivalent.
§ 32-10 PINE CODE § 32-10
32:126
§ 32-11. Nonduplication of benefits.
To avoid any duplication of benefits, if any participant ceases to be
employed for any reason and is reemployed, any benefit payments then
being paid pursuant to the terms of this plan shall be suspended, and future
retirement benefits shall be coordinated in such a manner as to preclude
any duplication hereunder.
§ 32-12. Distribution of small value benefits.
In its sole discretion, the Committee may direct the trustee to distribute
in the form of a lump sum payment to a participant who is terminating his
participation in the plan such participant's vested benefit if the actuarial
present value of such benefit is $3,500 or less and such participant is onehundred-
percent vested in his accrued benefit hereunder. Any distribution
made pursuant to this section shall be made within one year after a
participant terminates service with the employer.
§ 32-13. Commencement of retirement benefits.
(5) Benefits payable to a participant under this plan shall be deemed
not to exceed the limitations imposed by Subsection A if the annual
benefit payable to such participant does not exceed $10,000 (for
this year or any prior year), provided that such participant has
never participated in a defined contribution plan maintained by the
employer.
(6) In the event that a participant has less than 10 years of service, the
limitations described in Subsections A and B(5) of this section shall
be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
years of service credited to the participant and the denominator of
which is 10.
(7) For purposes of applying the limitations of this section, all defined
benefit plans of the employer shall be treated as one defined
benefit plan, and all defined contribution plans shall be treated as
one defined contribution plan.
(8) For purposes of the above limitations, the limitation year shall be
the plan year, unless such period is otherwise defined in a written
resolution adopted by the employer.
A. A participant may elect to commence receiving distribution of his
retirement benefits as of his normal retirement date, late retirement
date or disability retirement date, whichever is applicable, or may defer
such payments to a date not later than the required date for
commencement of benefits determined under § 32-14. If a participant
elects immediate commencement of his retirement benefit, payments
shall commence as soon as administratively feasible following his
retirement date.
§ 32-10 PENSIONS § 32-13
32:127
§ 32-14. Required distributions.
B. Unless the participant otherwise elects, payment of his benefits under
the plan shall commence not later than 60 days following the close of
the plan year in which occurs the latest of the following dates:
(1) The date when the participant attains normal retirement age;
(2) The 10th anniversary of the year in which the participant
commenced participation in the plan; or
(3) The date when the participant terminates his service with the
employer.
A. Interest of participant entitled to benefits prior to death.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire interest
of each participant under this plan who becomes entitled to
benefits prior to his death shall be distributed either:
(a) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(b) Beginning not later than the required beginning date over the
life of such participant or over the lives of such participant and
a designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending
beyond the life expectancy of such participant or the life
expectancy of such participant and a designated beneficiary).
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior
to the date when his entire interest has been distributed to him
after distribution of his benefits has begun in accordance with
Subsection A(1)(b) above, the remaining portion of such benefit
shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of
distribution being used under Subsection A(1)(b) as of the date of
his death.
B. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before
distribution of his benefit has begun, the entire interest of such
employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of such
employee, unless the following sentence is applicable, if any portion of
the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated
beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over the life of such
designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of such beneficiary), and such distributions begin not later
than one year after the date of the employee's death or such later date
as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury,
then, for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the preceding
sentence, the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as
distributed on the date on which such distributions begin; provided,
however, that, notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the
designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then
the date on which distributions are required to begin shall not be
§ 32-13 PINE CODE § 32-14
32:128
§ 32-15. Termination of employment.
earlier than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2 and, provided, further, that if the surviving spouse dies before
the distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied
as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
C. Definitions; payment to children; redetermination of life expectancy.
(1) For purposes of this section, the following definitions and
procedures shall apply:
DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY — Any individual designated by the
employee under this plan according to its rules.
REQUIRED BEGINNING DATE — April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of:
(a) The calendar year in which the employee attains age 70 1/2; or
(b) The calendar year in which the employee retires.
(2) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it has been paid to
the surviving spouse if such amount will become payable to the
surviving spouse upon such child reaching majority (or other
designated event permitted under regulations issued by the
Secretary of the Treasury).
(3) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be redetermined, but not more frequently than
annually.
A. Deferred vested benefits. Subject to Subsection C, a deferred vested
benefit shall accrue to a participant who terminates his employment
prior to his normal retirement age for any reason other than retirement,
death or disability, in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Such participant's vested benefit shall be a percentage of his
accrued benefit (attributable to employer contributions)
determined as of such date of termination and based upon the
following schedule:
Completed Years of Service Vested Percentage
Less than 3 0
3 30
4 40
5 50
6 60
7 70
8 80
§ 32-14 PENSIONS § 32-15
32:129
§ 32-16. Administration of plan.
Completed Years of Service Vested Percentage
9 90
10 100
(2) Payments of a participant's vested benefit shall be made by the
trustee, at the direction of the plan administrator, and subject to
the provisions of § 32-9, at the date which would have been such
participant's normal retirement date had he continued his
employment. Notwithstanding the preceding, a participant with an
entitlement to a vested benefit may elect to commence receiving
such benefit as of the date when he would have been eligible for an
early retirement pension as provided in § 32-5 had he continued
employment with the employer; provided, however, that any
payment of a vested accrued benefit as of a participant's early
retirement date shall be subject to the reduction factor for early
payment set forth in § 32-5. A participant eligible to receive his
vested benefit shall be permitted to receive such benefit in any
form of payment authorized for payment of retirement benefits
under the provisions of § 32-9; provided, however, that he may elect
an optional form of payment only with the consent of the plan
administrator. The plan administrator shall, after consulting with
the participant, and subject to the provisions of § 32-14, determine
the time and form of any distribution of vested benefits hereunder
in a nondiscriminatory manner and not contrary to any laws or
regulations which may govern such distributions.
(3) A participant shall always be one-hundred-percent vested in any
portion of his accrued benefit attributable to employee
contributions.
B. Vesting at normal retirement date. Notwithstanding the preceding, a
participant shall become one-hundred-percent vested as of his normal
retirement date.
C. Forfeiture upon death. A participant who terminates his employment
with the employer at a time when he is not vested in any portion of his
accrued benefit derived from employer contributions shall cease to be a
participant hereunder and shall not be entitled to any benefits under
the plan derived from employer contributions. Payment of a
participant's vested retirement benefit depends upon his continued
survival to the date of his actual retirement on either an early
retirement date or normal retirement date hereunder.
D. Application of forfeitures. Amounts forfeited by any participant may not
be used to increase the benefits which other participants would
otherwise receive under the plan; they shall be used only to reduce the
employer's contributions to the plan.
§ 32-15 PINE CODE § 32-16
32:130
A. Plan administrator.
(1) The administration of this plan shall be vested in the plan
administrator, who shall have the power and duty to operate and
administer the provisions of the plan and to make and enforce such
rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper for the
efficient administration of the plan.
(2) The plan administrator hereunder shall be the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Pine.
(3) The plan administrator may appoint such subcommittees with such
powers as it shall determine; may authorize one or more of its
members to execute or deliver any instrument or do any act on its
behalf; and may employ counsel and agents and such clerical,
accounting and actuarial services as it may require in carrying out
the provisions of the plan.
(4) Any act which the plan administrator is authorized or required to
perform hereunder may be performed by a majority of its members.
The action of such majority expressed from time to time by voting
at a meeting, or in writing without a meeting, shall constitute the
action of the plan administrator and shall have the same effect for
all purposes as if assented to by all members then in office.
(5) The plan administrator shall have the power to determine the
eligibility of any employee to participate in or receive benefits
under this plan, to settle any disputes which may arise in the
operation of the plan, to determine the interest of any participant in
the trust fund on the basis of their present market value in such
manner, consistently applied, as the plan administrator or, at the
direction of the plan administrator, the trustee, may deem
appropriate, in the form of periodic payments, or any combination
of the foregoing.
(6) All discretionary acts which may be taken pursuant to this plan by
the plan administrator with respect to participants or their
beneficiaries shall be uniform and nondiscriminatory in their
nature and shall be applicable to all participants and their
beneficiaries in substantially identical situations.
(7) Any decision by the plan administrator denying a claim by a
participant or a beneficiary for benefits under the plan shall be
communicated in writing to the participant or beneficiary, setting
forth the specific reasons for such denial. Any such participant or
beneficiary whose claim has been denied, or his or her duly
authorized representative, may appeal to the plan administrator in
writing within 90 days after receipt of the notice of denial for a full
review of the decision by the plan administrator; review pertinent
documents; and submit issues and comments in writing. The
decision by the plan administrator following such review shall be
made no later than 60 days after the date of receipt by the plan
§ 32-16 PENSIONS § 32-16
32:131
§ 32-17. Trust fund.
administrator of the request for review and shall be conclusive as
to all persons affected thereby. Such decision shall be in writing
and shall include both specific reasons for the decision, written in
a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant, and specific
references to the pertinent plan provisions on which the decision is
based.
B. Trustee.
(1) The Township's governing body shall serve as trustee hereunder to
hold and invest the contributions in accordance with the terms of
the agreement of trust, incorporated as § 32-17 hereof.
(2) The trust shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan and,
to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses
of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the
employer.
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the
exclusive benefit of its employees. It expects to make the
contributions to the trust required under the plan. The employer
shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in the trust;
benefits are payable only from the trust, and only to the extent that
there are moneys available therein.
A. Establishment and acceptance of trust. The trust will consist of all funds
held by the trustee under the plan, including contributions made
pursuant to the provisions hereof and the investments, reinvestments
and proceeds thereof. The trust shall be held, managed and
administered in trust pursuant to the terms of the plan. The trustee
hereby accepts the trust created hereunder and agrees to perform the
duties under the plan on its part to be performed. Except as otherwise
expressly provided for in the plan, the trustee has exclusive authority
and discretion to manage and control the trust assets. The duties,
powers and responsibilities reserved to the trustee may be allocated
among the trustees (if there be more than one) so long as such
allocation is pursuant to action taken by the employer, or by written
agreement executed by the trustee and approved by the employer, in
which case no trustee shall have any liability, with respect to any duties,
powers or responsibilities not allocated to him, for the acts or omissions
of any other trustee.
B. Powers and duties of trustee. With respect to the trust the trustee shall
have the following powers, rights and duties, in addition to those vested
in it elsewhere in the plan or by law:
(1) To retain in cash so much of the trust as it deems advisable and to
deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
§ 32-16 PINE CODE § 32-17
32:132
institution, including any such institution which may be a trustee
hereunder, without liability for interest thereon.
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act of
1949, or as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property, and to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and in connection therewith to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
(7) To cause any securities or other property held as part of the trust
fund to be registered in its own name or in the name of one or more
of its nominees, without designating the same as trust property,
and to hold any investments in bearer form, but the books and
records of the trustee shall at all times show that all such
investments are part of the trust fund.
(8) Generally, to do all such acts, execute all such instruments, take all
such proceedings and exercise all such rights and privileges with
relation to property constituting the trust fund as if the trustee
were the absolute owner thereof.
(9) If bonds, preferred stocks or other securities shall be purchased at
a premium, it shall not be necessary for the trustee to set aside a
sinking fund from the earnings to retire or absorb the premium.
(10) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed by the trustee
to be appropriate for the purposes of this trust, no matter where
situated, including the savings department of its on commercial
bank. Such deposits may be for such duration as the trustee, in its
sole discretion, may determine.
(11) In addition to the foregoing powers, the trustee shall also have all
of the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon Trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Act of 1949, 20 P.S. § 320, or as the same
§ 32-17 PENSIONS § 32-17
32:133
may be subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do
all acts, take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges,
although not specifically mentioned herein, as the trustee may
deem necessary to administer the trust fund and to carry out the
purposes of this trust.
(12) To invest the assets of the trust in any collective commingled trust
fund maintained by a bank or trust company, including any bank or
trust company which may act as a trustee hereunder. In this
connection, the commingling of the assets of the trust with assets
of other eligible, participating trusts through such a medium is
hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the trust which may be
so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to all of the
provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as amended from
time to time, which declaration, if required by its terms or by
applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan, to the extent
of the participation in such collective or commingled trust fund by
the trust.
(13) To make any payment or distribution directed by the employer or
otherwise required or advisable to carry out the provisions of the
plan.
(14) To compromise, content, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands.
(15) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(16) After advance notice to the employer, to pay, and to deduct from the
charge against the trust, any taxes which may be imposed upon the
trust, the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with
respect to the interest of any person therein, which the trustee is
required to pay; to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount
of any tax, assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or
made against or in respect of the trust, the income, property or
transfer thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith,
provided that the trustee is indemnified to its satisfaction.
C. Management authority. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B,
the powers granted the trustee thereunder shall be exercised in the
discretion of the trustee; however, the employer may at any time
affirmatively direct the trustee with regard to the investment of the
trust, or direct the trustee to obtain the employer's approval before
exercising any of the powers granted the trustee. Any such direction
may be of a continuing nature or otherwise, may be revoked at any time
and shall be complied with as promptly as possible by the trustee. The
trustee shall not be liable for any loss or depreciation in value of the
trust or any adverse effect upon the exempt status of the trust under the
§ 32-17 PINE CODE § 32-17
32:134
code, resulting from actions taken in accordance with the employer's
affirmative direction or from the failure or refusal of the employer to
give any required approval, nor shall the trustee be obliged to review
the assets of the trust acquired on the direction of the employer.
D. Successor trustee. Pending the appointment of any successor trustee
and the acceptance of such appointment, the existing trustee or
trustees shall have full power to take any action hereunder. Each
successor or additional trustee shall have all rights and powers, as well
as duties and liabilities, vested in the original trustee without the
signing or filing of any further instrument, but any resigning or
removed trustee shall execute all documents and do all acts necessary
to vest title of record to any assets of the trust in any successor trustee
or in the remaining trustee or trustees. With the approval of the
employer, a successor trustee may accept the account rendered and the
property delivered to it by a predecessor trustee as a full and complete
discharge of the predecessor trustee, without incurring any liability or
responsibility for so doing.
E. Common investments. The trustee shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account, but may invest
contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common
investments.
F. Compensation and expenses of trustee. The trustee shall be entitled to
such reasonable compensation as shall from time to time be agreed
upon by the employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is
prohibited by law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably
incurred by the trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a
charge upon the employer or the trust fund which may be executed at
any time after 30 days written notice to the employer. The employer
shall be under no obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and, in the
event of its failure to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same,
or to reimburse itself for the payment thereof from the trust.
G. Immunity and liability of trustee.
(1) The trustee shall not be liable for the making, retention or sale of
any investment or reinvestment made by it, as herein provided, nor
for any loss to, or diminution of, the trust fund, unless due to its
own intentional or willful misconduct, lack of good faith or gross
negligence.
(2) The trustee shall be fully protected in acting upon any instrument,
certificate or paper believed by it to be genuine and to be signed or
presented by the proper person or persons, and the trustee shall be
under no duty to make any investigation or any inquiry as to any
statement contained in any writing, but may accept the same as
conclusive evidence of the truth and accuracy of the statements
therein contained.
§ 32-17 PENSIONS § 32-17
32:135
(3) The trustee shall not be liable for the proper application of any part
of the trust if payments are made in accordance with the directions
of the employer as herein provided, and the trustee shall not be
obliged to inquire as to whether any payee is entitled to any
payment or distribution, pursuant to such directions, or as to
whether any payment or distribution, pursuant to such directions,
is proper or within the terms of the plan. The trustee shall not be
required to make any investigation to determine the identity or
mailing address of any person entitled to benefits under the plan
and shall be entitled to withhold making any payments or deliveries
upon instructions from the employer.
(4) The trustee shall not be responsible for the adequacy of the trust to
meet and discharge any and all payments and liabilities under the
plan. The trustee shall be responsible only for such sums as shall
actually be received by it as trustee, hereunder, and it shall not be
the duty of the trustee to collect, or to ascertain the correctness of
the amount of, any sum receivable or received from the employer.
(5) The trustee shall discharge its duties with respect to the assets of
the trust solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries,
administering the assets of the plan with the care and diligence,
under the then prevailing circumstances, that a prudent man
acting in like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in
the conduct of an enterprise of like character and with like aims.
H. Financial records. The trustee shall maintain records and accounts
reflecting all receipts and disbursements made by it under the plan and
showing such other items and information as the employer from time to
time may specify. The trustee's records and accounts shall be open to
the inspection of the employer at all reasonable times and may be
audited from time to time by such person or persons as the employer
may specify.
I. Periodic accounting. The trust will be evaluated annually, or at more
frequent intervals, by the trustee, and a written accounting rendered as
of each fiscal year end of the trust, and as of the effective date of any
removal of resignation of the trustee, and such additional dates as
requested by the employer, showing the condition of the trust and all
receipts, disbursements and other transactions effected by the trustee
during the period covered by the accounting, based on fair market
values prevailing as of such date. Any such accounting shall be due
within 90 days after the date thereof; to the extent permitted by law,
upon the expiration of 180 days from the filing of such accounting, the
trustee shall be forever released, revised and discharged from all
liability and accountability to anyone with respect to the propriety of its
accounts and transactions shown in such accounts except with respect
to any such accounts or transactions as to which the employer shall
within such one-hundred-eighty-day period file written exceptions. All
determinations as to the value of the assets of the trust, and as to the
amount of the liabilities thereof shall be made by the trustee, whose
§ 32-17 PINE CODE § 32-17
32:136
§ 32-18. Amendments to plan and trust.
The employer shall have the right to amend the plan and trust, at any
time, and with respect to any provisions thereof, and all parties thereto
or claiming any interest thereunder shall be bound thereby; provided,
however, that no amendment shall revise the accrued benefit of a
participant determined as of the later of the date such amendment is
adopted, or the date such amendment becomes effective, is such revised
vested accrued benefit is less than that computed under the plan without
regard to such amendment.
§ 32-19. Employer termination of plan.
decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto,
the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In making any such
determination, the trustee shall be entitled to seek and rely upon the
opinion of or any information furnished by brokers, appraisers and
other experts, and the trustee shall also be entitled to rely upon reports
as to sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
J. Rights of trustee. The rights and interest of any participant on whose
life or in whose name a contract is issued shall not be expanded by such
an investment and any and all rights provided under the contract or
permitted by the insurer shall be reserved to the trustee. Such rights
shall include the right to surrender, reduce or split the contract, the
right to name and change the payee to receive thereunder on the
happening of any contingency specified in the contract, the right to
exercise any loan provisions to pay premiums or for any other reason
and such other rights as may be reserved to the owner of the policy.
K. Actions of insurer. No insurer which may issue a policy for the purpose
of this plan shall be required to take or permit any action contrary to
the provisions of said policy nor shall the insurer be required to look
into the terms of this plan, or question any action as authorized by the
trustee in the application for a policy or changes in an existing policy.
L. Insurer not a party to plan. The insurer shall not be deemed to be a
party to this plan for any purpose nor shall it be responsible for the
validity of this plan.
A. Right to terminate. It is the present intention of the employer to
maintain the plan indefinitely. Nevertheless, the employer reserves the
right, at any time, to permanently discontinue further contributions to
the trust or to terminate the entire plan and trust.
B. Automatic termination of contributions. The liability of the employer to
make contributions to the trust shall automatically terminate upon
liquidation of the employer, upon its adjudication as bankrupt, upon the
making of a general assignment for the benefit of creditors or upon its
merger into or consolidation with any other corporation or corporations
§ 32-17 PENSIONS § 32-19
32:137
§ 32-20. Compliance with standards.
and failure of the surviving corporation or consolidated corporation to
specifically adopt and agree to continue the plan.
C. Distribution upon termination. In the event of the termination or partial
termination of the plan, all amounts of benefits accrued by the affected
participant to the date of such termination, to the extent funded on such
date, shall immediately become fully vested and nonforfeitable. In the
event of termination of the plan, the employer shall direct that:
[Amended 2-3-1992 by Res. No. 394]
(1) The trustee continue to hold the accrued benefits of participants in
the trust fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with such provisions;
(2) The trustee immediately distribute to each participant an amount
equal to his accrued benefit as of such date; or
(3) The trustee transfer the accrued benefits of participants in the
trust fund to another qualified retirement plan.
D. Residual assets. If all liabilities under the plan to participants and
others entitled to receive a benefit have been satisfied and there remain
any residual assets in the trust fund, the residual assets shall be divided
among the participants in the plan at the date of termination of the plan
pursuant to an allocation formula set forth by the employer which does
not contravene any provision of the law. [Amended 2-3-1992 by Res.
No. 394]
A. Actuarial evaluations. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial
valuation at least biennially unless the employer is applying or has
applied for supplemental state assistance pursuant to section 603 of the
Act,46 whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an off-numbered calendar
year, beginning with the year 1985. Such actuarial valuation shall be
prepared and certified by an approved actuary, as such term is defined
in the Act.
B. Reporting requirements. Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and
filed under the supervision of the Chief Administrative Officer of the
municipality. The Chief Administrative Officer of the pension plan shall
determine the financial requirements of the pension plan on the basis of
the most recent actuarial report and shall determine the minimum
obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any
given plan year. The Chief Administrative Officer shall submit the
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 32-19 PINE CODE § 32-20
32:138
§ 32-21. Incapacity of pensioner.
If any pensioner shall be physically or mentally incapable of receiving or
acknowledging receipt of any payment of pension benefits hereunder, the
trustee, upon the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such pensioner is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining him and
that no guardian or committee has been appointed for him, may provide for
such payment of pension benefits hereunder to such person or institution so
maintaining him, and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every
purpose to have been made to such pensioner.
§ 32-22. Payment of benefits for deceased participant.
If any benefit shall be payable under the plan to or on behalf of a participant
who has died, if the plan provides that the payment of such benefits shall
be made to the participant's estate, and if no administration of such
participant's estate is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the
trustee, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving spouse
of such deceased participant, or, if there be no such surviving spouse, to
such participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall prevent the trustee from insisting upon the
commencement of estate administration proceedings and the delivery of
any such benefits to a duly appointed executor or administrator.
§ 32-23. Liability of employer.
Subject to the provisions of the Act,47 no past, present or future officer of
the employer shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or
other person under any provision of the plan or trust or any policy issued
pursuant thereto.
§ 32-24. Participants not to receive interest in trust assets.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give any participant or his
beneficiary any interest in any specific property of the trust or any right
financial requirements of the plan and the minimum obligation of the
employer to the Board and/or to the employer annually and shall certify
the accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the Act.
C. Benefit modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the Board, the Chief Administrative Officer of the plan
shall provide to the Board a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Board the impact of the proposed
benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements of the
plan and the future minimum obligation of the employer with respect to
the plan.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 32-20 PENSIONS § 32-24
32:139
except to receive such distributions as are expressly provided for in this
plan.
§ 32-25. Plan not to affect employment rights.
Participation in this plan shall not give any right to any employee to be
retained in the employ of the employer, nor shall it interfere with the
right of the employer to discharge any employee and to deal with him
without regard to the effect that such treatment might have upon him as a
participant in this plan.
§ 32-26. Use of trust fund.
The income and principal of the trust fund are for the sole use and benefit
of the participants of this plan, and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be
free, clear and discharged of and from and are not to be in any way liable
for, debts, contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter
be contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
§ 32-27. Word usage.
As used herein, the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and
the singular shall include the plural in all cases where such meaning would
be appropriate. Headings of sections are inserted only for convenience of
reference and are not to be considered in the construction of the plan.
§ 32-28. Information to be furnished by employer.
The employer shall furnish to the Retirement Committee and the trustee
information in the employer's possession as the Retirement Committee and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under the
plan and the trust.
§ 32-29. Tax-exempt status of trust.
The employer intends that the trust herein created shall qualify as an
exempt organization within the meaning of Section 501(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, or under any comparable section of any future
legislation which amends, supplements or supersedes said section, and until
advised to the contrary, the trustee may assume that the trust is so qualified
and is entitled to tax exemption. Nevertheless, all taxes of any and all kinds
whatsoever that may be levied or assessed under the existing or future laws
upon the trust fund or the income thereof and investment charges, shall
be paid from the trust fund. The trustee may assume that any such taxes
are lawfully levied or assessed unless, subsequent to notification to the plan
administrator of such action as the plan administrator shall direct, but all
expenses incident thereto shall be chargeable to the Trust Fund, unless
otherwise directed by the plan administrator.
§ 32-24 PINE CODE § 32-29
32:140
ARTICLE II
Chief Administrative Officer
[Adopted 1-21-1987 by Res. No. 301]
§ 32-30. Designation of Officer.
Gerald W. Weaver is designated as the Chief Administrative Officer for the
purpose of certifying information to the Department of the Auditor General.
§ 32-30 PENSIONS § 32-30
32:141
Chapter 38
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 38-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission is hereby established for the Township of Pine as
provided for in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1988, as amended.48 Said Commission hereby established shall hereafter be
known as the "Pine Township Planning Commission."
§ 38-2. Compensation.
The Pine Township Planning Commission shall consist of seven persons who
shall be residents of this municipality. Said members shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 38-3. Term.
All members shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors. The term of each member shall be for four years or until the
Commission member's successor is appointed and qualified, except that
for the terms of the members first appointed, no more than two shall be
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year.
§ 38-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and the duties of the Planning Commission shall include, but
may not necessarily be limited to, those powers and duties as set forth in
Act 247 of 1968, as amended, and referred to in 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Chapter 38A
PROPERTY, SALE OF
§ 38A-1. Property valued at $1,000 or more.
A. No personal property owned by the Township of Pine, the estimated fair
market value of which is $1,000 or more, shall be sold except to the
highest bidder after due notice by advertisement for bids or for public
auction in one newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The
advertisement shall be published once not less than 10 days before the
date set for the opening of bids or public auction, and the date for
opening bids or public auction shall be announced in the advertisement.
If after attempting twice to receive bids or if at a public auction no bid
was received, then the personal property may be sold by the Township
to any person or entity upon such terms and at a price certified to be
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 32-30 PINE CODE § 38A-1
38:142
§ 38A-2. Property valued at less than $1,000.
Chapter 39
PUBLIC WORKS, DIRECTOR OF
fair and reasonable under the circumstances by both the Township's
Manager and the director of the administrative department of the
Township which previously utilized such property.
B. No further action of the Board of Supervisors shall be required, but
such sale and its terms shall be publicly announced at the next
following regular or special meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Personal property owned by the Township with an estimated fair market
value of less than $1,000 may be sold by the Township to any person or
entity without the necessity for public advertisement or bidding or
public auction, following a certification by both the Township's
Manager and the director of the administrative department of the
Township which previously utilized such property that the terms and
price proposed is fair and reasonable under the circumstances.
B. No further action of the Board of Supervisors shall be required, but
such sale and its terms shall be publicly announced at the next
following regular or special meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 38A-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DIRECTOR OF § 38A-2
39:143

ARTICLE I
Use of Specialized Vehicle
[Adopted 11-1-1993 by Res. No. 441]
§ 39-1. Use of vehicle authorized; restrictions.
The Director of Public Works is hereby provided with the use of a
specialized vehicle (a Township-owned dump truck) on a twenty-four-hour
basis to carry out the duties of his position, and the use of such vehicle
by the Director of Public Works is restricted to the official business of the
Township of Pine, and personal use of such vehicle by the Director of Public
Works, other than commuting to and from work, is prohibited.
§ 39-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DIRECTOR OF § 39-1
39:145
Chapter 42
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
§ 42-1. Composition.
The Township of Pine Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall
consist of the members of the Township of Pine's Planning Commission and
the following four persons who shall serve as ad hoc voting members of such
Planning Commission solely whenever it functions as the Transportation
Impact Fee Advisory Committee.49
§ 42-2. Member attributes.
All of the above-named members are residents of the Township of Pine or
conduct business within the Township and, except as otherwise may be
noted above, are not employees or officials of the Township.
§ 42-3. Representatives of industries.
Not less than 40% of the above-named members are representatives of
the real estate, commercial and residential development and building
industries.
§ 42-4. Compensation.
All of the above-named members shall serve without compensation.
§ 42-5. Duties.
The Township of Pine Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall
serve in an advisory capacity and shall review land use assumptions,
roadway sufficiency analysis studies, capital improvement plans,
transportation service area(s), impact fee charges and the Township of
Pine's transportation impact fee ordinance, and make recommendations to
the governing body as to any necessary revisions thereof for the entirety of
the Township of Pine, all as provided by (and in accordance with) Act 209 of
1990.50
49.Editor's Note: The names of the current members of the Committee are on file in the
Township offices.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 39-1 PINE CODE § 42-6
39:146
§ 42-6. Succession of members.
In the event that any current member of the Township of Pine's Planning
Commission shall hereafter cease to be a member thereof (as of result of
resignation, failure to be reappointed or otherwise), then such person shall
also cease to be a member of the Township of Pine's Transportation Impact
Fee Advisory Committee and his or her successor as a member of said
Planning Commission (by virtue of appointment thereto) shall also thereby
be designated to serve as a member of said Transportation Impact Fee
Advisory Committee.
Part II: Building and Development Legislation
Chapter 44
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 91.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 107.
§ 42-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 42-6
44:147

ARTICLE I
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
§ 44-1. Adoption of standards.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code/1998 Edition
regulating the fabrication, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, location and use of detached one- and two-family dwellings, their
appurtenances and accessory structures, and providing for the issuance
of permits therefor, and providing for penalties for violation thereof, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in § 44-2 of this chapter.
§ 44-2. Modifications to standards.
The International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code/1998 Edition is
hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 807 (Attic Access) is amended to read as follows:
807.1 Attic access. All new one- and two-family dwellings
constructed in the Township shall have an attic access located in a
hallway of the structure, and said opening shall be no smaller than:
(1) Twenty-two and one-half inch by 54 inches where disappearing
stairs are used.
(2) Twenty-six inches by 44 inches in all other cases.
In one- and two-family dwellings, where there are separate attic areas,
each area shall have a separate attic access as described above.
B. The following chapters and Appendixes of the International One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code/1998 Edition shall be deleted and not
adopted as part of the Code of the Township of Pine: Chapters 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 and 48.
§ 44-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-2
44:149

ARTICLE II
National Building Code
§ 44-3. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Township Manager of the Township of Pine, being marked and designated
as the "BOCA National Building Code/1999, Fourteenth Edition," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Township of Pine,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Building Code/1999,
Fourteenth Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 44-4 of this chapter.
§ 44-4. Modifications to standards.
The BOCA National Building Code/1999, Fourteenth Edition, is hereby
revised as follows:
A. In Section 101.1, insert "Township of Pine."
B. In Section 112.3.1, insert "See current Township of Pine Fee Schedule."
C. In Section 116.4, insert "criminal offense," "no more than $500" and "30
days," respectively.
D. In Section 117.2, insert: "$50" and "$500," respectively.
E. In Section 3408.2, insert "January 1, 1978."
F. Chapter 29, entitled "Plumbing Systems," is deleted in its entirety.
G. Chapter 31, Sections 3101.0 through 3110.1, entitled "Special
Construction," is deleted in its entirety.
H. Chapter 12, Section 1211.2, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
1211.2 Access to attics: An opening not less than 26 inches by 44
inches with ready access thereto shall be provided to any attic area
having a clear height of over 30 inches. The access shall be located
in the common hallway area and clearly identified. Where doors or
other openings are installed in the draftstopping, such doors shall be
self-closing and be of approved materials as specified in this section,
and the construction shall be tightly fitting around all pipes, ducts or
other assemblies piercing the draftstopping. In structures where there
are separate attic areas, each such attic area shall have separate attic
access as defined above.
§ 44-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-4
44:151
I. Chapter 7, Section 707.1, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
707.1 General: Walls shall have sufficient structural stability under
fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without
collapse of the wall and shall be constructed of noncombustible
masonry units that provide the required strength and fire-resistance
rating specified in Table 602, but not less than the fire resistance
rating of the use group specified in Table 707.1. Strength and stability
shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14 and 16.
J. Chapter 7, Section 707.6.2, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
707.6.2 Residential occupancies: In occupancies in Use Groups R-1,
R-2, R-3 and R-4 containing sleeping areas for individuals, families or
households, the party wall or fire wall shall be continuous masonry
construction from the foundation or footing to 30 inches above the roof
surface.
K. Chapter 9, Section 904.2, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
904.2 Use Groups A-1, A-3 and A-4: Where a Use Group A-1, A-3,
or A-4 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 M2) in area, an
automatic fire-suppression system shall be provided as follows:
(1) Throughout the entire story or floor level where the A-1, A-3 or
A-4 Use Group is located;
(2) Throughout all stories and floor levels below the A-1, A-3 or A-4
Use Group; and
(3) Throughout all intervening stories and floor levels between the
A-1, A-3 or A-4 Use Groups and the highest level of exit discharge
that serves the Use Group A-1, A-3 or A-4 fire area, including the
highest level of exit discharge.
L. Chapter 9, Section 904.4, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
904.4 Use Groups B and E: An automatic fire suppression system
shall be provided throughout all buildings having a Use Group B and E
fire area which exceeds 5,000 square feet.
M. Chapter 9, Section 904.6, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
904.6 Use Group I: An automatic fire suppression system shall be
provided throughout all buildings with a Use Group I fire area.
N. Chapter 9, Section 904.7, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
§ 44-4 PINE CODE § 44-4
44:152
§ 44-5. Severability.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes or action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
904.7 Use Groups M, S-1 and F-1: Throughout all buildings with
Use Groups M, S-1 and F-1 where the floor area exceeds 5,000 square
feet, an automatic fire-suppression system shall be provided.
O. Chapter 9, Section 915.2.1, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
replaced as follows:
915.2.1 Building height: Standpipe systems shall be installed
throughout all buildings with two or more stories. Standpipe systems
shall also be required in buildings where occupancy occurs in an area
that is partly or completely below grade, regardless of the number of
stories above grade.
P. Chapter 9, Section 915.2.2, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
replaced as follows:
915.2.2 Building area: Standpipe systems shall be installed in all
single story buildings where any portion of the building floor area is
more than 400 feet (122m) of travel from the nearest point of Fire
Department vehicle access.
Q. Chapter 9, Section 915.7, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced
as follows:
915.7 Hose connection/fire hose: A standpipe hose connection shall
be located within the stair tower at each floor level at every exit
stairway. The standpipe connection shall be enclosed by an approved
hose cabinet located not more than five feet above the floor. The hose
cabinet shall be supplied with one-and-one-half-inch lined approved
fire hose and approved variable fog nozzle hung on an approved pin
rack. The length of the fire hose shall be a minimum of 50 feet in length
or a sufficient length to extend to all areas of the fire area on the floor
if there is only one fire hose cabinet required on that floor or 50% of
the area to the next fire hose cabinet where more than one fire hose
cabinet is required. In addition, also located in each fire hose cabinet
shall be one spanner wrench and one pick head ax.
§ 44-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:153
Chapter 46
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Private roads, acceptance of — See Ch. 65.
Rights-of-way — See Ch. 66.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Standard details — See Ch. 70.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 46-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Township of Pine hereby elects to administer and to enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. § 7210.101 through § 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 46-2. Adoption and incorporation by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Township of Pine.
§ 46-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code with the Township of Pine shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as hereafter may be determined
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine from time to time by
resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee or employees of the Township of Pine
to serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township
of Pine.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township of Pine.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the code through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entry into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the code on behalf of the Township
of Pine.
§ 44-5 PINE CODE § 46-3
46:154
§ 46-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals for the Township of Pine shall hereafter be established
by subsequent resolution of its Board of Supervisors in conformity with
the requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from
time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any future time
the Township of Pine undertakes joint enforcement and administration with
one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall then be
established by joint action of the Township of Pine and the other
participating municipalities.
§ 46-5. Affect on other regulations.
§ 46-6. Allegheny County Health Department jurisdiction.
In accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 through
§ 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its applicable regulations,
the Township of Pine is hereby declared to be and to remain subject to
and within the jurisdiction of the Allegheny County Health Department with
regard to permit issuance, inspection processes, and enforcement of the
Plumbing Code, and its applicable rules and regulations, as promulgated
by the Allegheny County Health Department as part of its Public Drinking
Water and Waste Management Program.
E. By entry into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry for plan review, inspections, and enforcement, regarding
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Township of Pine on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full
force and effect until such time as such previously adopted provisions
fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as
amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances previously
adopted by the Township of Pine which are in effect as of the effective
date of this chapter and whose requirements are less than the minimum
requirements of the code, are hereby amended to conform with the
comparable provisions of the code.
C. All existing, relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the
Township of Pine which are not governed by the Code shall remain in
full force and effect. Such existing ordinances, regulations and policies
shall include, but not be limited to, the applicable existing provisions or
portions thereof presently contained in Chapter 52, Fire Prevention,
and Chapter 44, Building Construction, of the code of the Township of
Pine.
§ 46-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 46-7
46:155
§ 46-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township of Pine for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
hereafter established by resolution of its Board of Supervisors from time to
time.
§ 46-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall be become effective on July 1, 2004.
Chapter 48
EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Standard details — See Ch. 70.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 48-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Grading, Excavating and Fill, and Retaining Wall Ordinance.
§ 48-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, to protect property, to maintain the present level of ecology and
to promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of materials, use, location and maintenance of grading,
excavation and fill, and retaining wall systems.
§ 48-3. Definitions.
A. Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — A Township of Pine Code Enforcement Officer or
designee as the individual designated from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors to act for the Township of Pine under this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — A valid permit issued by the Township of Pine,
pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, coal or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
§ 46-7 PINE CODE § 48-3
48:156
§ 48-4. Conformance required.
New grading (excavations or fills) or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing grading (excavations or fills) and/or the
installation of new or the replacement of existing retaining walls shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 48-5. Permit required.
No person shall commence or perform any grading (excavation or fill) or
the installation of a new retaining wall in excess of four feet in height, or
replacement of an existing retaining wall in excess of four feet in height
displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to
a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE — The elevation of the ground surface above sea level at the
location of any proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — The excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT or PERMIT — Any permit required by this chapter
for the cut of an existing grade, the filling to increase the height of the
existing grade, or the installation or replacement of a retaining wall(s).
PAVING — The application of such material as will produce a dust-free,
all-weather, hard surface.
PERSON — A natural person or persons but shall also include a
partnership or corporation and its heirs, successors and assigns.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed of natural or man-made
materials designed to hold back soil so that the elevation of ground at
the base of the structure is different than the elevation of the ground at
the top of such structure.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or
parcels of land, joined together, where grading work is continuous and
performed at the same time.
SLOPE — The difference in grade between two points. It is often
referred to as the "difference in elevation per hundred feet of horizontal
distance." A "ten-percent slope" means a change in elevation of 10 feet
vertically per 100 feet horizontally.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine.
B. By reference, all definitions in the Zoning and Subdivision of Land
Ordinances51 and amendments are incorporated herein.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning, and Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 48-3 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-5
48:157
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Administrator. A
separate grading permit shall be required for each site. One permit may
cover an excavation and any fill and/or the installation of a new retaining
wall or replacement of an existing retaining wall made on the same site.
A grading permit will not be required, however, in the following situations,
but, in all other respects, the provisions of this chapter shall apply:
§ 48-6. Application.
A. An excavation which does not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface. This
exception shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to or the
requirement of a grading permit for any fill made with the material from
such excavation, unless such fill is within the exception of Subsection B
herein.
B. A fill which does not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface, provided that the
surfaces of such fills do not have a slope at any point steeper than 2 1/2
horizontal to one vertical.
C. An excavation for basements and footings of a building, swimming pool
or underground structure authorized by a building permit and
excavation of a building site where plot plans are attached to the
building permit; provided, however, that a grading permit is required
for excavation of a building site when conditions, such as excessive cut
or fill, make such permit necessary. This exception shall not affect the
applicability of this chapter to or the requirement of a grading permit
for any fill made with the material from such excavation unless such fill
is within the exception of Subsection B herein. A grading permit shall
not be required for the temporary stockpiling on the same site of the
material from such excavation, however such temporary stockpiling
shall not create excessively steep slopes.
D. A single-family house site where the maximum slope between property
lines or the maximum excavation or fill, exclusive of the situations
referred to in § 48-5C hereof, do not exceed the slopes or quantities set
forth in the following table:
Single-Family House
Site
(area to be graded
in square feet)
Maximum Slope
Without Permit
(feet vertical per
100 feet horizontal)
Maximum
Excavation or Fill
Without Permit
(cubic yards)
Less than 12,000 12 100
From 12,000 to
30,000
15 200
Over 30,000 20 250
§ 48-5 PINE CODE § 48-6
48:158
A. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Administrator. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract or street address, or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
registered professional engineer, including a contour map showing
the present contours of the land and the proposed contours of the
land after completion of the proposed grading at a scale of not
greater than 50 feet to one inch and at a contour interval of not less
than two feet and a plan showing cross sections of the proposed cut
or fill on fifty-foot intervals which show the method of benching
both cut and/or fill; however, under no circumstances shall there be
less than two cross sections for each property involved under said
permit; a plot plan showing the location of the grading, boundaries,
lot lines, neighboring streets and ways, existing and proposed
buildings, existing waterlines and sewers or drains, existing utility
lines, trees over 12 inches in diameter measured at breast height
(DBH) above the ground and sufficient dimensions and other data
to show the location of all work; description of the type and
classification of the soil; details and location of watercourses; area
and details of paving and any proposed drainage structures and
pipes, retaining walls and cribbing; details of bridges and/or
culverts required to cross over watercourses; nature of fill
material; and such other information as the Administrator may
require to carry out the purposes of this chapter. All plans shall be
dated and shall bear the name and seal of the registered
professional engineer who prepared the same, the name of the
applicant and the name of owner of the land. Plans shall be
submitted in triplicate.
(3) State the estimated dates of the starting and completion of the
grading work.
(4) State the purpose for which the application is filed.
(5) State the estimated cost of the work contemplated by the requested
permit.
(6) If a retaining wall(s) is/are proposed, then details of such retaining
wall(s) shall be submitted with the application.
B. The Administrator may waive the requirement of any or all plans and
specifications listed in Subsection A(1) to (6) above if he finds that the
information on the application is sufficient to show that the work will
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 48-6 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-7
48:159
§ 48-7. Fees.
Before issuing a permit, the Administrator shall collect a permit fee in the
amount as set forth in the Pine Township fee schedule.52
§ 48-8. Bond required.
Before issuance of a permit, the applicant shall post a bond, with corporate
surety or other approved security as set forth in this section, in an amount
of 110% of the estimated cost of the work to guarantee the completion
of said work, including surface treatment, drainage, and site restoration
contemplated by the permit. In the event that the applicant will move or
grade more than 50,000 square feet or more than 30,000 cubic yards, then
a formal security agreement shall be required by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Pine. Said agreement will be prepared by the Township
Solicitor and must be approved by the Township prior to the issuance of the
requested permit. No grading shall commence and no grading permit shall
be issued until the formal agreement, if required, is signed by both parties
and, in all cases, the security is posted.
§ 48-9. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six
months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided
that the administrator may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence in writing that unusual difficulties have prevented the work being
started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable
extension of time and provided, further, that the application for the
extension of time is made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 48-10. Denial of permit.
Where, in the opinion of the Administrator, the work as proposed by the
applicant is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or is likely
to endanger any person, any property or any street or way, he shall deny
the grading permit. In determining whether the proposed work is likely
to endanger property or streets or alleys or streams or create hazardous
conditions or damage the ecology of the area, the Administrator shall give
due consideration to, but shall not be limited to, possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, runoff of surface waters and subsurface conditions,
such as the stratification and faulting of rock, and the nature and type of
the soil, rock or other minerals and the extent of removal, if any.
§ 48-11. Appeals.
The applicant may appeal the decision of the Administrator to the governing
body, which may consider alternate methods, standards or materials
proposed by the applicant. Any request for modifications of the applicable
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 48-7 PINE CODE § 48-11
48:160
stormwater management standards, specifically the standards governing
allowable peak rate of stormwater runoff, shall be determined in
accordance with the procedure for a no-harm evaluation as contained in the
Zoning and Subdivision of Land Ordinances.53
§ 48-12. Inspections.
The Administrator shall make inspections and shall either approve that
portion of the work which has been completed or notify the permit holder
wherein the same fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where
it is found by inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or
shown in the application, the Administrator may refuse to approve further
work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the
existing conditions and shall be authorized to issue a stop-work order until
such unauthorized condition is resolved.
§ 48-13. Work to be maintained while awaiting approval.
Plans for grading work, approved by the Administrator, shall be maintained
at the site during the progress of the grading work until the work has been
inspected and approved.
§ 48-14. Notification of inspection.
The permit holder shall notify the Administrator in order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule, and such notification
shall be made by the permit holder at least 24 hours before the inspection
is to be made:
§ 48-15. Safety precautions.
If, at any stage of the work, the Administrator shall determine by inspection
that the nature of the conditions on the site are such that further work
as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger any property or
streets or ways or to create hazardous conditions, the Administrator may
A. Initial inspection: when work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
B. Rough grading when all rough grading has been completed.
C. Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities are to be installed and
before such facilities are backfilled.
D. Special structures (including retaining walls): when excavations are
complete for retaining walls and/or crib walls and/or when reinforcing
steel is in place and before concrete is poured.
E. Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, and site restoration has been completed.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning, and Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 48-11 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-15
48:161
require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
safety precautions be taken as the Administrator considers appropriate
to avoid such likelihood of danger. Safety precautions may include, but
shall not be limited to, a less steep or exposed slope, construction of
additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing walls
or retaining walls.
§ 48-16. Excavation standards.
§ 48-17. Blasting; use of explosives.
A. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than 2 1/2
horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) Formal permission is granted by the Board of Supervisors following
submittal of a request for special consideration.
(2) A retaining wall in accordance with the provisions of this section or
other approved support designed by a registered professional
engineer is proposed and said design is approved by the
Administrator and/or the Board of Supervisors.
B. The Administrator may require an excavation to be made with a cut face
less or flatter in slope than 2 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if he finds
that the material in which the excavation is to be made is unusually
subject to erosion or if other conditions exist which, under applicable
engineering practice, make such flatter cut slope necessary for stability
and safety.
C. Excavations adjacent to any footing, foundation or structure shall not
extend below the angle of repose or natural slope of the soil under the
nearest point of the same unless such footing, foundation or structure is
first properly underpinned or protected against settlement.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making or causing
the excavation to be made shall notify, in writing, the owners of
adjoining property and structures not less than 30 days before such
excavation is to be made that the excavation is to be made. Adjoining
properties and structures shall be protected as provided in the
Township of Pine Building Code54 as is on file in the office of the
Township and/or as required by the Administrator.
A. Blasting to loosen material to be excavated may be utilized only under
extraordinary site conditions where conventional means of excavation
can not accomplish earth removal, and the approval of the Board of
Supervisors has been obtained.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Building Construction.
§ 48-15 PINE CODE § 48-17
48:162
§ 48-18. Filling standards.
B. Blasting shall not be considered wherein conventional removal is
possible, but blasting provides only an economic advantage.
C. Blasting may not be utilized when the Administrator deems that the
proximity of adjacent property, structures, or natural features may be
affected by a blasting operation.
D. Blasting may not be utilized when the Administrator deems that water
wells in the proximity of the blasting site may be adversely affected by a
blasting operation.
E. Should it be determined that a blasting operation is permissible, then
the following standards shall apply:
(1) The person or firm responsible for the blasting operation shall be
certified in the transportation, storage and use of explosives, and
such certification shall be presented to the Township.
(2) The person(s) or firm responsible for the blasting operation shall
fully comply with the Building Officials and Code Administrators
(BOCA) Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, for the transportation,
storage and use of explosives.
(3) Blasting shall only be conducted between sunrise and sunset, and
only after notification of the Township and adjacent property
owners.
(4) Blasting operations shall not be conducted within 800 feet of a
public highway.
(5) Blasting operations shall not be conducted within 200 feet of a
pipeline.
(6) Blasting operations shall not be conducted within 1,000 feet of a
school or public building.
(7) Blasting operations shall not be conducted within 500 feet of a
dwelling or structure unless prior written consent of the property
owner and occupant of such dwelling or structure is obtained.
(8) Blasting shall be conducted in a manner so that flying rock or
overburden is not ejected into the air by the blast so as to
constitute a hazard or danger or do harm or damage to persons or
property.
(9) Seismographic recording of all blasting operations shall be
required and shall be submitted to the Township following each
blast.
(10) Such other requirements deemed appropriate by the Administrator
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 48-17 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-18
48:163
§ 48-19. Retaining wall standards.
A. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than 2 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) Special permission is granted, as a waiver or variance, to a
subdivision of land, planned residential development or a land
development plan.
(2) A retaining wall or series of retaining walls are proposed.
B. The Administrator may require that the fill be constructed with an
exposed slope less than or flatter than 2 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if
he finds that under the particular conditions such flatter slope is
necessary for stability and safety.
C. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time, said
time limit to be determined by the Administrator and to be
specified on the grading permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials, other than clean soil or earth, within the fill.
D. When the fill is other than clean soil or earth, the Administrator may
require clean soil or earth to be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at the
end of each day's operations.
(1) No fill of any kind shall be placed over trees, stumps or other
material which would create a nuisance or be susceptible to
attracting rodents, termites or other pests.
(2) No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until a faithful performance bond in the
amount of at least 10% more than the Administrator's estimated
cost of adequately covering such fill with clean soil or earth and
providing surface treatment and drainage has been furnished to
the Township. Such bond shall be executed by a corporate surety,
as well as by the principal, and shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Solicitor as to form. The bond shall inure to the
benefit of the Township and be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the work required under the terms and conditions
of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the Administrator. In
lieu of said bond, a cash deposit in said amount may be made with
the Township.
§ 48-18 PINE CODE § 48-19
48:164
§ 48-20. Ground cover.
A. No new retaining wall shall be constructed in excess of four feet in
height and no existing retaining wall shall be reconstructed if such
existing retaining wall is in excess of four feet in height, unless such
construction or reconstruction of a retaining wall is submitted as a part
of a grading permit application.
B. No retaining wall shall be constructed so that the vertical face of the
wall is in excess of eight feet in height.
C. If more than one retaining wall is proposed on separate elevations, then
the retaining walls shall be setback or staggered from the face plane of
an adjacent retaining wall by at least 25 feet of horizontal distance.
D. No more than two retaining walls may be used to retain any one slope.
E. The proposed retaining wall(s) shall be designed to withstand the forces
of the earth or fill behind the retaining wall. All retaining walls over four
feet in height shall be designed and bear the seal of a registered
professional engineer.
F. Any proposed retaining wall shall be depicted on a drawing which is
submitted with a grading permit application, such drawing shall:
(1) Bear the professional seal of the wall designer;
(2) Depict the proposed materials to be used for construction of the
proposed retaining wall(s).
G. Walls exempted from this section shall include:
(1) An extension of a building designed to solely retain a section of
earth so long as the extension is compatible with the design and
constructed of similar materials as the building.
(2) Walls that are principally designed to abate sound generated from
one area to an adjacent area
(3) Walls that are necessary for road or sidewalk installation.
H. Where the top of retaining walls are located within two feet of a walk,
path, parking lot, or driveway, then such retaining walls shall have a
guard of suitable construction of at least 42 inches in height.
A. In order to prevent erosion, the permittee shall be required to provide
adequate surface treatment by installing ground covering of such kind
and character as may be approved by the Administrator. The ground
covering shall be either grass, or other approved variety of vegetation.
B. If a site for which grading is proposed contains woodlands, steep
slopes, and/or specimen trees (as such are defined elsewhere in the
Code of the Township of Pine), then a site restoration plan shall be
submitted which shall show mitigation of such natural features as is
§ 48-19 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-20
48:165
§ 48-21. Fill to be compacted.
All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to prevent
undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by a sheepsfoot
roller or other approved method after each layer is spread. The
Administrator may require tests or other information if, in his opinion, the
conditions or materials are such that same is necessary. Where fills are
placed on slopes of 5% or more, benching of the surface shall be required
and indicated on the cross sections.
§ 48-22. Drainage.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloping surface of a fill.
The Administrator shall require such drainage structures or pipes to be
constructed or installed which are necessary to prevent erosion damage and
to satisfactorily carry off surface waters. All drainage provisions shall be of
such design so that the peak discharge from all stormwater outfalls on the
site shall be in conformance with the applicable stormwater management
performance standards for the stormwater management district in which
the site is located.
§ 48-23. Maintenance required.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures, fences, ground cover and other protective devices as
established by permit, and, further, the continued use of said area shall be
contingent upon the maintenance and upkeep, satisfactory to the Township
and subject to such further conditions as the Township may prescribe from
time to time. The certificate of completion, therefore, may, at any time, be
revoked by the Board of Supervisors, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in § 48-26B and C, if the conditions of the permit are not being
observed or if conditions exist that prejudice the health, safety and welfare
of any person, persons or property.
§ 48-24. Protection of adjacent property and utilities.
required by the provisions of the Code of the Township of Pine relating
to such woodlands, steep slopes, and/or specimen trees.
A. Prevention of slides or washes. Materials shall not be permitted to roll,
slide, flow or wash onto adjacent private or public property, and, where
necessary, retaining walls, cribbing or benching shall be utilized to
comply with this requirement.
B. Horizontal distance of excavation or fill slope from property or
easement line. The horizontal distance from either the toe or top of the
excavation or fill slope line shall be five feet or 1/2 of the vertical height
of the fill or excavation from any adjoining property or easement line,
§ 48-20 PINE CODE § 48-24
48:166
§ 48-25. General requirements.
whichever is greater, but such distance need not exceed 10 feet. The
Administrator shall have the authority to modify this requirement in
instances where it is demonstrated that such modification is needed to
secure desirable interrelationships between properties.
C. Support and protection of public utilities and public streets. Protection
from drainage resulting from the operation, shall be provided for all
public and private utilities, whether on the surface, beneath the ground
surface or overhead, and, when necessary, for the repair, replacement
or relocation of such utilities. The surface and other facilities of public
streets shall be fully restored by the holder of the permit, in the event of
any damage. The owner shall correct and/or reimburse the Township of
Pine for any damage to the utility or Township owned property involved
before the Administrator issues the completion certificate and
authorizes release of the posted security.
D. Fencing. Should, in the opinion of the Administrator, operations
governed by this chapter create a hazard to persons or property unless
adequately fenced, then the permittee shall construct such fences or
guardrails as safeguards to persons using adjoining property (public or
private or at the top of a retaining wall) as required by the
Administrator.
A. The top or bottom edge of excavations and fills shall be at least five feet
from property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property. The top or bottom edge of excavation and fills shall be at least
50 feet from the nearest bank of any stream or body of water. A fence
not less than four feet in height, or a design approved by the
Administrator and meeting Township fence requirements may be
required at the top of all cuts or fills. Before a grading permit is issued,
a bond shall be required as provided in § 48-8 hereof, to guarantee
protection during and restoration following the grading operation.
B. The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt or debris washing from his property as a result
of any grading or regrading of his property. The duties imposed under
this subsection shall be in addition to those duties owed to other
property owners by statute or by operation of law.
C. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending suburban development shall be preserved.
D. All grading, excavation or fill shall be performed so that no unnecessary
dust shall be raised. The Administrator may impose and enforce
reasonable dust-control regulations and may revoke any permit issued
under this chapter until proper dust-control regulations are met.
§ 48-24 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-26
48:167
§ 48-26. Certificate of completion.
§ 48-27. Violations and penalties.
A. If, upon final inspection of an excavation or fill, it is found that the work
authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate
of completion covering such work and stating that the work is approved
shall be issued to the permit holder by the Administrator.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to revoke any grading
certificate of completion upon the recommendation of the
Administrator that the work covered by the certificate has been
materially extended or altered, without a permit so to do, or that any
retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, fence or other protective
devices shown on the approved plans and specifications submitted for a
permit have not been maintained in good order and repair.
C. Before such revocation, the Administrator shall first give written notice
to the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved,
specifying the defective condition and stating that, unless such
defective condition is remedied, the certificate may be revoked. If the
defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall not be revoked.
Such conditions shall be corrected within 30 days of notice to the owner
to correct the same.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or retaining wall, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Administrator on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable on conviction thereof before a District Justice or
other proper judicial officer to a penalty not exceeding $500 for each
and every offense, and, whenever such person, firm or corporation shall
have been notified by the Administrator that he is committing such
violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation
after such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now by law collected.
D. In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper office of the Township, in addition
to other remedies, may institute, in the name of the Township, any
appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such
violation.
§ 48-26 PINE CODE § 48-27
48:168
Chapter 52
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire company — See Ch. 17.
Fire districts — See Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 91.
Firearms — See Ch. 104.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 112
§ 48-27 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 48-27
48:169

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)55
§ 52-1. through § 52-5. (Reserved)
55.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Fire Prevention Code, adopted 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 268, as
amended, was repealed 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 363. See now Art. IV, International Fire
Code.
§ 52-1 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-1
48:171

ARTICLE II
Key Lock Box Rapid Entry Systems
[Adopted 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 279]
§ 52-6. System required; approval authority.
The following newly constructed structures, which otherwise contain a
central station supervised alarm system, shall have and maintain, and it
shall be a condition precedent to the issuance by the Township of Pine
of an occupancy permit therefor, an approved key lock box rapid entry
system which meets the specifications contained in this article: commercial
structures and all multifamily residential structures in which there is access
to individual dwelling units from a common internal or external corridor
or other enclosed space. The approval of the installation of such keylock
box rapid entry system shall be made by the Township of Pine or its
authorized designee, which may include the Township's Fire Marshal and/
or an authorized representative of the Wexford Volunteer Fire Company or
any successor thereto.
§ 52-7. Location.
The key lock box rapid entry system required by this article shall be located
on the exterior of the structure for which it is utilized, at a location at
or near the structure's main entrance. The required key lock box rapid
entry system shall be placed at a height of approximately six feet above
ground level and shall not be covered or have its visibility obscured by any
items, including but not limited to displays, signs or landscaping. The exact
location of the required key lock box rapid entry system upon each structure
shall be subject to the approval of the Township of Pine or its designee prior
to its installation.
§ 52-8. Contents.
The box for the required key lock box rapid entry system shall contain
labeled keys for all locked areas of the structure for which it is utilized,
including but not limited to all locked points of ingress and egress to/from
the structure, all locked mechanical rooms, all locked elevator rooms, all
locked elevator controls, all locked fenced or otherwise secured areas and
all locked individual tenant spaces. In the event that the number of locked
individual tenant spaces is so large so as to preclude placement of all keys
for same within the key lock box rapid entry system box, a separate key
vault for same may be located elsewhere within the structure; however, its
location and access thereto must be provided within the key lock box rapid
entry system box.
§ 52-9. Size.
The size of the required key lock box rapid entry system shall be in
conformity with the manufacturer's recommendations for same and be
§ 52-6 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-9
48:173
subject to the approval of the Township of Pine or its designee prior to its
installation.
§ 52-10. Installation.
The required key lock box rapid entry system shall be installed in
accordance with its manufacturers instructions by an approved contractor,
such as a fire alarm installer. Such installation shall be complete and shall
be required to meet the approval of the Township of Pine or its designee
prior to issuance by the Township of Pine of an occupancy permit for the
structure.
§ 52-11. Interconnections required.
The required key lock box rapid entry system shall be interconnected to
the structure's fire alarm control panel, and there shall be produced both
a tamper alarm to the central station of the alarm monitoring entity and a
local, audible alarm sound which shall be audible at the location of the key
lock box which activate upon the opening of the key lock box. In addition,
a visible clear/white flashing strobe light shall also be installed at the same
location as the required key lock box rapid entry system, which strobe light
shall activate upon the annunciation of a fire alarm for the structure.
§ 52-12. Exemptions for certain structures.
Certain structures shall not be required to have a key lock box rapid entry
system upon certification by the Township of Pine or its designee that
the structure is open to the public at all times on a twenty-four-hoursper-
day, seven-days-per-week basis; or is occupied by staff personnel on
a twenty-four-hours-per-day, seven-days-per-week basis; or entrance into
the structure, unless evidence of fire is visible from the exterior (when
forcible entry by emergency personnel shall be utilized), is precluded by
valid, special security concerns. In the event that a structure previously
certified for exemption pursuant to this section has its use altered so as to
no longer qualify for the exemption specified herein, such structure shall
have a key lock box rapid entry system installed therefor within 60 days of
such alteration of use. Failure to then install the required key lock box rapid
entry system in such event shall result in the revocation of the occupancy
permit for the structure by the Township of Pine and the imposition of the
penalties hereafter provided in this article.
§ 52-13. Required installation of system for existing structures.
All qualifying structures in existence which contain a central station
supervised alarm system and for which occupancy permits have been
previously issued by the Township of Pine prior to enactment of the
requirements for key lock box rapid entry systems shall be required to
install and maintain same in conformity with the provisions of this article
within one year of the Township's enactment of the aforementioned
requirements. Failure to then install and maintain the required key lock
§ 52-9 PINE CODE § 52-13
48:174
box rapid entry system in such event shall result in the revocation of
the occupancy permit for the structure by the Township of Pine and the
imposition of the penalties hereafter provided in this article. The location
of the key lock box rapid entry system required under this section shall be
subject to the approval of the Township of Pine or its authorized designee,
which may include the Township's Fire Marshal and/or an authorized
representative of the Wexford Volunteer Fire Company or any successor
thereto.
§ 52-14. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this article, any person
or persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity violating any of
the provisions of this article shall constitute a summary offense and, upon
conviction within the magisterial district which includes the Township of
Pine, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, may be committed to the
Allegheny County Jail in conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each and every day that a
violation of the provisions of this article exists shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense under this article and shall be subject to separate and
distinct penalties hereunder. The penalties provided herein shall not be the
exclusive method of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this article
but shall be in addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available
to the Township of Pine.
§ 52-13 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-14
48:175

ARTICLE III
Burning Regulations
[Adopted 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 301]
§ 52-15. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
APPLICATION — The form prescribed by the Township which an applicant
must complete in order to obtain a burning permit.
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes.
BURNING — Combustion of any materials wherein the products of such
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. For the purpose of
this definition, a chamber shall be deemed to be enclosed when, during the
time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues, or chimneys
necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas
are open.
BURNING PERMIT or PERMIT — A written authorization granted by the
Township for burning of materials.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
§ 52-16. Burning permit required; exceptions.
A. No person shall cause or allow burning within the Township except in
accordance with all applicable regulations of the County of Allegheny
and with those of the Township and, also, without first having obtained
a burning permit, if such is required by the provisions of this article.
B. Before a burning permit is issued, the applicant shall have received any
other applicable approvals, permits or authorizations, if required, from
the County of Allegheny.
C. Burning utilized for disposal of tree leaves, refuse, garbage, or waste
material (including the clearing or grubbing of land or incineration of
landscape waste or brush not directly related to ongoing, recognized
agricultural or horticultural management purposes necessary to the
quantity or quality of such production) is expressly prohibited at all
times within the Township.
D. Burning used exclusively for providing heat for outside work crews
shall be allowed without a permit only if such burning is in compliance
with the provisions of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
Eleventh Edition, 1999 and the applicable regulations of the Health
Department of the County of Allegheny. In the event of a conflict
between such requirements, the stricter of the two shall govern.
§ 52-15 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-16
48:177
§ 52-17. Application for burning permit.
§ 52-18. Term of burning permit.
Unless otherwise stated as a condition of issuance, burning permits shall
have a duration period of six months from date of issuance.
§ 52-19. Fees and expenses.
Each applicant for a burning permit shall include with its application an
application fee, if any, as hereafter may be specified in the Township's
standard schedule of fees contained in Chapter A144 of the Code of the
Township of Pine. The application fee will not be refunded in the event the
application is denied. The amount of the application fee may be amended
from time to time, as appropriate, by the Township's Board of Supervisors
by resolution and inclusion in the Township's aforementioned standard
schedule of fees.
§ 52-20. Management of burning activities.
E. Bonfires shall be allowable only upon the issuance of a permit pursuant
to the provisions of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Eleventh
Edition, 1999, and the applicable regulations of the Health Department
of the County of Allegheny. In the event of a conflict between such
requirements, the stricter shall govern. The Township may require that
fire-extinguishing equipment of its emergency services providers be
present during the duration of the bonfire or impose other appropriate
conditions necessary to public safety. If the applicant is not the property
owner, such property owner's written consent shall be part of the
application.
F. Burning utilized for ongoing, recognized agricultural or horticultural
management purposes (to maintain or increase the quantity or quality
of agricultural or horticultural production) shall be allowable without a
permit, provided that advance notification to the Township is provided
and that any applicable requirements of the County of Allegheny are
met.
A. A burning permit shall be issued only after an applicant has completed
an application in the form prescribed by the Township, which form may
be revised from time to time. If the Township deems further information
is necessary, it may request such additional information as is necessary
to enable it to make a determination regarding the appropriateness of
the burning activity requested.
B. Upon submission of a fully completed application, the Township shall
review the application and shall grant or deny such application. The
Township may issue a burning permit subject to compliance with
mandatory conditions designed to minimize or eliminate any potential
hazards, or detrimental effects determined to exist by the Township.
§ 52-16 PINE CODE § 52-20
48:178
§ 52-21. Compliance with standards required.
§ 52-22. Liability and indemnification.
A permit holder shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township, its elected
and appointed officials, employees and agents, against any and all claims
for personal injury (including death) and property damage arising out of the
permit holder's burning activities. A permit holder shall defend any actions
or proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that personal
injury (including death) or property damage was caused by the permit
holder's burning activities. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
§ 52-23. Transfer or assignment of permits.
Burning permits may not be transferred or assigned without the written
consent of the Township.
§ 52-24. Termination of permit.
In addition to all other reserved rights and powers, the Township reserves
the right to terminate a permit if the permit holder fails to comply with
any of the material provisions of the permit, this article, or other applicable
federal, state, or local laws or regulations.
A. The Township shall have the right to condition or limit the terms of the
permit as necessary to minimize or to eliminate potential hazards or
detrimental effect upon public safety. In making such determinations,
the Township shall consider the physical condition of the property
utilized, nature or use of proposed burning activity, and weather
conditions.
B. A permit holder shall allow the Township to monitor its burning
activities and to make inspections of any part of the property or
equipment utilized so as to evaluate any effects upon public safety.
A. A permit holder shall perform all burning activities in a manner in
compliance with its application and with all applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the
applicable provisions of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
Eleventh Edition, 1999 (or as thereafter amended), the County of
Allegheny, this article, and any specific conditions of its permit.
B. All burning activity authorized by a permit shall occur only between
those hours specified by the permit.
§ 52-20 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-25
48:179
§ 52-25. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any of the terms of this article shall be punishable by a fine of
up to $100 per day until the violation is cured. The rights of the Township to
seek the penalty set forth in this section shall be deemed to be cumulative
and in addition to any provisions set forth elsewhere in this article
regarding suspension or termination of permits.
§ 52-26. Police powers; effect upon other provisions.
The Township, by granting any permit under this article, does not waive,
lessen, impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in it under
applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation or use
of fire and/or burning. The provisions of this article shall not alter, amend,
or revise any existing language or provisions of the Code of the Township
of Pine (including, but not limited to, the specific provisions of Chapter 52,
Fire Prevention) and the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Eleventh
Edition, 1999, unless such is specifically stated herein and all provisions
of this article shall otherwise be interpreted to be additional, supplemental
regulations.
§ 52-25 PINE CODE § 52-26
48:180
ARTICLE IV
International Fire Code
[Adopted 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 350; amended in its entirety
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 363]
§ 52-27. Adoption of international fire code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Township Manager of the Township of Pine, and being marked and
designated as the "2009 International Fire Code" (and as it may thereafter
be subsequently amended or revised from time to time and including laterissued
editions thereof), as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted for the control of buildings, structures, and premises
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said 2009 International Fire Code (as it
may be amended or revised from time to time and including later-issued
editions thereof) are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this article with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 52-29 hereof.
§ 52-28. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Township of Pine in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 52-29. Modification of standards.
The 2009 International Fire Code is hereby amended and changed in the
following specific respects:
§ 52-30. Effect on other regulations.
A. In Section 109.3 (Violation penalties), insert "criminal offense," "no
more than $500," and "30" days, respectively.
B. Section 307 (Open Burning and Recreational Fires) is deleted in its
entirety, due to the existence of preexisting alternate regulations
contained in Article III of Chapter 52 of the Code of the Township of
Pine.
C. Section 506 (Key Boxes) is deleted in its entirety, due to the existence of
preexisting alternate regulations contained in Article II of Chapter 52 of
the Code of the Township of Pine.
A. All fire prevention and/or building code ordinances, or portions of
ordinances, which were previously adopted by the Township of Pine and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the portion of the
aforementioned 2009 International Fire Code (as it may be hereafter
amended or revised from time to time and including later-issued
editions thereof), shall continue in full force and effect until such time
as such previously adopted provisions fall to equal or exceed the
§ 52-27 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-30
48:181
minimum requirements of the 2009 International Fire Code, as it may
be hereafter amended or revised from time to time (and including laterissued
editions thereof).
B. All fire prevention and/or building code ordinances, or portions of
ordinances, previously adopted by the Township of Pine which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the portion of the
aforementioned 2009 International Fire Code (as it may be hereafter
amended or revised from time to time), are hereby amended to conform
to the comparable provisions of the 2009 International Fire Code (as it
may be hereafter amended or revised from time to time and including
later-issued editions thereof).
C. All existing, relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the
Township of Pine which are not governed by those portions of the
aforementioned 2009 International Fire Code herein adopted (as it may
be hereafter amended or revised from time to time and including laterissued
editions thereof) shall remain in full force and effect. Such
existing ordinances, regulations and policies shall include, but not be
limited to, the applicable existing provisions, or portions thereof,
presently contained in Chapter 52 (Fire Prevention), Chapter 44
(Building Construction), and Chapter 46 (Construction Codes, Uniform)
of the Code of the Township of Pine.
§ 52-30 PINE CODE § 52-30
48:182
Chapter 56
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Construction codes — See Ch. 46.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Standard details — See Ch. 70.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 52-30 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 52-30
48:183

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 56-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,56 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine does
hereby order as follows.
56.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 56-1 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-1
48:185

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 56-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 56-3. Applicability.
§ 56-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 56-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 56-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Township of Pine unless a permit has
been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 56-2 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-6
48:187
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Pine
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 56-6 PINE CODE § 56-6
48:188
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 56-7. Designation of the floodplain administrator.
§ 56-8. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Pine.
§ 56-9. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
A. The Director of Code Administration and Land Development is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the "floodplain administrator." The floodplain administrator
may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);57 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);58 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);59 and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
57.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
58.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 56-7 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-9
48:189
§ 56-10. Application procedures and requirements.
C. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the floodplain administrator/manager.
I. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof, as
adopted per the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Township of Pine. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
§ 56-9 PINE CODE § 56-10
48:190
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 56-10 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-10
48:191
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof,
as adopted per the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(c) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 56-24F, Storage, and § 56-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 56-24F and 56-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 56-25
during a base flood.
(d) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
§ 56-10 PINE CODE § 56-10
48:192
§ 56-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed subdivision or land
development or construction in any identified floodplain area to be
considered for approval shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator
to the County Conservation District and County Department of Community
and Economic Development for review and comment prior to the issuance
of a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District and
Department of Community and Economic Development shall be considered
by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed
plan.
§ 56-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 56-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 56-14. Start of construction.
(e) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be subject to a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
§ 56-10 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-14
48:193
§ 56-15. Enforcement.
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Township of Pine of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
§ 56-14 PINE CODE § 56-15
48:194
§ 56-16. Appeals.
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter, may be declared by
the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 56-15 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-16
48:195

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 56-17. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Township of Pine
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs),
dated September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most-recent revision thereof, including
all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study, and the
above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township of Pine and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
§ 56-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
§ 56-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 56-22B for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
A. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 56-17 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-20
48:197
§ 56-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Township's governing body
(following receipt of any recommendation from the Township's Planning
Commission), and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 56-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 56-20 PINE CODE § 56-21
48:198
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 56-22. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the floodplain administrator's conditional approval
of map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of
the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating
the increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway
reflecting the post-project condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, an applicant
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 56-22 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-22
48:199
§ 56-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 56-18A of this chapter.
(2) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, as adopted per the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC), and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as
amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 56-18A of this chapter, or be designed and constructed so that the
space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, as adopted per the Uniform Construction Code
§ 56-22 PINE CODE § 56-23
48:200
(UCC), and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as
amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
§ 56-23 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-23
48:201
§ 56-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
§ 56-23 PINE CODE § 56-24
48:202
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and "the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no lower than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 56-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
§ 56-24 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-24
48:203
§ 56-25. Development which may endanger human life.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof, as adopted per the Uniform Construction Code (UCC):
Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix
G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof, as adopted per the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC): Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind
described below shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 56-24 PINE CODE § 56-25
48:204
§ 56-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at a
minimum of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 56-25 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-26
48:205
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 56-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
B. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401-405 shall apply.
C. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, as
adopted per the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), and 34 Pa. Code, as
amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the proposed unit's (units') installation.
§ 56-26 PINE CODE § 56-27
48:206
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits Prohibited
§ 56-28. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 56-28 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-28
48:207

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 56-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 56-30 shall apply.
§ 56-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its assessed value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revision
thereof, as adopted by the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its assessed value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 56-29 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-30
48:209

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 56-31. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Township of Pine may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 56-32. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of Pine in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 56-16 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI) or
development which may endanger human life (§ 56-25).
(2) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(3) In granting any variance, the Township of Pine shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Pine shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Pine shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(6) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township of Pine. In addition, a report of all
§ 56-31 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-32
48:211
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 56-32 PINE CODE § 56-32
48:212
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 56-33. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application. The definitions set forth in Chapter 78, Subdivision and Land
Development, and Chapter 84, Zoning, of the Township of Pine Code shall
also apply to this chapter, except when in conflict with the following
definitions, which shall specifically apply to this chapter.
§ 56-34. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having a minimum of 50% of floor
area below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
§ 56-33 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-34
48:213
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
§ 56-34 PINE CODE § 56-34
48:214
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 56-17 and 56-18 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this chapter, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started
after September 22, 1978, and before the effective start date of this chapter
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 56-34 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-34
48:215
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
22, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
22, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1, A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
§ 56-34 PINE CODE § 56-34
48:216
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 56-34 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-34
48:217

ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 56-35. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately and shall remain in force until
modified, amended or rescinded by the Township of Pine.
§ 56-35 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING § 56-35
48:219
Chapter 62
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Fire Prevention — See Ch. 52.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 126,
Art. II
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 56-35 PINE CODE § 56-35
62:220
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 62-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Pine Township.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Allegheny County Health Department.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling which may be
towed on its own running gear and which shall be affixed to real estate
used for residential purposes and constructed with the same, or similar,
electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities as immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A designated portion of a mobile home park parcel
of land, planned and improved for the placement of one mobile home
in nontransient use, with the utility connections, patio and other
appurtenances necessary for occupants and required by law and this
chapter.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership containing
two or more mobile home lots in which each such lot has been planned and
unproved for the placement of one mobile home for nontransient use.
NONTRANSIENT — Persons or families occupying a mobile home for 90
days or more.
PERMIT — Written approval, in whatever form, as issued by the Allegheny
Health Department and Pine Township, authorizing a person to operate and
maintain a mobile home park.
PERSON — An individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation or other entity.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Pine Township Planning Commission.
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING — A structure housing
operational, office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities built
to conform to all required local standards.
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
WATER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system
within the mobile home.
§ 62-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-1
62:221
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — Consists of all pipes fittings, valves and
appurtenances from the water main of the park distributing system to the
water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
ZONING OFFICER — The Pine Township Zoning Officer.
§ 62-1 PINE CODE § 62-1
62:222
ARTICLE II
Permits Inspection; Fees; Registration
§ 62-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile
home park within the limits of Pine Township unless he holds a valid permit
issued by the Allegheny County Health Department in the name of such
person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed and
also a permit issued by the Pine Township hereunder.
§ 62-3. Applications.
§ 62-4. Inspection of plans and park; issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of such application, the Planning Commission shall forthwith
inspect the applicant's plans and proposed park to determine compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, and with the Township Zoning
Ordinance.60 After a favorable determination by the Allegheny County
Health Department, the Planning Commission shall report its findings and
recommendations to the governing body for a final decision. If the
governing body approves the mobile home park, the applicant shall be
issued a mobile home park permit which shall be valid until January 31 of
the next year. When the application is refused, the decision shall specify
grounds for refusal by citing provisions relied upon.
§ 62-5. Renewal permits.
Renewal permits for a like period shall be Sued by the Township Zoning
Officer upon furnishing proof by the applicant that his park continues to
meet the standards prescribed by the Allegheny County Health Department,
this chapter and the Township Zoning Ordinance.61
§ 62-6. Fees.
Each application for a new or renewal permit hereunder shall be
accompanied by payment of an inspection fee annually affixed by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.62 In the event that the Building Inspector or
A. Application to the Allegheny County Health Department. All
applications for permits shall be made by the owner of the mobile home
park or his authorized representative in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Allegheny County Health Department.
B. Application to Pine Township. An application shall be filed with the
Township Planning Commission, using a form furnished by said
Commission, for a permit to operate a mobile home park in the
Township.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 62-2 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-6
62:223
other Township employee or official is required to perform additional or
unusual service in determining said application, the cost of such additional
services shall be borne by the applicant. Such charges shall be paid,
whether or not the application is approved.
§ 62-7. Structural inspection.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, lease, rent, occupy or have
occupied any mobile home which has not been inspected and approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Industrialized and Mobile Housing. All units which have been inspected and
approved shall bear the insignia of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 62-8. Registration; notice; suspension.
A. Allegheny County Health Department. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the
Township unless he holds a certificate of registration issued annually by
the Allegheny County Health Department in the name of such person
for the specific mobile home park. Proof of such registration shall be
furnished the Township Zoning Officer by no later than February 1 of
each year.
B. Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a certificate shall file
notice, in writing, with the Allegheny County Health Department and
the Township Zoning Officer within 10 days after having sold,
transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of all or part of his
interest in or control of any mobile home park. If the certificate of
registration is transferred by the Allegheny County Health Department,
proof of such transfer shall be furnished the Township Zoning Officer
forthwith.
C. Suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is
determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of
any provision of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto or of the Township Zoning Ordinance63 or of any other
applicable Township ordinance, the Township Zoning Officer shall give
notice, in writing, to the person to whom the certificate was issued,
advising him that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, but not to
exceed 30 days, the license to operate in the Township shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
inspected, and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected
and the licensee has not requested a hearing, the Township Zoning
Officer shall suspend the license and give notice, in writing, of such
suspension to the person to whom the certificate is issued.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 62-6 PINE CODE § 62-9
62:224
§ 62-9. Standards for inspection of park and unit.
A. Inspections. A representative of the Township, shall inspect a mobile
home park at reasonable intervals, but not to exceed once every 90
days, and at reasonable times to determine compliance with this
chapter. Following each inspection by the Township representative, a
report of findings shall be made at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Occupancy permits. The Township Inspector shall also inspect each
new mobile home unit immediately after installation to ensure
compliance with all applicable regulations. Certificates of occupancy
for each mobile home unit shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit and shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer within 10 days after the installation of such unit shall have been
completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A record of
all certificates shall be maintained by the Township Supervisors, and
copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person who has a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the unit affected. No mobile home
shall be occupied without such a permit.
C. Inspectors. The Township Zoning Officer is hereby designated as the
person to make such inspections. Another or additional inspectors may
also be authorized to make inspections or additional inspections at the
discretion of the Township Supervisors.
D. Authorization to act. The Township Zoning Officer may, in his
discretion, give notice for violations of this chapter and issue notice
thereof, without express authority from the Township Supervisors in
each instance.
§ 62-9 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-9
62:225

ARTICLE III
Park Construction Requirements
§ 62-10. Minimum park area and site location.
§ 62-11. Site drawings.
§ 62-12. Soil and ground cover.
A. Minimum park area. A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at
least 10 contiguous acres of land.
B. Site location. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with
the following minimum requirements:
(1) The location shall be free from adverse influence from swamps,
marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
(2) The location shall not be subject to flooding.
(3) The location shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance, such as
excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat,
odor or glare.
(4) The location shall be in an area appropriately zoned for such use.
A. The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner and in
such a way as to protect adjacent property.
B. Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water capable of
breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be eliminated or controlled
in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
C. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall not
be deposited upon the ground surface in any park of a mobile home
park.
A. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected with
a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and
emanation of dust during dry weather. All unpaved areas within the
mobile home park shall be landscaped subject to the approvals of the
Planning Commission and governing body of the Township. Planting
areas and landscaping shall conform to reasonably minimum standards
as required, by the Planning Commission and the governing body. Lot
areas not covered by building, sidewalks or paving shall be seeded with
grass or other appropriate ground cover material compatible with the
landscape and natural amenities for the district.
§ 62-10 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-12
62:227
§ 62-13. Nonresidential we of park.
§ 62-14. Required setbacks; buffer strips.
§ 62-15. Erection and placement of mobile homes.
B. Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which is
poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects or other pests harmful
to man.
A. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except
such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of
park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.
Provision for such nonresidential uses shall be indicated on the plan
submitted with the permit application.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the
sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home lot and connected to
utilities, but the sale of a mobile home lot to an individual by the mobile
home park owner is prohibited.
A. All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park
property line or public street right-of-way which is not in the mobile
home park.
B. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual
mobile home, including accessory structures attached thereto, and
adjoining pavement of a park street or common parking area or other
common areas and structures.
C. The perimeter of a mobile home park shall be bordered on all sides by a
planted strip of at least 15 feet width or of such greater width which, in
the opinion of the Planning Commission and governing body of Pine
Township, may be necessary for the adequate protection of adjoining
premises and highways. The plant material shall have initially a height
and compactness of not less than 50% of the ultimately desired height
and compactness, which shall be determined in each case separately by
the Planning Commission and governing body on the basis of site
location, adjacent land areas, topography and other appropriate
considerations. The park management is responsible for maintaining
this planted strip is such a way as to achieve the purpose of providing a
screening between the mobile home park and adjacent properties.
A. Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by at least 30 feet on all sides.
B. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around
the entire base of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide
sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure
and shall be installed at the same time that the mobile home unit is
installed.
§ 62-12 PINE CODE § 62-15
62:228
§ 62-16. Streets; walkways.
§ 62-17. Off-street parking.
§ 62-18. Construction of lots.
C. Every mobile home lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by
permanent markers. There shall be posted and maintained in a
conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the number
of each lot as shown on the plot plan.
D. Each mobile home shall be installed upon an adequate, frost-free
foundation for placement and tie-down to secure the structure against
uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. The foundation shall not heave,
shift or settle under weight due to frost action, inadequate drainage or
other forces. The foundation shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns,
such as cast-in-place concrete dead men, eyelets embedded in
the foundation or runways, screw anchors, arrowhead anchors or other
devices securing the stability of the mobile home. Anchors and tiedowns
shall be placed at least at each corner of the foundation.
A. General requirements Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
access shall be provided from abutting public streets or roads.
B. Design standards. All streets and walks, whether public or private, shall
conform to the requirements of the Township Subdivision of Land
Ordinance,64 except that the right-of-way may be 40 feet in width.
C. Access. No public street access from individual lots shall be permitted.
All vehicular accessways from mobile home lots, parking areas and any
on-site facilities serving the mobile home park shall intersect with
interior street systems within the mobile home park.
D. Walks. All parks shall provide safe, convenient all-season pedestrian
walkways of three feet minimum width which are durable and
convenient to maintain, from the entrance of each mobile home
entrance to the parking area of that lot and to the street
A. Off-street parking shall be provided by a paved area of 20 feet by 20
feet in front of each mobile home foundation, paved with four-inch thick
asphalt plant mix or equivalent.
B. No parking shall be permitted on the park street right-of-way.
A. Mobile home lots within the park shall each have a minimum gross area
of 5,000 square feet, and each lot shall have a maximum of one mobile
home thereon.
B. Each mobile home lot shall be improved to provide an adequate
foundation for the placement of the mobile home and in such position as
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 62-15 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-18
62:229
§ 62-19. Recreation areas.
A recreational area, or areas, with suitable facilities shall be maintained
within the park for the use of all park residents. At least 5% of the gross
area of the park shall be developed for recreational purposes. Such areas
shall be used exclusively for playground purposes and be located as to be
free of traffic and other hazards. Playground areas shall be centrally located
in relation to their service area.
§ 62-20. Regulations for mobile home units.
to allow a minimum of 25 feet between the mobile home and the rightof-
way of the park street which serves the lot.
A. Each mobile home shall provide a flush toilet, bathtub or shower and
lavatory which shall be contained in a separate private room within the
mobile home unit.
B. No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any
mobile home as an addition to such home, nor shall any accessory
structure be permitted on any lot or in any mobile home park, except
those accessory structures required and approved by these regulations.
The prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a mobile
home shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a
mobile home.
§ 62-18 PINE CODE § 62-20
62:230
ARTICLE IV
Water System
§ 62-21. Water supply.
§ 62-22. Water storage facilities.
All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and constructed
of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be
effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping
covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Reservoir
overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap.
§ 62-23. Water distribution system.
§ 62-24. Individual water riser pipes and connections.
A. General requirements. An adequate supply of potable water shall be
provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory
facilities as required by this chapter. Where a public water supply
system of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available,
connection shall be made thereto, and its supply shall be used
exclusively. Where a satisfactory public water supply system is not
available, the development of a private water supply system shall be
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources and the
Allegheny County Health Department or other authorities having
jurisdiction.
B. Source of supply. An approved water supply shall be the source of the
water in each mobile home park and the supply, pressure and
distribution system shall be sufficient to sustain and operate the
facilities and equipment of the Township's fire protection system.
C. Water supply shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Resources and the Allegheny County
Health Department.
A. All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
B. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards
of backflow or backsiphonage.
C. The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a
pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square inch, under normal
operating conditions, at service buildings and other locations requiring
potable water supply.
A. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of
the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will
§ 62-21 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-24
62:231
approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring the shortest possible
water connection and decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
B. The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 1/2 inch
and shall terminate at least four inches above the ground surface. The
water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines,
valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of the ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall
be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shutoff valve below the frostline shall be provided near the water
riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste valves
are prohibited unless their type of manufacturer and their method of
installation are approved.
§ 62-24 PINE CODE § 62-24
62:232
ARTICLE V
Sewage Disposal
§ 62-25. Sewerage system.
An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all parks for
conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes, service buildings
and other accessory facilities. Such system shall be designed, constructed
and maintained in accordance with the Department of Environmental
Resources and all other state, county and local health regulations.
§ 62-26. Individual sewer connections.
§ 62-27. Sewer lines.
All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of at least three feet in depth to
be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated
from the park water supply system. All sewer lines shall be constructed of
materials installed in a manner that is in accordance with the Department
of Environmental Resources and the Allegheny County Health Department
and shall have watertight joints.
A. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a three-inchdiameter
sewer riser pipe. The sewer rise pipe shall be so located on
each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet
will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not less
than three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least
1/4 inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
C. All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid, corrosionresistant,
nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
D. Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile
home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away
from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least 1/2 inch
above ground elevation.
§ 62-25 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-27
62:233

ARTICLE VI
Electrical System
§ 62-28. Wiring system required.
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances and shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the local electric power company's
specifications, as well as applicable state and local codes regulating such
systems.
§ 62-29. Power lines.
§ 62-30. Individual connections.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnecting
device and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per
outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 100 amperes.
§ 62-31. Grounding.
All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other
equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor
run with branch circuit conductors of other approved method of grounded
metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment
ground for mobile homes or other equipment.
§ 62-32. Streetlighting.
All mobile home parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and
equipped with luminaires placed at such mounting heights as will provide
adequate levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night, which shall not be less than an average 0.4 footcandle on
each street.
§ 62-33. Telephone system.
A telephone distribution system shall also be installed with connection to
each mobile home lot, in accordance with telephone company regulations.
A. Power lines shall be located underground.
B. All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18 inches
below the ground surface and shall be insulated and specially designed
for the purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than one foot
radial distance from water, sewer, gas or communications lines.
§ 62-28 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-33
62:235

ARTICLE VII
Service Buildings
§ 62-34. Applicability.
The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreational buildings and other community service facilities when
constructed, such as:
§ 62-35. Structural requirements.
§ 62-36. Additional requirements.
All service buildings and other park service facilities and grounds shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition free from any condition that will
menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance or
a fire hazard.
A. Management offices, repair shops and storage areas.
B. Laundry facilities; and
C. Indoor recreation areas.
A. All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by
reason of ordinary uses, decay, corrosion, termites and other
destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and
be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration
of moisture and weather.
B. All buildings shall have:
(1) Sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and
female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions in lavatories and
other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moistureresistant
material.
(2) At least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The
minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room
shall be not lees than 10% of the floor area served by them.
(3) At least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical
device which will adequately ventilate the room.
C. Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with selfclosing
doors.
§ 62-34 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-36
62:237

ARTICLE VIII
Refuse
§ 62-37. Storage, collection and disposal.
It shall be the responsibility of the operator of the park to contract for
the collection of refuse. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in
the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to prevent health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accidents or fire hazards or air
pollution and shall comply with the Allegheny County Health Department
and all local regulations governing mobile home parks.
§ 62-37 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-37
62:239

ARTICLE IX
Insect and Rodent Control
§ 62-38. Property to be maintained free of harborage and
infestation.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other
measures to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements
of the Allegheny County Health Department regulations governing mobile
home parks.
§ 62-38 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-38
62:241

ARTICLE X
Fuel Supply
§ 62-39. Natural gas.
§ 62-40. Liquefied petroleum gas. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings or other structures, when installed, shall be maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having
jurisdiction, including the National Fire Protection Association and the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., National Fire
Prevention Code/1987, or as amended. These rules and regulations shall
also include the following:
§ 62-41. Installation of fuel oil supply system.
A. Natural gas piping systems, when installed in mobile home parks, shall
be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices and
the standards and regulations of the gas company.
B. Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved
shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be
equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas
when the cutlet is not in use.
A. Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a
safe location.
B. Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas.
Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be
maintained in effective operating condition.
C. All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes shall be
well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through
piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
D. Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 US gallons' gross capacity
shall be securely, but not necessarily permanently, fastened to prevent
accidental overturning.
E. No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or
beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other
structure unless such installations are specially approved by the
authority having jurisdiction.
A. All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity
§ 62-39 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-41
62:243
§ 62-42. Storage tanks.
with the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction,
including the National Fire Protection Association.
B. All piping from outside fuel-storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes
shall be securely, but not necessarily permanently, fastened in place.
C. All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall have shutoff valves located within five inches
of storage tanks.
A. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall not
be less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
B. Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage.
§ 62-41 PINE CODE § 62-42
62:244
ARTICLE XI
Fire Protection
§ 62-43. Local regulations. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1987, Seventh Edition, and
subsequent editions issued thereafter.
§ 62-44. Litter.
Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
§ 62-45. Fire extinguishers.
Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in public service buildings under park control, and
a sufficient number shall be maintained throughout the park in readily
accessible and well-marked positions. All fire extinguishers shall be
maintained in good working condition.
§ 62-46. Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. The water supply source shall include a four-and-one-half-inch foot
valve, two two-and-one-half-inch hose ports and one pumper port. The
water supply source shall be connected to a minimum six-inch lateral
equipped with gate valves. The main shall also be a minimum of six
inches.
B. Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver at
least 500 gallons of water per minute with a residual pressure of 20
pounds per square inch at the highest point in the park.
C. Fire hydrants shall be located within 600 feet of every mobile home,
service building or other structure in the park and shall be installed in
accordance with the Township's specifications.
§ 62-43 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-46
62:245

ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 62-47. Management responsibilities.
§ 62-48. Removal of mobile homes. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 173]
No mobile home in a mobile home park shall be removed from the Township
without first obtaining a permit from the Township Tax Collector and the
Township Wage Tax Collector. The former permit shall be issued upon
payment of a fee as set by the current Pine Township fee schedule65 and
real estate taxes assessed against the home and unpaid at time the permit
is requested, and the latter shall be free of charge upon payment of wage
taxes due and unpaid at time the permit is requested.
A. The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
B. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home lot, which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections and shall notify the Township Zoning
Officer immediately after the installation of each new mobile home unit.
C. The park management shall give the health officer free access to all
mobile home lots, service buildings and other community service
facilities for the purpose of inspection.
D. The management shall maintain a register for the past two years
containing the names of all park occupants, along with the date of
arrival and departure. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park. The management shall notify the
appropriate officer, in accordance with state and local taxation laws, of
the arrival and departure of each mobile home or residential occupants
thereof.
E. No lot in any mobile home park shall be rented for a period of less than
90 days.
F. The owner of the mobile home park shall be responsible and shall
provide for all maintenance of grounds, including individual lots and
common open spaces, structures and roadways and pedestrianways
within the park.
65.Editor's Note: For the current fee schedule, see Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 62-47 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-48
62:247

ARTICLE XIII
Violations; Hearing
§ 62-49. Notice of violations.
Whenever the Township Zoning Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit
or certificate was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 62-50. Hearing procedures.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that such person
shall file in the office of the municipal authority a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within 10 days after the notice was served. The filing of the request
for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Board shall set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall
be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition
was filed, provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the Board may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such tenday
period when, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement. A record of all proceedings shall
be made, and a fee shall be charged the petitioner to cover all costs.
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have
been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof
has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required by the laws of this commonwealth; and
D. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, and
with the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 62-49 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 62-50
62:249
Chapter 65
PRIVATE ROADS, ACCEPTANCE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rights-of-way — See Ch. 66.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
§ 65-1. Designation of private roads.
At the time of the enactment of this chapter, the Township of Pine has
determined that 61 private roads have been constructed and currently exist
within the boundaries of the Township of Pine. Such 61 private roads are
identified by name and are each specified as belonging to one of four
classifications (Class A, B, C, or D, respectively) as set forth in an exhibit
hereto entitled "Township of Pine Private Road Index and Classification
Schedule," the provisions of which exhibit are incorporated herein by
reference as if hereby set forth at length in this section.66
§ 65-2. Criteria for classification.
The Township of Pine has reviewed each of the 61 private roads identified
in § 65-1 hereof for purposes of both classifying them and setting forth the
procedures and criteria under which any of them might be accepted in the
future as a public Township road. In establishing the classification of each
of the aforesaid private roads, the Township of Pine has considered, among
other elements: the number of housing units which presently exist upon
such private road; the amount and type of vehicular traffic thereon; and the
potential for additional development in the area of the existing private road,
and the likelihood of the amount of additional residential and/or commercial
structures to be served thereby and the amount and type of vehicular traffic
that would be occasioned by such additional development.
§ 65-3. Classification specifications.
In the event that the Township of Pine, pursuant to procedures set forth
herein, hereafter desires to accept any of the aforementioned private roads
as public Township roads, it shall do so only after such private road has
been previously improved and upgraded at the financial expense of parties
other than the Township prior to its acceptance, and according to its hereindesignated
classification, to the following specifications:
A. Class A: Dedication to the Township of a public right-of-way of a
minimum of 50 feet in width. Construction of a road surface (cartway)
and drainage thereof which satisfies the current Township
66.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 62-50 PINE CODE § 65-3
62:250
specifications for construction and drainage of new public roads, as
shown on Drawing No. R-1 as prepared by the Township's Engineer,
originally dated July, 2001, and with revisions thereto dated December,
2004, or latest subsequent revision date (as on file in the office of the
Township Manager), and provided that the width of the paved road
surface shall be a minimum of 20 feet and that, in addition, the road
shall have integral wing curbs of two feet constructed on both sides
thereof. Such road shall be required to also have the area specified for
turnaround and to have met all other requirements set forth in Chapter
72 ("Streets and Sidewalks") and § 84-125 ("Stormwater management")
of Chapter 84 ("Zoning") of the Code of the Township of Pine. In
addition, all preexisting, unacceptable cartway material shall have been
completely removed prior to construction of the new road surface
specified herein.
B. Class B: Dedication to the Township of a public right-of-way of a
minimum of 33 feet in width. Construction of a road surface (cartway)
of a minimum of 18 feet in width and, in addition, with construction of
one-and-one-half-foot-wide integral wing curbs on both sides thereof.
Such road shall also be required to have met all requirements of the
road specifications as prepared by the Township's Engineer in Drawing
No. R-2, originally dated July, 2001, and with revisions thereto dated
June, 2011, or latest subsequent revision date, as is on file in the office
of the Township Manager. Such road shall also be required to have met
the specifications for drainage and turnaround area as set forth in
Chapter 72 ("Streets and Sidewalks") and § 84-125 ("Stormwater
management") of Chapter 84 ("Zoning") of the Code of the Township of
Pine. In addition, all preexisting, unacceptable cartway material may be
required to have been completely removed prior to the construction of
the new road surface specified herein if such is so required by the
Township's Engineer due to unsatisfactory results of a roadway base
material analysis performed by such Engineer upon such preexisting
roadway material.
C. Class C: Dedication to the Township of a public right-of-way sufficient in
width, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, to provide for: safe
public travel, accommodation of any necessary utilities, and
appropriate ability for public maintenance. Construction of a road
surface (cartway) of a minimum width sufficient, in the opinion of the
Board of Supervisors, to permit safe public travel and public
maintenance, and including construction of one-and-one-half-foot-wide
wing curbs on each side. Such road shall also be required to have met
all requirements of the road specifications as prepared by the Township
Engineer in Drawing No. R-2, originally dated July, 2001, and with
revisions thereto dated June, 2011, or latest subsequent revision date,
as is on file in the office of the Township Manager. Such road shall also
be required to have met the specifications for drainage and turnaround
area as set forth in Chapter 72 ("Streets and Sidewalks") and § 84-125
("Stormwater management") of Chapter 84 ("Zoning") of the Code of
the Township of Pine. In addition, such preexisting, unacceptable
§ 65-3 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65-3
62:251
§ 65-4. Roads excluded from acceptance.
Those private roads classified as Class D in § 65-5 of this chapter shall not
at any time in the future be accepted by the Township of Pine as public
Township roads under any circumstances.
§ 65-5. Classification designations (for existing and future private
roads).
cartway material shall be replaced as required by the Township's
Engineer based upon such Engineer's analysis of the degradation of
such existing material.
A. Based upon the review set forth in § 65-2 hereof and the classifications
set forth in § 65-3 and § 65-4 hereof, it has been determined by the
Board of Supervisors that the Township's aforementioned 61 existing
private roads are dividable into Classes A, B, C, and D and are,
henceforth, classified as follows:
(1) Class A: those 39 private roads identified as Class A on the attached
exhibit hereto entitled "Township of Pine Private Road Index and
Classification Schedule," the provisions of which are incorporated
herein by reference as if set forth at length in this section.
(2) Class B: those seven private roads identified as Class B on the
attached exhibit hereto entitled "Township of Pine Private Road
Index and Classification Schedule," the provisions of which are
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth at length in this
section.
(3) Class C: those 14 private roads identified as Class C on the
attached exhibit hereto entitled "Township of Pine Private Road
Index and Classification Schedule," the provisions of which are
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth at length in this
section.
(4) Class D: that one private road identified as Class D on the attached
exhibit hereto entitled "Township of Pine Private Road Index and
Classification Schedule," the provisions of which are incorporated
herein by reference as if set forth at length in this section.
B. Any additional private road which meets the requirements set forth in
Chapter 72 ("Streets and Sidewalks") of the Code of the Township of
Pine and which is later approved as such by any official action of the
Township's Board of Supervisors taken subsequent to the effective date
of this chapter shall be deemed to have been classified thereby as a
Class A private road, pursuant to § 65-3 hereof, unless some other
classification is specifically designated for it in formal action taken by
the Township's Board of Supervisors.
§ 65-3 PINE CODE § 65-6
62:252
§ 65-6. Evaluation for acceptance; petition required.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine may initiate the evaluation
of the possible future public acceptance of any existing private road
classified within Classes A, B, or C, as previously set forth herein, upon
the written petition signed by all owners of property representing more
than 50% of the number of properties abutting on such existing private
road proposed for public acceptance. In the event that a property does not
abut upon the existing private road proposed for public acceptance, but is
legally permitted to reach and utilize such private road and, also, does not
otherwise abut an existing public Township road, then such property shall
also be included in the calculation of the percentage of owners described
within this § 65-6.
§ 65-7. Preparation of plans and estimates.
Upon receipt of a written petition meeting the criteria as set forth in § 65-6
hereof, the Board of Supervisors may refer such matter to the Township
Engineer, Township staff, and Solicitor to prepare engineering plans and
estimates of the costs necessary to improve and upgrade the private road in
question to the specifications set forth for a private road of its classification
as designated in §§ 65-3 and 65-5 of this chapter.
§ 65-8. Establishment of assessments; Board of Viewers.
The method for establishing the assessments against owners of properties
abutting on and/or served by any private road which is to be the subject of
public acceptance shall be as follows:
A. Whenever the engineering plans and cost estimates for the proposed
improvement and construction of the private road to the appropriate
specifications set forth herein have been completed and approved by
the Township Engineer, the Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Board
of Viewers to establish the method (footage or benefit) by which each
property accommodated, improved, or benefitted by the construction of
the road improvements to the private road shall be assessed. Said
Board of Viewers shall consist of three members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Township. One member shall be a member of the
Township's Planning Commission, one member shall be a member of
the Township's Zoning Hearing Board, and one member shall hold no
other current elected or appointed position for the Township.
B. The Board of Viewers so appointed shall determine the method whereby
the properties accommodated, improved, or benefitted by the
construction of the road improvements to the private road shall be
assessed. The assessment method to be used in each instance shall be
confirmed in writing by the Board of Viewers and conveyed to the
Township Manager.
§ 65-6 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65-9
62:253
§ 65-9. Petition for public acceptance.
Upon receipt by the Township Manager of the information described in
§ 65-8 of this chapter, he/she shall convey to both the petitioning and
nonpetitioning property owners on the private road proposed for public
acceptance: the findings of the preliminary studies, the engineering
drawings, construction cost estimates, review of legal issues associated
with the proposed conversion, and methodology for cost assessment as
determined by the Board of Viewers. Upon consideration of this and any
other relevant information, the owners of property (as such is defined in
§ 65-6 of this chapter) abutting on or served by the private road in question
may file a written petition with the Board of Supervisors to undertake the
steps necessary to convert the private road to public ownership, subject to
the requirement that at least 2/3 of such owners of properties abutting and/
or serviced by the private road shall join in the written petition to the Board
of Supervisors to undertake its conversion to public ownership.
§ 65-10. Financial criteria for acceptance.
Upon the receipt of a written petition which meets the criteria as set
forth in § 65-9 hereof, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
shall determine if the Township's financial position permits it to undertake
an advancement of funds necessary for the improvement of the private
road for public acceptance and shall advise both the petitioners and the
nonpetitioning property owners in writing of such determination. The Board
of Supervisors shall have the absolute right to reject or to defer the
petitioners' request if, in the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the
Township's financial position does not reasonably permit such advancement
of funds for construction.
§ 65-11. Additional conditions for acceptance.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township shall not accept any presently
existing private road unless all of the following conditions have been met:
A. Appropriate public right-of-way has been dedicated to the Township by
all necessary owners of property and they have provided written
approval to the Township for removal of trees, branches, or structures
in or projecting into the public right-of-way.
B. The private road's cartway, drainage, turnaround, and other required
features have been previously constructed (and the Township Engineer
has so certified in writing) to the appropriate specifications set herein.
C. The property owners have provided certifications to the Township that
all construction contractors have been fully paid or the appropriate
arrangements for assessment of property owners have been made as
set forth in §§ 65-12 and 65-13 hereof.
§ 65-9 PINE CODE § 65-12
62:254
§ 65-12. Final assessment.
The final assessment against owners of property abutting and/or benefitted
or serviced by the private road shall be made as follows:
§ 65-13. Payment of assessment.
All such above assessments shall be payable forthwith to the Township
Manager. Any owner of property so assessed shall have the additional
option of paying the assessment in equal, annual installments for not to
exceed a total of three years, with a maximum annual interest rate equal
to the then-prevailing legal rate of interest specified in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (unless a lower rate of interest is specifically approved
therefor by the Township's Board of Supervisors), paid in the following
manner:
A. Whenever the final construction cost invoices have been received and
the Township Engineer has certified that the private road meets the
relevant construction and other standards necessary for public
acceptance (as set forth elsewhere in this chapter), the Board of
Viewers shall assess such construction costs against owners of property
abutting and/or benefitted or serviced by the private road, using the
methodology previously determined.
B. Upon the filing of the final report of the Board of Viewers with the
Board of Supervisors, assessment bills based upon the report of the
Board of Viewers shall be prepared by the Township and signed by the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and attested by the Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall serve the assessment bills upon the owners of such
properties by certified mail, return receipt requested. If such owner or
owners cannot be found within the Township, said notice may be served
upon any agent or party in possession of the premises or posted on the
most public part of the assessed premises.
A. The first installment shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the
assessment bill, and each of the remaining annual installments, with
interest thereon, shall be payable on the same day and month of each of
the succeeding years.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner or owners to exercise such
installment option shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager
no later than at the time of payment of the first such installment is due.
C. A municipal lien shall be duly filed by the Township of Pine, in
accordance with applicable law, against the affected properties and
owners for the amount of the remaining installments of the assessment,
which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as the installments are duly
paid in accordance with the following provisions: Upon default on the
payment of a current installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged
against such installment; and upon default in the payment of more than
§ 65-12 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65-13
62:255
§ 65-14. Municipal lien.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment within 30 days from receipt of the assessment bill,
the Township shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with applicable law,
against the affected properties and owner, also claiming interest thereon
at the then-prevailing legal rate of interest per annum specified in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (unless a lower rate of interest is
specifically approved therefor by the Township's Board of Supervisors) on
the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill. The Township
Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid assessments, and
the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against the property or
properties and owners or owners upon which such assessments shall have
been made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits.
§ 65-15. Township costs for acceptance.
The Township of Pine shall pay (without the requirement of reimbursement
by or assessment of the property owners abutting on the private road) the
costs of engineering, legal, or other consulting services necessary to the
design and planning of the construction of the road improvements herein,
the cost of erection of any necessary signage, and the cost of reflection of
such change in circumstances upon the affected property owners' deed.
§ 65-16. Deviation from regulations prohibited.
The procedures and specifications set forth herein shall be the sole manner
in which the Township shall consider acceptance of the herein-named
existing private roads as public Township roads, and no deviation herefrom
shall be permitted or approved.
Chapter 65A
REAL ESTATE, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Taxation — See Ch. 128.
one installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid
balance.
§ 65-13 PINE CODE § 65-16
62:256
ARTICLE I
Certification of Sanitary Sewer Status
[Adopted 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 380.]
§ 65A-1. Intermunicipal Agreement.
The Marshall Township Municipal Sanitary Authority (hereinafter "the
Marshall Authority") and the Township have previously entered into an
intermunicipal agreement, dated as of June 22, 1988, in which the Township
and the Marshall Authority agreed that the Marshall Authority would
provide sanitary sewage service to certain areas of the Township as more
fully described in said 1988 Agreement.
§ 65A-2. Applicability of 1988 Agreement.
The aforementioned 1988 Agreement provided, inter alia, that the Township
would be subject to all existing and subsequently enacted resolutions, rules,
and regulations of the Marshall Authority and all local, state, or federal
ordinances, laws or regulations to which the Marshall Authority may be
subject from time to time.
§ 65A-3. Applicability of dye testing requirement.
The Marshall Authority and its customers located within Marshall Township
are subject to the requirements of a dye testing ordinance first enacted
by Marshall Township as its Ordinance No. 413 (enacted June 4, 2012)
and subsequently amended by Marshall Township as its Ordinance No. 441
(enacted February 1, 2016).
§ 65A-4. Marshall Service Area.
The areas within the Township whose sanitary sewage service rights are
held by the Marshall Authority pursuant to the agreement referred to in
§ 365A-1 above shall be referred to herein as the "Marshall Service Area."
§ 65A-5. Certification from Marshall Authority.
After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person
to sell, transfer or assign any real estate within the Marshall Service Area
on which a building or improvement exists that is connected to public
sanitary sewers owned and operated by the Marshall Authority, without
first delivering to the purchaser, transferee or assignee a document of
certification or a temporary document of certification obtained from the
Marshall Authority.
§ 65A-6. Interior and exterior test requirements; applicability.
Section 6. For any real estate within the Marshall Service Area on which a
building or improvement exists that is connected to a public sanitary sewer
owned and operated by the Marshall Authority which real estate has been
sold, transferred or assigned within 18 months prior to the date of entry
§ 65A-1 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65A-6
62:257
into a new contract for sale, transfer or assignment of the same real estate,
the seller shall only be required to have an interior test (as defined herein)
performed and obtain a document of certification that an interior test has
been successfully passed with respect to such initial new sale, transfer or
assignment. With respect to any other sale, transfer or assignment of the
same real estate within said eighteen-month period or thereafter, the seller
shall have both interior and exterior tests (as defined herein) performed and
a complete new document of certification shall be required.
§ 65A-7. Application for certification.
Any person selling, transferring or assigning real estate located within the
Marshall Service Area ("applicant") shall make application to the Marshall
Authority or the Township's designated agent for a document of certification
on the then required form, which application shall be made at least 14 days
before the date of the proposed sale, transfer or assignment. The applicant
shall then request the Marshall Authority or the Township's designated
agent to perform a visual inspection and dye testing on the property to be
sold, transferred or assigned to determine if any interior sumps or drains
("interior test") or any downspouts and area or outside drains ("exterior
test") are illegally connected to the sanitary sewer system. Upon completion
of the dye testing, the Marshall Authority or the Township's designated
agent shall certify the results of each test. In the event that there are
no illegal storm sewers or surface water connections, the document of
certification shall be issued to the applicant upon payment of the amount
established as the administrative fee for the same.
§ 65A-8. Temporary certification.
The Marshall Authority may issue temporary documents of certification
under such terms and conditions as are contained in its rules and
regulations.
§ 65A-9. Persons authorized to perform inspections.
The inspections and dye testing described herein as necessary to obtain a
document of certification or temporary document of certification may be
performed by any person or entity authorized to perform same by rules and
regulations adopted by the Marshall Authority or by a registered or licensed
plumber or other qualified contractor approved by the County of Allegheny
to perform such inspections and dye testing.
§ 65A-10. Removal of illegal connections; subsequent inspection.
When an illegal storm or surface connection is discovered by the means
of the above-mentioned dye testing, no document of certification will be
issued until the illegal connection is removed and subsequently inspected
and approved by the Marshall Authority.
§ 65A-6 PINE CODE § 65A-11
62:258
§ 65A-11. Redirection of water following illegal connection.
In the event it is determined from a dye test that there is an illegal
connection of storm water or surface water from applicant's property, then
applicant shall redirect such storm or surface water in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Code of the Township of Pine (for Storm Water
Management) as amended and any applicable storm water management
plan. If a storm water management plan is not then in existence, then the
Township shall determine how stormwater surface water is to be redirected.
§ 65A-12. Authority and powers of Marshall Authority.
The Marshall Authority is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed
to make reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this
chapter regarding the following:
§ 65A-13. Authority of Township.
The Township is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to make rules
and regulations for the enforcement of this chapter as it deems necessary.
§ 65A-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Form of application for the document of certification and the temporary
document of certification, including any purchaser acknowledgement.
B. Terms and conditions for temporary document of certification.
C. Establishment of acceptable forms of security or guarantees for
temporary documents of certification.
D. Time and circumstances of dye testing, including establishment of
those persons or entities authorized to perform the inspections and
tests required hereunder; provided, however, that any registered or
licensed plumber or other qualified contractor approved by the County
of Allegheny to perform such inspections and tests shall be permitted to
perform same by the Marshall Authority.
E. Use of tests other than dye tests.
F. Reasonable fees for the application for a document of certification or a
temporary document of certification, which fees shall be identical to
those applicable to properties situate in Marshall Township, and which
shall, in no event, exceed $50 without the approval of the Township.
G. Such other rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation and
enforcement of this chapter as approved by both the Township and by
the Marshall Authority.
A. Any person who violates § 65A-5 or § 65A-6 of this chapter shall for
every offense, be fined not more than $1,000 together with costs, or
shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion
of the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 65A-11 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65A-14
62:259
§ 65A-15. Compliance with state and county laws.
The provisions of this chapter providing for dye testing and issuance of a
document of certification shall be modified to the extent required by any
mandates of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of Allegheny County
relating to such programs of testing and compliance.
§ 65A-16. Limit of authority to enter private real estate.
Nothing herein shall authorize the Marshall Authority to enter upon any
private real estate, except for the purpose of conducting the dye test
provided for herein.
§ 65A-17. Severability.
It is the express intent of the Township that the provisions of this chapter
are severable. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be held to be
illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this chapter
or said regulations shall not be affected or impaired.
§ 65A-18. Other dye testing and inspection permissible.
This article shall not preclude the Township from conducting dye testing
or other testing or inspection, or implemewnting a program of dye testing
B. The Township is authorized to issue orders to correct any violation of
this chapter.
C. Any person, firm or corporation which is found to have violated any
order of the Marshall Authority or the Township issued pursuant to this
chapter shall pay a fine of $1,000 following adjudication by a
Magisterial District Judge for each violation. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation.
D. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Township may recover
penalties, damages, costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person or user found to have violated this chapter or the
orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
E. Upon final adjudication that a violation of this chapter exists and the
refusal or failure to act by the property owner to undertake the repair,
replacement or rehabilitation identified by a written order as herein
provided, the Township shall have the right to enter onto the subject
property to conduct the necessary work to bring the property into
compliance at the expense of the property owner, and further, upon the
failure of the property owner to pay said expense, the Township shall
have the right to file a lien against the subject property for the amount
of said expense, together with costs of filing and perfecting such lien.
§ 65A-14 PINE CODE § 65A-18
62:260
or inspection, within the Marshall Service Area for purposes of discovering
or locating the inflow of surface storm water to the Marshall Authority's
sanitary sewer system.
§ 65A-19. Municipal lien letter.
A request to the Marshall Authority or to the Township for a municipal
lien letter must be accompanied by a valid document of certification or
temporary document of certification.
§ 65A-18 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS § 65A-19
62:261
Chapter 66
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 66-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit or a
construction permit.
APPLICATION — The form prescribed by the Township which the applicant
must complete in order to obtain a right-of-way permit.
CONSTRUCTION — The building, erection or installation in, on or under a
right-of-way. It does not include maintenance or repair of equipment in a
right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the right-of-way.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — The document that must be obtained before a
person may perform construction in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY — An interruption of service or a condition that poses a clear
and immediate danger to life or health, or significant loss of property.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible property located or proposed to be located in
a right-of-way, including, but not limited to, wires, lines, cables, conduits,
pipes, supporting structures or other facilities.
IN — When used in conjunction with rights-of-way means over, above, in,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
MAINTENANCE — Work of a minor nature that will keep an existing
condition from failure or decline.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person obtaining a right-of-way permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good as or better than its condition before
construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space in, on, above and below any
real property in which the Township has an interest in law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, avenue, road,
§ 65A-19 PINE CODE § 66-1
66:262
highway, easement, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river,
tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park, green space or any other place.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT — A written authorization granted by
the Township to an applicant for use of the rights-of-Way in the Township
for wires, lines, cables, conduits, pipes, supporting structures and other
facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The services offered to customers
involving the transmission of video, data and/or voice communications and/
or content, both active and interactive, and associated usage.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system used or to be used to
provide telecommunications services.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine, a home rule municipality located in the
County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania, with its municipal business office situate
at 230 Pearce Mill Road, Wexford, Pennsylvania 15090-8511.
UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT — All equipment that is located wholly or
partially underneath a right-of-way.
§ 66-2. Right-of-way permit required.
§ 66-3. Application for right-of-way permit.
A. No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a
telecommunications system without first having obtained a right-of-way
permit. Any person maintaining or operating a telecommunications
system as of the effective date of this chapter shall also obtain a rightof-
way permit.
B. Before a right-of-way permit is issued, the holder of or applicant for a
right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and all regulatory
approvals, permits or authorizations from the appropriate federal and
state and local authorities, if required. Upon the request of the
Township, the applicant shall submit written evidence of its
applications for or receipt of all such approvals, permits or
authorizations.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances
or regulations of the Township or of the Township's right to require
prospective or current right-of-way permit holders to secure and remit
payment for any and all required permits or authorizations.
A. A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the
Township, which form may be revised from time to time. Upon request,
an applicant shall be provided with a copy of the then current
application for a right-of-way permit. The application shall request
information regarding the applicant's proposed or actual physical use
and occupation of the rights-of-way. Specifically, the application shall
§ 66-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 66-3
66:263
§ 66-4. Duration and suspension of right-of-way permit.
request: a brief description of the telecommunications service or
services to be offered or provided in or through the Township; specific
information regarding the equipment it proposes to place or currently
maintains in the rights-of-way; the expected physical burden that such
equipment will place or does place on the rights-of-way; and whether
the equipment will or does have a detrimental effect on public safety
as it relates to the rights-of-way. If the completed application does not
fully provide such requested information, the Township may request
such additional information as is necessary to enable it to make a
determination regarding the physical use and occupation of the rightsof-
way by the applicant. The application may request less information
from a permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-of-way permit.
B. Upon submission of a fully completed application to the Township and
the accompanying fee, the Township shall review the application as
follows: for new applicants, the Township shall grant or deny such
applications within 45 days. For existing permit holders applying for a
renewal of their permits, who are not under suspension in accordance
with § 66-4 below, the Township shall grant or deny such applications
within 10 business days. If the Township fails to grant or reject such
application within the time periods specified above, the application
shall be deemed approved. In each case, the Township shall review the
application to determine whether such use would have a detrimental
effect on public safety as it relates to the rights-of-way or would place
an undue physical burden on the rights-of-way.
C. In considering an application, the Township may use such outside
experts as it deems necessary. In the event that the Township deems it
necessary to employ an outside expert to advise the Township with
respect to a particular application, the reasonable costs of such expert
shall be borne by the applicant.
A. Right-of-way permits shall have an initial duration period of one year
from their date of issuance. Permit holders may apply for a renewal of a
right-of-way permit prior to its expiration. The Township may suspend
such right-of-way permit in the event that any one or more of the
following has occurred:
(1) The permit holder shall have caused damage to Township property
or the right-of-way without the prior consent of the Township
(except such prior consent shall not be required in the case of an
emergency) and without completing proper restoration.
(2) The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right-ofway
has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
rights-of-way.
(3) The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
chapter.
§ 66-3 PINE CODE § 66-4
66:264
§ 66-5. Construction permit required.
§ 66-6. Fees and expenses.
(4) The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards in
accordance with the provisions contained in § 66-8 below.
(5) The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
Township in accordance with the provisions contained in § 66-9
below.
B. If the Township has reason to believe that one or more of the above
events has occurred, it shall notify the permit holder in writing. The
permit holder shall have 30 days to cure the violation, unless the
Township reasonably determines that the event is an emergency, in
which case the Township may impose a shorter time period to cure the
violation.
C. If the permit holder fails to cure the violation within the specified time
period, the Township shall be permitted to immediately suspend the
right-of-way permit. A suspension shall be brought to the attention of
the Township's Board of Supervisors at its next public meeting, at which
time the Township's Board of Supervisors shall be permitted to uphold
or withdraw the suspension. The permit holder shall be provided an
opportunity to be heard at such meeting.
A. Except in the case of an emergency, before commencing any
construction in the rights-of-way, a person shall submit to the Township
detailed plans of the proposed construction activity. Such plans shall
include the type of construction activity, the equipment proposed to be
installed or erected, the specific locations of the construction activity
and the scheduled beginning and ending dates of all planned
construction. Such plans shall also include the name(s), address(es) and
experience of any and all subcontractors whom applicant intends to
utilize. Such information may be submitted concurrently with an
application for a right-of-way permit.
B. Upon submission of all such information required in Subsection A
above, the Township shall review such information and either grant or
deny a construction permit within 45 days. If the Township fails to grant
or deny the construction permit within such time period, the permit
shall be deemed granted. In each such case, the Township shall review
the information provided herein to determine whether such
construction would have a detrimental impact on public safety as it
relates to the rights-of-way. The Township may impose conditions on the
Construction permit regulating the times, locations and manner of
construction to preserve effective traffic flow, prevent hazardous road
conditions and/or minimize noise impacts.
A. Each new applicant for a right-of-way permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $500. This fee is directly
§ 66-4 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 66-6
66:265
related to the Township's costs in reviewing the application (excluding
expert costs) and managing the rights-of-way with respect to each
permit holder. Such costs in managing the rights-of-way include, but
are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs, costs of
maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of streets and
right-of-way property. This fee will not be refunded in the event that
the application is denied. If the application is granted, the application
fee will apply to the full term of the right-of-way permit of one year. If
the applicant applies for a construction permit concurrently with the
application for a right-of-way permit, then the application fee contained
herein shall apply to both the right-of-way permit and the construction
permit.
B. Each existing permit holder applying for a renewal of its right-of-way
permit shall include with its application an annual fee in the amount of
$300. This fee is directly related to the Township's costs in managing
the rights-of-way with respect to each permit holder. Such costs
include, but are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs,
costs of maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of
streets and right-of-way property.
C. Each applicant for a construction permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $200. This fee is directly
related to the Township's costs in reviewing the application and
determining time, place and manner restrictions on the construction
activity. If the application for a construction permit is denied, this fee
shall not be refunded. If the application is granted, then the applicant
shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, the
Township's actual costs based on the rate established by resolution of
the Township's Board of Supervisors. Such actual costs include, but are
not limited to, costs of disruption and rerouting of traffic, inspection
costs and administrative costs.
D. Extraordinary expenses. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit
holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the
Township as a result of the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way,
provided that the Township notifies the permit holder of the expected
expenses prior to them being incurred and provides the permit holder
with an opportunity to mitigate such expenses. Examples of
extraordinary or unusual costs include, but are not limited to, the cost
of obtaining and operating a backhoe, dump truck or other heavy
equipment used to repair the right-of-way, pay (including overtime or
special pay) for police officers, personnel to direct or route traffic or
other emergency services. The statement of such expenses presented to
the permit holder shall be directly related to the Township's actual
costs.
E. In the event that payment of any of the fees or expenses identified
above is not made upon submission of the application or by the date
due, the applicant or permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of
§ 66-6 PINE CODE § 66-6
66:266
§ 66-7. Management of rights-of-way.
§ 66-8. Construction standards.
simple interest at 10% annual percentage rate of the total amount
past due. Such penalty shall be in lieu of any other monetary penalty.
Acceptance of payment under this section shall not in any way limit
or waive the Township's right to suspend or terminate the permit
according to the terms of this chapter.
A. The Township shall have the right to limit the placement of new or
additional equipment in the right-of-way if it determines, in the exercise
of its reasonable discretion, that there is insufficient space to
reasonably accommodate all requests to occupy and use the rights-ofway.
The Township shall consider requests for occupying and using the
rights-of-way in the order of receipt of fully completed applications for
right-of-way permits. The Township shall strive, to the extent possible,
to accommodate all reasonable requests, but shall be guided by the
physical condition of the right-of-way and whether such use would have
a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the right-of-way.
B. The Township shall have the right to monitor the telecommunications
systems and the equipment related thereto located in the rights-of-way
in order to prevent interference between and among such systems and
equipment.
C. A permit holder shall allow the Township to make inspections of any
part of the permit holder's telecommunications system located in the
rights-of-way at any time upon three days' notice or, in case of an
emergency, upon demand. Costs or expenses incurred by the Township
in such inspections shall be paid by the permit holder to the Township
within 30 days of the presentation of a statement therefor.
A. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall disturb any
pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any
underground activities, the permit holder will fully comply by
registering with Pennsylvania's "One Call" system pursuant to 73 P.S.
§ 176 et seq. Such permit holder shall provide the Township with GPS
information showing planned locations and reference points for all
equipment to be installed. Each permit holder shall perform
construction activity in a manner consistent and in compliance with the
detailed plans it submitted to the Township and all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations.
B. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall cause
damage to the right-of-way or to Township property in the right-of-way,
the permit holder shall restore such right-of-way or property within 30
days, weather permitting.
C. The telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the Township. All operating,
§ 66-6 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 66-8
66:267
§ 66-9. Liability and indemnification.
maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be thoroughly
trained in the safe use of all equipment and in the safe operation of
vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety procedures required by
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The permit
holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all areas of the
telecommunications system so that conditions that could develop into
safety hazards shall be corrected before they become a hazard.
D. Except in the case of an emergency, at least three days prior to the
commencement of any construction activity, the permit holder shall
notify nearby residents of such construction activity in a manner which
is satisfactory to the Township. The name of the permit holder shall be
clearly disclosed to such residents.
E. All construction activity shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public utilities
serving the Township following accepted industry construction
procedures and practices.
F. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundles with due
respect for engineering considerations.
G. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed underground
when so required by the Township. Such requirement for underground
installation shall be consistent with the same requirement being
imposed on all other similarly situated applicants or permit holders.
A. A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising out of the permit holder's
use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. A permit holder shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the
permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to,
the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification. A permit holder shall not be required to indemnify and
hold the Township harmless for claims caused by the Township's
negligence, gross negligence or willful misconduct.
B. A permit holder shall at all times during the life of a permit carry and
require its subcontractors to carry liability, property damage, worker's
disability and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be
determined by the Township as set forth in the permit. A permit holder
shall name the Township as an additional insured on its liability
§ 66-8 PINE CODE § 66-9
66:268
§ 66-10. Reporting requirements.
§ 66-11. Sale or transfer of rights of permit holder.
A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days' written
notice to the Township, provided that the transferee/assignee agrees in
writing to comply with all of the obligations and requirements contained in
this chapter.
§ 66-12. Performance bond
A permit holder may be required, prior to construction, to obtain a
performance bond in a reasonable amount set by the Township based upon
the construction cost of the equipment to be installed in the rights-of-way
and the extent of the disturbance of such rights-of-way. The performance
bond shall ensure the permit holder's faithful performance of its
construction obligations. The Township may reduce or cancel the bond
requirement when construction is completed.
§ 66-13. Termination.
insurance policies. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30
days' advance, written notice to the Township in the event of material
alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of
such material alteration or cancellation.
A. A permit holder shall annually provide the Township, upon application
for renewal of the permit, or upon request, the current maps of the
horizontal and vertical locations of its existing installations and a
summary of all additions and deletions of equipment in the rights-ofway,
unless no changes have occurred in the previous year. If no
charges have occurred in the previous year, permit holder shall so
inform the Township.
B. A permit holder shall submit to the Township such reasonable
information directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation
of the rights-of-way as the Township may request. All information
provided to the Township shall be maintained by the Township as
proprietary and confidential if such information is designated in good
faith as such prior to the time it is provided to the Township.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Township, the
Township reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
(1) A permit holder fails, after 30 days' prior written notice, to comply
with any of the material provisions of the permit or this chapter.
(2) A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt.
§ 66-9 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 66-13
66:269
§ 66-14. Removal.
§ 66-15. Violations and penalties.
If the Township has reason to believe that the permit holder violated any of
the terms of this chapter, it shall notify the permit holder in writing of the
nature of the violation and the section of this chapter which it believes has
been violated. The permit holder shall have 20 business days to cure the
violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully cured
(3) All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit
holder within 90 days from such sale.
(4) A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations with the Township under the permit.
(5) The Township condemns all or part of the property of a permit
holder within the Township by the lawful exercise of eminent
domain.
(6) The permit holder abandons the telecommunications system.
B. No termination shall be effective unless and until the Township's Board
of Supervisors shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause
and reason for the termination and the effective date, which resolution
shall not be adopted without 30 days prior notice to permit holder and
an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard before the Township's
Board of Supervisors on the proposed resolution.
A. Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not
renewed, the permit holder shall, upon 60 days' prior written notice to
the permit holder, remove its equipment from the rights-of-way and
shall restore said areas. If such removal is not completed within six
months of such notice, the Township may deem any equipment not
removed as abandoned, and the Township may remove it at the former
permit holder's expense. In the event that the permit holder installed
and/or operated any underground conduit or pipe which is six inches or
more in diameter, permit holder shall fill said conduit or pipe with
material in a manner satisfactory to Township.
B. During the term of the permit, if the permit holder decides to abandon
or no longer use all or part of its telecommunications system, it shall
provide the Township with written notice of its decision at least 30 days
prior to such decision, which notice shall describe the equipment and
its location. The Township shall have the right to require the permit
holder to remove the equipment upon 60 days' prior written notice to
the permit holder. If such removal is not completed within six months of
such notice, the Township may deem any equipment not removed as
abandoned and may remove and dispose of it at the permit holder's
expense.
§ 66-13 PINE CODE § 66-15
66:270
within such time period, the Township may, in its reasonable judgment,
extend the time period to cure. If the violation has not been cured within
the time period allowed, it shall be subsequently punishable by a fine of up
to $100 per day until the violation is cured.
§ 66-16. Police powers; effect upon other provisions of Code of
Township of Pine.
The Township, by granting any permit under this chapter, does not waive,
lessen, impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in the Township
under applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation
or use of the rights-of-way. The provisions of this chapter shall not alter,
amend, or revise any existing language or provisions of the Code of the
Township of Pine (including, but not limited to, the specific provisions of
Chapter 84, Zoning, Chapter 48, Excavations and Grading and Chapter 72,
Streets and Sidewalks, thereof) unless such is specifically stated herein, and
all provisions of this chapter shall otherwise be interpreted to be additional,
supplemental regulations of construction within and the use of rights-ofway.
§ 66-17. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not render this chapter
invalid.
§ 66-18. Equal application.
The provisions of this chapter shall be imposed upon and enforced against
all persons requiring a permit from the Township.
Chapter 68
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 66-15 SEWERS § 66-18
68:271

ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 7-6-1976 by Ord. No. 102]
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADJOINING OR ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER — Every owner of property
in the Township of Pine whose property adjoins or is adjacent to any
sanitary sewer line of Pine Township, the Pine Township Authority, or any
other authority or legal entity specifically sanctioned by the Township
Supervisors and the Pine Township Authority to install sanitary sewer lines,
including property owners on both sides of a street or highway along
which a sewer is installed. In accordance with the current laws of the
commonwealth, this shall include only "adjoining and adjacent property
owners" whose principal building is within 150 feet from such sewer system
if the system has been established or constructed by a municipal authority;
provided, however, that this definition shall be automatically amended to
conform to any future amendments to applicable commonwealth laws.
AUTHORITY — The Pine Township Authority or such other municipal
authority given jurisdiction over a particular territory in the Township of
Pine by ordinance of the Pine Township Supervisors and by resolution of the
Pine Township Authority.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, syndicate or
other legal entity.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — Any sewer line and system the authority for
the installation and operation of which was granted by the Pine Township
Supervisors by ordinance and by the Pine Township Authority by resolution.
RECEPTACLE FOR HUMAN EXCREMENT — Any container or system for
the storage, deposit or processing of human excrement including but not
limited to privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks and mine holes, but excluding
public sanitary sewer lines and systems.
§ 68-2. Connection to sewers required.
A. All adjoining and adjacent property owners, at their own expense, shall
connect the buildings and other structures, as appropriate, located on
their property with the public sanitary sewers for the purpose of
disposing of all drainage which is customarily disposed of in a sanitary
sewer system. Adjoining and adjacent property owners and their
lessees and occupants shall not use any receptacles for human
excrement except the public sanitary sewers.
B. Adjoining and adjacent property owners who presently have
receptacles for human excrement on their property which are being
used by any person shall be directed, in writing by the Pine Township
Supervisors or authorized Authority official, to obtain the necessary
§ 68-1 SEWERS § 68-2
68:273
§ 68-3. Failure to comply.
If the adjoining and adjacent property owners fail to comply with the
requirements in § 68-2B within the sixty-day period, the Township, Authority
or their agents may enter upon said property and construct and connect
the sewage systems with the public sanitary sewer and disconnect the
receptacle for human excrement. Upon completion of said work, the
Township Supervisors or other persons authorized by law shall immediately
send an itemized bill of the cost of such construction and disconnection to
the adjoining or adjacent owner, which shall be payable immediately. In the
case of neglect or refusal by the adjoining or adjacent property owner to
pay said bill forthwith, but not later than 10 days after receipt thereof, a
municipal lien for said construction and disconnection shall be filed within
six months of the date of completion of said construction, and the lien shall
have the same status as all other municipal liens.
§ 68-4. Tapping permit.
Adjoining and adjacent property owners, who are required to connect to the
public sanitary sewer, shall make application on the appropriate forms for
a tapping permit and all other required permits, if any, and shall complete
all requested information contained on the forms and shall pay the fees
connected with such permits.
§ 68-5. Connection of receptacles to public facilities prohibited.
No receptacle for human excrement shall at any time be connected with the
public sanitary sewers.
§ 68-6. Maintenance of receptacles prohibited.
No receptacle for human excrement shall hereinafter be maintained on
any premises from which connection to the public sanitary sewer has been
made. Within 30 days after final enactment of this article and within 30 days
after any future connection with the public sanitary sewer, Pine Township
may, at its discretion, require any receptacle for human excrement to be
abandoned, cleansed and filled under the conditions set forth in regulations
adopted by resolution of Pine Township Supervisors. Any receptacle for
human excrement which is not abandoned, cleansed and filled pursuant to
this section and the regulations adopted pursuant hereto shall constitute a
public nuisance which may be abated on order of the Township or Authority
permits, pay the required fees, make connections with the public
sanitary sewer and disconnect the receptacle for human excrement
within 60 days of receipt of such notice, provided that no adjoining or
adjacent property owner shall be required to connect with the public
sanitary sewer where their sewage would not flow by gravity into the
public sanitary sewer. Such notice shall be served personally or by
registered mail at the last known address of the adjoining and adjacent
property owner.
§ 68-2 PINE CODE § 68-6
68:274
as provided by law at the expense of the adjoining or adjacent property
owner.
§ 68-7. Drainage from other property.
No roof drain, drain for stormwater, surface water or sewage from any
property other than that for which permits were issued or any other
substance except those customarily disposed in a system of public sanitary
sewers shall be introduced by any means whatsoever into the public
sanitary sewer.
§ 68-8. Compliance with plans and specifications required.
The construction of all private sewers, laterals and their connections,
building sewer lines, house service sewers and any other sewer connecting
with the public sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications established by the Township and Authority,
and said plans and specifications may be amended from time to time, by
resolution, and shall be kept on file at the Township Municipal Building and
all said construction shall be inspected and certified by the engineer for the
Township and/or Authority before being covered.
§ 68-9. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available to Pine
Township and the Authority, any person found guilty of violating the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, for each and every violation,
pay a fine of $300. Each provision of this article or rule or regulation
adopted pursuant hereto and each day said violation exists shall be deemed
a separate violation and shall continue to constitute another separate
violation, punishable upon conviction by the same penalties. In addition,
upon conviction, the defendant shall be required to pay all costs of
prosecution and enforcement of this article which were incurred as a result
of defendant's action or inaction.
§ 68-6 SEWERS § 68-9
68:275

ARTICLE II
Extensions, Improvements and/or Modifications of Sanitary Sewer
Systems
[Adopted 12-7-1987 by Res. No. 309]
§ 68-10. Intent. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
§ 68-11. Developer to file preliminary letter of request.
As the first step toward obtaining the Township's approval of extending or
constructing sewer service to any location within the Township's service
area, the developer or his representative must file a letter requesting the
same in which a general description of the proposed improvements is
included, along with a photocopy of a map on which the property to be
developed is superimposed. Such information need not be technical nor
detailed but should be sufficiently clear to illustrate what is proposed to be
constructed and where.
§ 68-12. Preapplication conference.
The Township will respond to the developer's preliminary letter for the
purpose of establishing a date and a time mutually agreeable for a
preapplication conference, to be held in the Township's office. The purpose
of the conference will be for the developer to elaborate upon the proposed
project and for the Township's representatives to elaborate upon its
requirements relative to the sewer work expected to be performed. The
developer shall have its engineer in attendance at the conference so that the
Township's representatives may communicate directly with him concerning
A. This article is intended to provide guidance and to assist prospective
developers in the Township of Pine which desire connection to,
extension to or construction of a separate sanitary collecting sewer
system. The details of construction of those facilities which are
proposed to be designed and constructed within streets and other
public rights-of-way and, upon proper completion, will be conveyed to
the Township for operation and maintenance are set forth in the current
Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary Sewer Pipe Lines and
Appurtenances, copies of which are available for inspection and review
in the Pine Township Municipal Building during normal business hours.
This, then, addresses notifications, payment of fees, certain
engineering requirements, scheduling of construction work, surety
requirements, inspections and other administrative procedures
necessary to obtain the Township's approval as the work commences,
progresses and is completed.
B. The Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary Sewer Pipe Lines
and Appurtenances, which detail construction requirements for sewer
service laterals which are proposed to connect dwellings, commercial
establishments and/or institutional and industrial buildings, and which
are located on private property are on file in the Township offices.
§ 68-10 SEWERS § 68-12
68:277
the Township's requirements relative to preparation of plans, performance
of surveys, submittals, obtaining approvals and otherwise performing the
developer's engineering work in compliance with the Township's rules and
regulations.
§ 68-13. Preparation of detailed plans, proposed sewer lines and
appurtenances.
A. The Township may approve the design and construction of wastewater
treatment plants, pump stations or force mains by the developer, or the
Township will design and construct wastewater treatment plants,
pumping stations and force mains. The allocated cost of the same to the
developer will be disclosed by the Township to the developer after
receipt of construction bids and prior to commencement of
construction. In general, if such facilities serve only the respective
proposed development, the developer will be responsible for the total
costs of construction, engineering and inspection incurred by the
Township; if, on the other hand, such facilities are determined by the
Township to benefit the Township and/or others, the Township will
allocate such costs and benefits and will negotiate an agreement with
the developer before approval of the plans for the project.
B. All plans, profiles and details shall be prepared on tracing film 24
inches by 36 inches in size.
C. All pipeline plans shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet;
all profiles shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
(horizontal) and one inch equals 10 feet (vertical). Scale of any required
details shall be agreed upon prior to commencement of design. General
location maps/plans shall be prepared on a scale of one inch equals 400
feet.
D. All plans shall show property lines, rights-of-way, lot layouts, creeks,
streams, existing buildings, existing utility lines and other topographic
features.
E. A brief narrative report shall be prepared identifying sewage loadings
and all characteristics of flows which are nondomestic and providing all
technical information required for any industrial, commercial or
institutional user and for the ultimate attainment of approval of any
relevant regulatory agencies. A wastewater contribution permit, the
requirements relative to which are described within the Rules and
Regulations Governing Use of the Sewer System, must be applied for
and obtained by all system users anticipating the contribution of any
nondomestic wastewater.
F. Following the date of receipt of all properly prepared plans, profiles,
details, the narrative report and other filings, the Township will review,
comment upon, approve, reject or return said submittals within 21
calendar days.
§ 68-12 PINE CODE § 68-13
68:278
§ 68-14. Formal application agreement.
§ 68-15. Permits required prior to construction.
§ 68-16. Submission and approval of materials required prior to
utilization.
No materials may be utilized for construction of any sewer facilities which
have not been submitted to the Township by the developer and approved
by the Township, in accordance with the paragraph addressing that subject
G. All designs of sewer lines and appurtenances shall conform to the
appertaining requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. All proposed work which will involve
construction activity or other encroachment upon Township streets or
roads or highways under the jurisdiction of the state shall be subject to
the prevailing rules and regulations of those agencies (Pine Township
and the Department of Transportation, respectively).
H. Submission of detailed plans shall be accompanied by all right-of-way
descriptions pertaining to facilities proposed to be ultimately conveyed
to the Township for operation and maintenance.
A. After approval of the plans by the Township, a formal application to
construct shall be filed with the Township on forms which will be
furnished by it. An agreement between the Township and the developer
shall then be negotiated, commensurate with the signing of which the
developer shall pay a filing fee.
B. The amount of the filing fee shall be determined as indicated in Ch.
A144, Fees, made payable to the Township. Proceeds from such fees
will be utilized by the Township for deferring the costs of
administration, engineering and inspection. Any residual of the original
fee shall be refunded to the developer. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 173]
A. Highway occupancy permits, (Department of Transportation) and Water
quality management and other permits (Department of Environmental
Resources), promulgated for construction of sewer lines, shall be
applied for and obtained by the developer from those agencies. No
construction work in the field may commence until such permits have
been formally approved and are in the possession of the Township.
B. Formal permits are required to be obtained from the Township in the
advance of performance of any relevant work covering.
(1) Demolition.
(2) Blasting.
(3) Excavation within Township roads/streets.
§ 68-13 SEWERS § 68-16
68:279
which is included in the Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary
Sewer Pipe Lines and Appurtenances.67
§ 68-17. Commencement of construction.
No construction shall commence until a proposed schedule of the work
is filed; all required permits have been obtained; the agreement with the
Township has been formalized and executed by both the Township and the
developer; the filing fee has been paid in full; performance, payment and
eighteen-month maintenance bonds (on forms satisfactory to the Township)
have been posted and approved by the Township and; at least one week's
advance notice of commencement has been filed with the Township.
§ 68-18. Hours for construction limited.
Unless otherwise approved by authorized Township personnel, no developer
and/or contractor shall conduct construction activities on the site of the
work before 7:00 a.m., after 5:00 p.m. or on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays
observed by Township personnel.
§ 68-19. Communications.
All communications with the Township shall transpire with its Manager or
his designee. The developer shall identify, in writing, the person with whom
the Township should communicate. The person representing the developer
may be a contractor's employee, an engineer or other person but, in any
event, shall have the authority and the ability to respond to and reconcile
application problems or other job-related problems.
67.Editor's Note: The Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary Sewer Pipe Lines and
Appurtenances are available for inspection and review in the Pine Township Municipal
Building during normal business hours.
§ 68-16 PINE CODE § 68-19
68:280
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Sewer Districts
[Adopted 6-4-2001 by Res. No. 626]
§ 68-20. Policies established.
It is resolved by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine that
its policies and procedures for the creation of sanitary sewer districts and
for the payment, assessment and collection of the costs and expenses of
construction of certain of the improvements related thereto shall include,
but not be limited to, the following.
§ 68-21. Statutory authority.
Except as otherwise may be provided herein, the Township of Pine shall
proceed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Second Class
Township Code (Article XXV; 53 P.S. § 67501 et seq.).
§ 68-22. Request for establishment.
Upon the request, by written petition, of property owners representing at
least 51% of the property valuation (as such is assessed for real estate tax
purposes) of a defined area, the Board of Supervisors may provide access
to public sanitary sewers for the properties within such area through the
construction/extension of public main sanitary sewer lines and creation of a
sanitary sewer district therefor.
§ 68-23. Enacting ordinance; notice.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish any sanitary sewer district by
enactment of an ordinance therefor. Prior to the adoption of any such
ordinance, notice of intention to adopt and of the proposed construction
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once per week for
three successive weeks.
§ 68-24. Dedication of right-of-way by owner.
Each property owner within a sanitary sewer district may be required
to dedicate, free of cost, a public right-of-way through such property to
facilitate installation of the main sanitary sewer line.
§ 68-25. Contract for construction or extension of sewer line.
The Board of Supervisors may authorize the appropriate municipal sewer
authority (McCandless Township Sanitary Authority, Marshall Township
Municipal Sanitary Authority or Breakneck Creek Regional Sanitary
Authority), in accordance with such authority's established procedures, to
bid and to award the contract for the construction and/or extension of the
main sanitary sewer line to provide public sanitary sewer service to the
sanitary sewer district. Alternatively, the Board of Supervisors may elect
§ 68-20 SEWERS § 68-25
68:281
to directly bid and award the contract and to construct such main sanitary
sewer line pursuant to the established procedures of the Township of Pine.
§ 68-26. Payment of costs and expenses.
§ 68-27. Connection to sewer line required.
In accordance with the requirements of the Allegheny County Department
of Health, property owners abutting on the main sanitary sewer line shall
be required to connect thereto in the event that the property's primary
structure is within 250 feet of the main sanitary sewer line.
§ 68-28. Action by Board of Supervisors.
Petitions filed with the Township of Pine for creation of a sanitary sewer
district and the construction/extension of a main sanitary sewer line will be
considered and acted upon in the sole discretion of the Township's Board of
Supervisors, and such creation and construction shall be contingent upon
A. The Township of Pine shall make the initial payment of all necessary
costs and expenses for the main sanitary sewer line's construction,
including engineering and legal fees, but excluding any service
connection fees and/or construction of service tines for individual
properties.
B. All property owners within the sanitary sewer district shall be
thereafter assessed by the Township of Pine for all such costs and
expenses previously paid by the Township in connection therewith by
the use of one of the two following methods:
(1) By proportion of a property's frontage abutting on the main
sanitary sewer line (allowing for an equitable reduction for corner
properties or those that are unusually shaped); or
(2) By an equal assessment on all properties abutting on the main
sanitary sewer line in proportion to the total costs and expenses
paid by the Township of Pine.
C. Any owner of property so assessed by the Township of Pine shall have
the choice, within 60 days from receipt of the assessment bill, of
thereafter paying the assessment immediately in full or, alternatively,
by payment in five equal, annual installments with interest applied at
the rate of 6% per annum.
D. A municipal lien shall be filed by the Township of Pine against all
properties within the sanitary sewer district for which the assessments
are not immediately paid in full in the amount of said assessment.
E. Any additional costs attributable solely to providing sanitary sewer
service to individual properties (i.e., service line, service connection
fee, etc.) will be paid directly by the property owner and shall not be the
responsibility of the Township of Pine.
§ 68-25 PINE CODE § 68-28
68:282
the Township having appropriate funds and/or financing available to it, as
such is determined by the Township's Board of Supervisors.
§ 68-29. Attorneys fees.
Attorneys' fees incurred on all accounts referred to the Township's Solicitor
for enforcement and collection shall, if not collected in due course with
the debt as by voluntary agreement, be included in all claims (including
liens) filed on behalf of the Township of Pine in the course of enforcement,
including (if accrued before liening) in any claim originally filed with the
Prothonotary and in accordance with Ordinance No. 281 of the Township of
Pine.68
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Attorney Fees.
§ 68-28 SEWERS § 68-29
68:283
Chapter 70
STANDARD DETAILS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation and grading — See Ch. 48.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Acceptance of private roads — See Ch. 65.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 70-1. Documents and drawings adopted.
A. The Township of Pine's Standard Details, as prepared and
recommended by the Township of Pine's Engineer and professional
consultants, and consisting of the following documents and drawings:
Drawing No. Name
Created or last
revised
GN-1 General Notes January 2006
ES-1 Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-1A Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-1B Erosion Control Detail January 2006
ES-2 Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-3 Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-4 Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-4A Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-4B Erosion Control Detail July 2001
ES-5 Erosion Control Detail July 2001
RSD-1 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-2 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-3 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-4 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-5 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-6 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
§ 68-29 PINE CODE § 70-1
68:284
Drawing No. Name
Created or last
revised
RSD-6A Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-7 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-8 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-9 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-10 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-11 Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-12 (1 of 2) Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-12 (2 of 2) Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-13 (1 of 2) Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
RSD-13 (2 of 2) Roadway and Site Drainage
Detail
July 2001
SWM-1 (1 of 8) Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-1 (2 of 3) Stormwater Management
Detail
January 2006
SWM-1 (3 of 3) Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-2 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-3 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-3A Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-4 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-5 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-6 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
§ 70-1 SEWERS § 70-1
68:285
Drawing No. Name
Created or last
revised
SWM-6A Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-7 Stormwater Management
Detail
December 2018
SWM-8 Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
SWM-8A Stormwater Management
Detail
July 2001
R-1 Roadway Detail December 2004
R-2 Roadway Detail December 2018
R-2a Roadway Detail December 2018
R-3 Roadway Detail December 2009
R-4 Roadway Detail August 2009
R-5 Roadway Detail December 2004
R-6 Roadway Detail August 2009
R-7 Roadway Detail December 2004
R-8 Roadway Detail July 2001
R-9 Roadway Detail December 2018
S-1 Site Detail December 2004
S-2 Site Detail August 2009
S-3 Site Detail December 2018
S-4a Site Detail December 2018
S-4b Site Detail August 2009
S-5 Site Detail July 2001
S-6 Site Detail July 2001
S-7 Site Detail December 2018
S-8 Site Detail July 2001
S-9 Site Detail December 2018
S-10 Site Detail December 2018
S-11 Site Detail September 2009
S-11/1 Site Detail September 2009
S-11/2 Site Detail September 2009
S-11/3 Site Detail October 2009
S-11/4 Site Detail October 2009
§ 70-1 PINE CODE § 70-1
68:286
Drawing No. Name
Created or last
revised
S-11/5 Site Detail October 2009
S-12 Site Detail July 2001
S-13 Site Detail December 2018
S-14 Site Detail July 2001
S-15 Site Detail January 2006
S-16 Site Detail July 2001
S-17 Site Detail December 2018
TDS-72 to 90 Trail Design Standards June 30, 2005
BD-91 to 110 Boulevard District
Streetscape Standards
April 2007
PR-1 Recreation Detail December 2018
PR-2 Recreation Detail December 2007
PR-3 Recreation Detail December 2007
PR-4 Recreation Detail December 2007
PR-5 Recreation Detail December 2007
PR-6 Recreation Detail December 2007
PR-7A Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-7B Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-8A Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-8B Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-8C Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-8D Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-9A Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-9B Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-9C Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10A Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10B Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10C Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10D Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10E Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10F Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-10G Recreation Detail December 2008
PR-11A Recreation Detail December 2008
§ 70-1 SEWERS § 70-1
68:287
§ 70-2. References within official documents.
All references within the official documents of the Township, including
but not limited to those within the Code of the Township of Pine, which
refer to the Township's standard details/specifications and requirements
for erosion control, roadway and site drainage, stormwater management,
roadway construction, site details, Trail Design Standards, Boulevard
District Streetscape and Landscape Standards, and Parks and Recreation
Details shall now be deemed to refer to the specifications contained in the
attached Township of Pine Standard Details.
Chapter 71
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
§ 71-1. Statement of findings.
Drawing No. Name
Created or last
revised
PR-12 Recreation Detail December 2008
B. Copies of such documents and drawings, in their entirety, are attached
hereto and incorporated herein in their entirety.69
A. The stormwater management needs of the Township of Pine have been
studied and identified through field investigations, citizen notifications,
engineering studies, and related planning activities, indicating that
more comprehensive and effective stormwater management in the
Township will contribute to the protection of health, safety and welfare
of its residents, and, also, the stormwater facilities, infrastructure and
activities associated with stormwater management shall provide
benefits to all properties, property owners, residents, visitors and
citizens of the Township of Pine.
B. Inadequate management of stormwater runoff through a watershed can
increase and accelerate flows and velocities, contribute to erosion and
sediment, overtax the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm
sewers, greatly increase the cost of public activities and public facilities
to effectively convey and manage stormwater, undermine floodplain
management and flood reduction efforts in downstream communities,
reduce groundwater recharge, negatively impact other related water
resource needs and threaten public health and safety.
C. Inadequate management of stormwater runoff throughout a watershed
can harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows, increasing erosion and
sedimentation, destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic
69.Editor's Note: Said copies are on file in the Township offices and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
§ 70-1 PINE CODE § 71-1
68:288
pollution concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals and pathogens.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which supports
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams.
E. A comprehensive program of public and private stormwater
management (utilizing both public and private facilities) which seeks to
avoid and minimize flooding, erosion, and water quality degradation is
fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township of Pine, local properties, and the environment of the
Township of Pine and also of its neighboring communities.
F. In order to establish, construct, operate, enhance and maintain
stormwater management facilities, systems, and management plans;
ensure the continued effective operation of the system through
installation and management of best management practices (BMPs);
and provide other services such as appropriate inspections, asset
management, and regulatory oversight associated with stormwater and
watershed management, sufficient and stable funding is required to
support these public services.
G. Multiple federal regulations, including those found at 40 CFR Part 122,
and also Pennsylvania state regulations, require the Township of Pine to
implement and fund a program of stormwater management, which
controls are otherwise unfunded, and that address discharges from the
Township of Pine's regulated stormwater outfalls to local water bodies.
In accordance with these regulations, the Township of Pine has a permit
to manage stormwater discharges from its municipal separate storm
sewer systems ("MS4s") under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System ("NPDES") regulations.
H. The Township of Pine Board of Supervisors has developed a program to
establish fair, reasonable and equitable uniform fees so that property
owners within a stormwater management district (except those owning
properties that have been predetermined to already have appropriate
and adequate installation and maintenance, in accordance with best
management practices, of stormwater management facilities or those
properties that have been determined to be tax exempt) will pay an
equitable share of the costs of operation, maintenance, repair,
inspection, regulatory compliance, administration, replacement and
construction of improvements related to the stormwater management
facilities, stormwater management systems, management plans and
related services provided or paid for by the Township of Pine.
I. The proposed program for creating the stormwater management
district and imposing the fees established herein has received input and
comment from the public through its review at publicly advertised
public meetings of the Township of Pine's Board of Supervisors
(including on October 20, 2017) and has been the subject of a specific
public hearing held upon this chapter (and duly advertised by required
§ 71-1 SEWERS § 71-1
68:289
§ 71-2. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this chapter, and not given a specific definition, as
set forth in this section, shall be defined as may be set forth in the applicable
statutes and/or regulations of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and shall otherwise be given their ordinary and common
meaning:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Methods, procedures and
analyses, as specified in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, to reduce flooding potential and to manage and control
the volume, flow rate, and water quality of stormwater.
FEES — A sum of money assessed, imposed, and to be collected from the
owner of each nonexempt property (having an Allegheny County property
identification number) within the Township of Pine Stormwater
Management District which uses, benefits from, or is serviced by the
public notice) on December 4, 2017, at 6:30 p.m. in the Township of
Pine's Community Center.
J. The fees as determined herein are fair, reasonable, equitable, and
uniform, and are based on the following facts:
(1) The fees specified herein shall be applicable to all properties within
the Township of Pine's Stormwater Management District, except as
may otherwise be provided by the terms of this chapter.
(2) Tax-exempt properties, as so determined by the Allegheny County
Real Estate Department, will not be assessed the fees specified
herein.
(3) All included residential properties with stormwater maintenance
responsibilities and which do not maintain their stormwater
management facilities in accordance with best management
practices (as approved and inspected by the Township) will be
assessed a fee as provided herein and in the Township of Pine Fee
Schedule. The Township of Pine may contract for the required
maintenance on behalf of the responsible property owners.
(4) All included properties with stormwater maintenance
responsibilities and which do maintain their stormwater
maintenance facilities in accordance with best management
practices (as approved and inspected by the Township) will be
credited the otherwise herein-required fee.
(5) All nonresidential properties with stormwater maintenance
responsibilities and which do not maintain their stormwater
management facilities in accordance with best management
practices (as approved and inspected by the Township) will be
required by the Township to separately provide maintenance for
their stormwater management facilities and will not be charged the
otherwise herein required fee.
§ 71-1 PINE CODE § 71-2
68:290
stormwater management system or stormwater management facility or
discharges stormwater directly or indirectly, into the stormwater
management system or stormwater management facility, with such fee to
be paid to the Township of Pine for its utilization in planning, constructing,
operating, maintaining, regulating, inspecting, and improving such system
and facilities and the services provided thereby.
NONTAXABLE PARCEL — A lot or parcel within the Township of Pine's
Stormwater Management District created and recorded in the Allegheny
County Department of Real Estate which has been determined by the
Allegheny County Assessor's office to be exempt from the imposition of real
estate taxes.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership, company,
association, organization, society or group owning herein affected real
property in the Township of Pine.
PROPERTY — Each lot, parcel, building or portion thereof within the
Township of Pine's Stormwater Management District, separately
established by a property identification number (i.e., a lot and block
number) issued through the Allegheny County Department of Real Estate.
STORMWATER — Runoff water from all precipitation events, snowmelt and
natural springs.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — A geographic area within the
Township of Pine consisting of land (and including the previously subdivided
lots or parcels within) identified and described in § 71-3 of this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Components, including both
man-made structures and natural features, which comprise a stormwater
management system (including, but not limited to, storm sewers, pipes,
conduits, mains, inlets, culverts, catch basins, gutters, manholes, ditches,
channels, basins, outfalls, detention ponds and tanks, streets, curbs, drains,
and all devices, appliances, and stormwater BMPs, such as infiltration and
filtration facilities).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — The system of runoff avoidance,
infiltration, collection and conveyance (including storm sewers, pipes,
conduits, mains, inlets, culverts, catch basins, gutters, manholes, ditches,
channels, basins, outfalls, and detention ponds and tanks, streets, curbs,
drains, and all devices, appliances, and stormwater BMPs, such as
infiltration and filtration facilities) used for collecting, conducting, pumping,
conveying, detaining, infiltrating, reducing, managing, avoiding the
generation of, and treating stormwater, regardless of ownership.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM EXTENT — For the purpose of this
chapter the extent of a stormwater management system shall commence
where stormwater runoff enters a closed conduit system and extend to
the exit of a structural outfall to a stream, drainageway or watercourse.
The extent of the stormwater management system shall not include surface
runoff or swales that convey stormwater either to or away from a
stormwater management system.
§ 71-2 SEWERS § 71-2
68:291
TAXABLE PARCEL — A lot or parcel within the Township of Pine's
Stormwater Management District created and recorded in the Allegheny
County Department of Real Estate and which has been determined by the
Allegheny County Assessor's office to be subject to the payment of real
estate taxes and is not the recipient of an established exemption therefrom.
USER — Any person, firm, corporation, individual, partnership, company,
association, society, or group using, benefiting from or being served by the
stormwater management system and/or stormwater management facilities.
§ 71-3. Creation of district.
A. Pursuant to the authority of Pennsylvania Act No. 62 of July 1, 2016 (P.L.
439) the Township of Pine hereby creates and establishes its
Stormwater Management District as a geographic area within the
Township of Pine consisting of land (and including the previously
subdivided lots or parcels within) identified and described therein in
the following plans of record (as recorded in the Department of Real
Estate of Allegheny County):
Plans of Lots
As Filed of Record (Plan
Book Volume/Page)
Karrington Woods
Phase 1 P.B.V. 150, pages 199 through
200
Phase 2 P.B.V. 152, pages 28 through 29
Phase 3 P.B.V. 153, pages 52 through 53
Phase 4 P.B.V. 159, pages 112 through
113
Avonlea Estates Phase 2 (recorded
as Enclave at North Park #2)
P.B.V. 166, pages 189 through
190
Pine Timbers Plan No. 2 P.B.V. 178, pages 132 through
139
Woodside Estates
Phase 1 P.B.V. 221, pages 60 through 61
Phase 2 P.B.V. 228, pages 126 through
129
Phase 3 P.B.V. 228, pages 130 through
133
Northbrook Estates P.B.V. 139, pages 106 through
107
North Point Village P.B.V. 148, pages 44 through 45
Lloydmont Estates plan of lots P.B.V. 148, pages 55 through 56
Woodhaven Heights P.B.V. 145, pages 62 through 64
Fox Meadow
§ 71-2 PINE CODE § 71-3
68:292
§ 71-4. Imposition of fees.
The Township of Pine hereby establishes and imposes a fee, as specified
herein, upon each and every taxable parcel (having an Allegheny County
property identification number) within its Stormwater Management District
that uses or is benefited by the stormwater management system, and/
or stormwater management facilities, either directly or indirectly. The fee
herein shall be imposed for the use, benefit, construction, inspection,
planning, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement
of the stormwater management system and/or stormwater management
facilities. The fee herein shall be imposed on a yearly basis and paid
annually as follows:
Plans of Lots
As Filed of Record (Plan
Book Volume/Page)
Phase 1 P.B.V. 161, pages 99 through
102
Phase 2 P.B.V. 191, pages 115 through
116
Cloverdale Estates
Phase 1 P.B.V. 153, pages 187 through
190
Phase 2 P.B.V. 160, pages 186 through
189
Woodland Farms Plan P.B.V. 158, pages 185 through
190
B. Copies of the pertinent portions of the above-referenced plans are
attached hereto as exhibits (and incorporated herein by reference). A
further description of individual properties within the above-described
Stormwater Management District has been prepared by the Township
Manager and a listing of same is and shall be maintained in the offices
of the Township of Pine, 230 Pearce Mill Road, Wexford, PA 15090 (and
the provisions of same are hereby incorporated by reference).
A. The fee shall initially be set at a flat rate of $100 per taxable property
where maintenance and operation of a stormwater management facility
is of multiple property owners (such as, but not limited to, a
homeowners' association or separate property owners within a
subdivision or land development plan where a viable homeowners'
association has not been created).
B. The fee credit shall be initially set at a flat rate credit of $100 per
taxable property where a stormwater management facility is the
responsibility of multiple property owners and such stormwater
management facility has been adequately maintained by such property
owners, as determined following inspection and certification by the
Township of Pine.
§ 71-3 SEWERS § 71-4
68:293
§ 71-5. Uniform application of fees.
The fee provided herein shall be uniformly assessed, liened and collected
in accordance with the applicability of responsibility for the specified
property's real estate taxes, unless exempted.
§ 71-6. "User" and "owner" distinguished.
References in this chapter to "use," "user," "lot," "parcel," with respect to
the assessment of fees shall not be construed to modify or alter the fact that
the fees authorized by this chapter shall be assessed to the owner(s) of each
separate property or parcel, and such owner(s) shall be and remain liable
for payment of same, whether or not such owner occupies the property
and therefore directly uses the stormwater management facilities and
stormwater management system. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to prohibit the owner's ability to collect by lease or contract equivalent
sums due from a tenant or other occupier of the owner's property, but such
lease or contract shall not bind the Township of Pine or limit in any way its
authority to impose, assess, and collect the fees specified herein from the
owner(s) of the property and to lien a property regulated hereby.
§ 71-7. Billing and collection of fees.
C. When a group of multiple property owners either assumes
responsibility for operation and maintenance of stormwater
management facilities (when they did not so previously) or no longer
performs or accepts responsibility for operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities (when they did so previously) such
changes shall be authorized by official action of the Township of Pine
Board of Supervisors at a public meeting.
D. When a group of multiple property owners requests to accept
responsibility for operation and maintenance of stormwater
management facilities (which was previously not so performed) the fee
provided herein shall continue to be charged, without credit, as
otherwise specified herein, for a period of three additional years after
official action of the Township of Pine Board of Supervisors, after which
time the credit specified herein shall become applicable.
A. The fee(s) fixed and established by this chapter shall be applicable,
beginning in calendar year 2018 and annually thereafter as to all
properties that use, are served, or are benefited by the stormwater
management system existing as of the effective date of this chapter, and
shall thereafter be applicable and effective to all other properties that
begin to use, be served or be benefitted by the stormwater management
system. Fees imposed by this chapter shall be assessed annually and
added as a line item to the annual Township real estate tax bill and shall
be due and payable by property owners using the same procedure and
timeline for same. The fees assessed and collected will not be subject to
proration or refund by the Township of Pine in the event that a property
§ 71-4 PINE CODE § 71-7
68:294
§ 71-8. Stormwater management fees constitute lien on property.
In accordance with Section 1612 of the Second Class Township Code and
the Municipal Claims Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended, all fees,
penalties, interest (at the permitted legal rate upon the unpaid balance
after its due date), collection fees (including reasonable attorneys' fees),
lien filing and satisfaction fees and other charges imposed for failure to pay
promptly the fees assessed by this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon and
against the subject property and its owner from the date of their imposition
and assessment.
§ 71-9. Credits and appeals.
§ 71-10. Stormwater Revenue Account.
All fees and other stormwater-related revenue authorized to be imposed,
assessed, and collected by this chapter shall be deposited in the Township
of Pine Stormwater Revenue Account, a separate account dedicated to
the operation, administration, maintenance, repair and improvement of
the stormwater management system. Such fees and revenue shall, in
accordance with the provisions of Pennsylvania Act No. 62 of July 1, 2016
(P.L. 439), be used only for the purposes authorized thereby.
is sold; provided, however, that a buyer and seller of property shall
not be precluded hereby from making their own private, contractual
agreement to provide for proration of credit between them of any fees
associated herewith.
B. The Township of Pine Board of Supervisors may review and update the
fees fixed and established by this chapter by a subsequent resolution, as
may be deemed necessary from time to time, and as adopted by
resolution at a properly advertised meeting.
A. Credits for fees otherwise imposed hereby will be provided when
property owner(s) have specifically requested such credit and the
required maintenance or repairs are performed in accordance with
Township directives on a timely basis and such stormwater facilities are
current and in accordance with acceptable standards (all as determined
by the Township in its reasonable discretion). Additionally, to qualify for
such credit, the property owner(s) shall be required to have executed a
standard operation and maintenance plan agreement (in a form
acceptable to the Township of Pine) which shall be recorded in the
Allegheny County Department of Real Estate acknowledging the
owner(s)' ongoing maintenance requirements.
B. Any owner (or group of owners) who believes its fees have been
calculated in error may appeal such calculation to the Township of
Pine's Board of Supervisors, with such appeal to be heard promptly
thereafter at a public meeting.
§ 71-7 SEWERS § 71-11
68:295
§ 71-11. Floods and liability.
Flooding may occur occasionally due to stormwater volume that exceeds
the capacity of the Township of Pine's stormwater management system.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to imply that properties within
the Township of Pine, including but not limited to those subject to the fees
imposed hereby, shall always be free from flooding or flood damage, or
that all flood control projects to control stormwater can provide complete
protection from all flood and storm events. Nothing whatsoever in this
chapter shall deem the Township of Pine liable for any injuries or damages
incurred, either directly or indirectly, from stormwater or from adverse
water quality. Nothing in this chapter purports to reduce the need,
appropriateness, or necessity for flood insurance to be separately
maintained by owners of properties, and the Township of Pine expressly
reserves its right to assert all available legal immunities and defenses in
any civil action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the Township of
Pine, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure
of or negligence or breach of duty regarding the stormwater management
system.
§ 71-12. Authorization to implement and enforce terms of this
chapter.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to do
all acts (including authorization to delegate same to its authorized Township
management staff, Township Solicitor, and other duly authorized agents)
necessary to carry out the terms of this chapter, including but not limited
to performance of necessary ongoing repairs, maintenance, or management
associated with stormwater management functions within the Township of
Pine's Stormwater Management District and, also, the collection of the
related fees and costs established hereby.
§ 71-13. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole or any part thereof other than that portion specifically declared
invalid.
Chapter 72
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 71-11 PINE CODE § 71-13
68:296
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 72-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pine Township
Excavation, Construction, Maintenance and Standards Ordinance for
Roads, Streets and Driveways."
§ 72-1 SEWERS § 72-1
68:297

ARTICLE II
Definitions; Word Usage
§ 72-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter and unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT or PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, copartnership,
limited partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity and
their agents, including but not limited to truck drivers. Whenever used in
any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied
to associations, shall also include the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, shall also include the officers thereof.
ENGINEER — The Township of Pine's engineer.
EXCAVATION or OPENING — The process by which the material on and
below the surface of a street or road is removed, regardless of whether it is
later replaced.
MATERIAL — All physical substances.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY — A private way, lane or road, not dedicated to public
use and providing access from private buildings or lands to public roads.
PUBLIC ROAD or ROAD — Any road, avenue, street, alley, right-of-way or
strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, not limited to the roadway,
intended for general public use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation within the Township of Pine.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway,
regardless of the surface composition or other public way or public grounds
of the Township of Pine and shall include any unimproved areas within the
street right-of-way boundaries.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of Pine Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania,
depending upon the context.
TUNNELLING or BORING — The process by which earth and other material
is removed from the area below the surface of a street without breaking
the surface of the street and regardless of whether such material is later
replaced.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Township of Pine.
§ 72-3. Word usage.
The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine.
§ 72-2 SEWERS § 72-3
68:299

ARTICLE III
Private Driveways
§ 72-4. Compliance required.
No person shall hereafter erect, construct, alter or repair that portion of a
private driveway lying in or entering on public roads of the Township of Pine
except in accordance with the terms and regulations of this article.
§ 72-5. Permit requirements.
No person shall construct, alter or repair that portion of a private driveway
lying in or entering on public roads of the Township of Pine unless and until
he has secured a permit from the Township of Pine, which shall be signed
by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit to any person
of intended compliance with this article and who, in addition, will fulfill the
following requirements:
§ 72-6. Special requirements.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to make special requirements in
writing on any applicant for a permit under this article.
§ 72-7. Elevation.
No permit shall be issued for the erection of any driveway lying in or
entering on a public road unless the elevation of said private driveway lying
in said public road is less than eight inches above or below the grade of the
public road at its highest adjacent elevation.
§ 72-8. Drainage.
All private driveways shall be so constructed so as not to impede the flow of
drainage water along the road. A standard galvanized metal pipe or culvert
or a reinforced concrete pipe as required to pass the maximum drainage
water under the private driveway of not less than 15 inches diameter shall
be installed under every private driveway to a minimum length of 20 feet.
Proper headwalls shall be constructed on both ends of the culvert to retain
driveway fill over the culvert. A standard concrete trough covered by a
proper metal grating or a paved ditch may be substituted for the pipe
culvert in accordance with the Township standards.
A. He shall provide and submit to the Zoning Officer a plan in writing
showing the location, culvert size and finish grade of said driveway.
B. He shall pay a permit fee as indicated in Chapter A144, Fees, to the
Township of Pine for the issuance of such a permit.
C. He shall show his intended compliance with written instructions and
requirements made by the Zoning Officer in addition to the
specifications and drawings provided by the applicant.
§ 72-4 SEWERS § 72-9
68:301
§ 72-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof before any District Justice in the Township of Pine or the
County of Allegheny, generally be subject to a fine of not more than $300
plus costs of prosecution for each offense. Any road or driveway constructed
in violation of this article after the effective date hereof shall be closed until
the provisions of this article have been complied with.
§ 72-10. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to create a liability on the part
of the Township to any person erecting a driveway in compliance with this
article. The Township may remove, change or destroy any private driveway
or parts thereof lying in a public road in the same manner and with no
greater liability than before this article was enacted.
§ 72-9 PINE CODE § 72-10
68:302
ARTICLE IV
Maintenance of Township Roads and Rights-of-Way
§ 72-11. Cleanup of materials tracked onto roads.
No person engaged in any hauling, building, construction, grading,
excavation, road cutting, land development or subdividing within the
Township or engaged in the laying of any water- or sewer lines or other
utility installations or engaged in the transportation of soil, stones, building
materials or debris within the Township, shall cause or allow the tracking or
disposition of mud, soil, stones, building materials, debris or any material
of any kind on any road with the Township. Any material of any kind
whatsoever tracked, placed, dropped or deposited on any road shall be
completely removed from said road immediately, but in no case later than
5:00 p.m. of the day on which such tracking, placement or disposition
occurs.
§ 72-12. Wheel and truck cleaners.
Wheel and truck cleaners shall be required on site at any transport origin
and destination point within the Township, and vehicles shall be scraped
and cleaned before leaving the site.
§ 72-13. Spillage during transit.
All persons shall take reasonable measures, including but not limited to
wetting down or other treatment of materials, before leaving the site to
ensure that during transit no material being transported shall blow or spill
over upon any road or private property.
§ 72-14. Grading permit.
The Township shall not issue any grading permit until the person applying
for such permit has furnished a bond with suitable requirements,
conditioned on compliance by the person with the provisions of this article,
with sufficient surety, or other security approved by the Township Solicitor,
in the amount of a minimum of 5% of the estimated cost of the work
contemplated.
§ 72-15. Road opening and excavation permit.
The Township shall not issue any road opening and excavation permit until
the person applying for such permit has furnished a bond with suitable
requirements conditioned on the compliance by the person with the
provisions of this article, with sufficient surety or other security approved
by the Township Solicitor, in the amount of a minimum of 25% of the amount
of the estimated cost of the work.
§ 72-11 SEWERS § 72-16
68:303
§ 72-16. Conditions of bonds.
One of the conditions of the bonds or other security specified in §§ 72-13
and 72-14 of this article shall be that, in the event that the person does
not comply with the provisions of this article or any special conditions
imposed by the Board of Supervisors, the Township may elect to cure any
deficiencies at the expense of such person, in which event the proceeds of
the bonds or other security shall be due and payable to the Township. If
the proceeds of the bonds or other security shall be insufficient to cover
the Township's expenses of curing such deficiencies, the persons shall
forthwith pay to the Township the amount of the difference. Any excess in
the proceeds in the bonds over the amount of the expenses of the Township
to cure any such deficiencies shall be refunded to the person.
§ 72-17. Enforcement.
The Township police shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article
and shall report any violations of this article to the Board of Supervisors
in their monthly report after appropriate enforcement measures have been
taken.
§ 72-18. Notification of posting of bond.
The Township Manager shall notify the Township police of the posting of
bend or other security under the terms of this article and the conditions
thereof.
§ 72-19. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Township police have notified the Township Manager and
Zoning Officer that a person has violated the provisions of this article, any
Township permit which the person holds shall be automatically revoked.
However, the Township police may, for minor violations, give any person 24
hours' notice to remedy the violation.
§ 72-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice or other proper judicial
officer, to a penalty not exceeding $300, plus costs of prosecution, for
each and every offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
remedies available to the Township.
B. Whenever any person has been notified by the Township police by
issuance of a citation, service of summons in a prosecution or in any
other way in writing that he is committing a violation of this article or
that he is engaged in activity requiring the posting of bond under this
article or that any day of his Township permits have been revoked, each
and every day that he shall continue such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a separate
penalty.
§ 72-16 PINE CODE § 72-20
68:304
ARTICLE V
Excavation of Streets; Tunneling
§ 72-21. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation
of any kind in the street or tunnel under any street within the Township
unless such person shall first have obtained a permit from the Township as
provided herein.
§ 72-22. Application.
Any person who intends to make any openings or excavation in any street or
tunnel under any street within the Township shall complete an application
in writing to the Township Zoning Officer for a permit. Such application
shall be made on forms furnished by the Township which, at a minimum,
shall require the following information:
§ 72-23. Insurance required.
Each applicant, upon the submission of an application for a permit, shall
provide the Township with a certificate of acceptable insurance indicating
he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury, as well as
claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether by himself, his subcontractor, agent or anyone directly
or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover, but not be
limited to, all work and related activities, both aboveground and
underground, collapse, explosive hazards, all equipment in Pine Township
and the operation thereof, protection against liability arising while the
work is being performed and from completed operations. The amount of
insurance shall be prescribed by the Township Supervisors in accordance
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The exact location of the proposed opening, excavation or tunneling.
C. The size and depth of the proposed opening, excavation or tunneling.
D. The approximate times of starting and completing the work.
E. That the applicant, intending to be legally bound, covenants and agrees
that the proposed work shall be done in full compliance with the
ordinances of the Township and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States, in relation to such work, and that
the applicant shall save and keep harmless the Township from and
indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments,
costs and charges for or by any reason whatsoever, which might arise
directly or indirectly from the proposed opening, excavation or
tunneling and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work
connected therewith, or from any other matter, cause or thing relating
thereto.
§ 72-21 SEWERS § 72-23
68:305
with the nature of the risk and the size of the opening, excavation or
tunneling involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury in effect shall not be less than $100,000 for each person and
$300,000 for each accident, and for property damages, not less than
$50,000 for each person, with an aggregate of $300,000 for all accidents.
A public utility may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such a
certificate if it submits satisfactory evidence that it is insured, or has
adequate provisions for self-insurance, in accordance with the requirements
of this article.
§ 72-24. Application and inspection fee.70
Before any permit shall be issued to open, excavate or tunnel under any
street within the Township, the applicant shall pay to the Township Zoning
Officer the application and inspection fees which shall be established by
and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Township
Supervisors for the purpose of defraying the actual administrative and
inspection costs to the Township administering this article.
§ 72-25. Bond required.
A. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant deposits with the
Township Secretary a surety bond written by a surety company
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a
certified check, to guarantee the restoration of the surface, drainage
and subsurface support of the opening, excavation, bore and tunnel.
The amount of said security shall be established by and may be
amended by resolution of the Township Supervisors. Said bond or
amount of the certified check, which shall be converted to cash and
deposited to the Township, shall be retained for one year after the date
of completion of the work to the Township specifications. Work
performed under this article will not be deemed to be completed until
such work is inspected and approved by an appropriate Township
official, who will thereupon issue a signed a and dated notice that the
work has been completed in accordance with Township specifications.
In the event that the restoration of the surface of the excavated street is
deemed to be improper, faulty, defective or not done at all, then, in such
case, the permit holder shall be given a written notice by the Township
Secretary to make such repairs or restoration as the Township Engineer
shall deem proper within a ten-calendar-day period. Upon the failure of
the permit holder to comply with the terms of the notice, the Township
Secretary is hereby authorized to have such repairs or restoration
immediately done and to charge the cost thereof, plus 20% for
administrative costs, to the permit holder. Any subsidence or any other
defect which can be attributed to improper restoration within one year
of the completion of the work shall be considered to be the
responsibility of the permit holder, and the permit holder shall be
required to correct the improper restoration as above set forth. At the
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 72-23 PINE CODE § 72-25
68:306
§ 72-26. Provisions for openings, excavations and tunneling.
The following shall apply to openings, excavations and tunneling of streets,
as specified:
expiration of the one year, the Township shall return or refund to the
permit holder his bond, or amount of certified check or that portion of
the same to which the permit holder is entitled.
B. A public utility shall be permitted to file a continuing bond for street
opening work done within the Township in such amount and in such
form as shall be deemed appropriate by the Township Supervisors.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curb or
side line into the street a distance of greater than one foot beyond the
center line of the street before being properly refilled and the surface of
the street restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 300 feet longitudinally shall be open in any street at any
one time.
C. Drainage, both surface and subsurface, and subsurface support shall be
restored to a condition at least as good as existed prior to the opening,
excavating or tunneling.
D. Permission of all proper authorities in connection with all subsurface
lines or constructions in the area shall be obtained prior to the
commencement of opening, excavating and tunneling, and such work
shall be so conducted as not to interfere with or minimize interference
with water mains, gas mains, electrical conduits, telephone conduits,
sewers or their connections with buildings and all other subsurface
lines and constructions.
E. No tunneling shall be allowed without the approval of the Township
Zoning Officer and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit The
backfilling of a tunnel or excavation shall be done only in the presence
of an inspector of the Township and shall be done only in a method
approved by him.
F. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly in accordance
with the specifications and standards of the Township which shall be
adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution.
G. On improved streets, when ordered installed by the Township Zoning
Officer, a temporary paving of suitable materials thoroughly bound and
compacted shall be installed by the applicant flush with the surface of
the adjoining paving.
H. During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant, and the parties
making the same, to keep the streets in a safe and passable condition
§ 72-25 SEWERS § 72-26
68:307
§ 72-27. Emergency conditions.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident to any subsurface
pipe, line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person
owning or responsible for the same to commence an excavation to remedy
such condition before securing a permit, provided that application for a
permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business day
thereafter and that all other provisions of this chapter are fully complied
with. If any such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended
to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
other apparatus, the Township may proceed to do the work required by such
emergency and charge the same to such owner or person on the basis of
cost thereof, plus 20% for administrative costs.
§ 72-28. Payment for Township work.
Payment for any work done by or for the Township under the provisions
of § 72-27 of this article shall be made by the person made liable therefor
under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill is sent to such person
by the Township. Failure to pay such charges as specified shall render them
collectible by the Township in the manner provided by law.
§ 72-29. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available to Pine
Township, any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, for each and every violation, pay a fine of $300.
during both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other
devices as required by ordinances, laws and regulations.
I. All opening and excavation permits are authorized to be granted only
under and subject to the express condition that the person to whom the
same is issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Township
from any loss in damages and costs whatsoever which may or shall be
occasioned at any time by said opening or excavation, and by any leak,
explosion or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit and any
other matter placed in said opening or excavation and as a direct or
indirect result of any action taken or not taken in connection with the
opening and excavation.
J. The applicant shall notify the Township Secretary when the opening or
excavation is ready for backfilling and before any backfilling is actually
done. The Township Secretary shall thereupon notify an appropriate
Township official, who shall undertake inspection duties as soon as
possible.
K. The applicant, upon completion of his work, shall restore the surface of
the street to as good a condition as it was in before said work was
commenced, and he shall notify the Township Secretary when the
restoration is completed.
§ 72-26 PINE CODE § 72-29
68:308
Each provision of this article or rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto
and each day said violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation,
punishable upon conviction by the same penalties. In addition, upon
conviction, the defendant shall be required to pay all costs of prosecution
and enforcement of this article which were incurred as a result of the
defendant's action or inaction. The penalties set forth in this section shall
be in addition to any other remedies available to the Township.
§ 72-29 SEWERS § 72-29
68:309

ARTICLE VI
Road Construction
§ 72-30. Purpose.
In order to establish uniform requirements for the construction, surface
treatment and maintenance of roads in the Township of Pine and in order
to advise all developers of real estate situate within the Township of Pine
and all persons using property within a Township right-of-way of said
requirements, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine adopts this
article.
§ 72-31. Provisions.
No person shall construct, open or dedicate any road for public use or travel
in the Township of Pine, or any drainage facilities in connection therewith,
without first applying to the Township for a road and paving permit. The
applicant shall submit, in triplicate, plans of the proposed road, prepared by
a civil engineer, licensed in Pennsylvania, to the Township Manager. Such
plans shall be prepared according to the following provisions:
A. All such plans shall show all lots or parcels of land adjoining or served
by the roads in such plans.
B. All such plans shall include a topographical survey of the land or the
lots served by said roads, a grade line profile of the center line of the
existing ground over which the proposed road will be constructed and
the proposed grade line to be established for such road.
C. All such plans shall include a proposed system or method of draining
the road and the waters flowing onto or collecting in and around said
roads; the proposed drainage system, the course, structure and
capacity of any drainage facilities and the method of draining adjacent
or contiguous territory; the watercourses, if any, existing and any
drainage ditches to be made; and the location of every bridge, culvert,
cross-drain, drop inlet and the like shall be shown on the plan. The
method of utilizing existing watercourses or the method of connecting
into other drainage facilities shall also be shown.
D. The plans shall include rights-of-way at least 20 feet wide for the
drainage of surface water and for the location of storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water, gas or electric lines and for other public and semipublic
utilities and services; all such rights-of-way shall be designated upon
the plan as "easement for utilities and drainage," or by some other
comparable language, subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor.
E. All plans shall include sufficient monuments to be placed at locations
which will enable the Township to survey, find and locate or relocate
road lines or right-of-way lines. The monuments shall be of such size,
shape and design as the Township Engineer shall specify; all such
§ 72-30 SEWERS § 72-31
68:311
§ 72-32. Recordkeeping.
Upon receipt of any application for a road and paving permit and plans
conforming to the provisions of § 72-31 of this article, along with the fee
required by § 72-39 of this article, the Township Manager shall immediately
forward one copy of the plans to the Township Engineer, one copy to
the Planning Commission and one copy to the Board of Supervisors. The
Township Manager shall maintain a checklist for each application in order
to make sure that all filings, fees, official actions and procedures are
properly and timely performed. He shall report any improper or untimely
acts or omissions to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 72-33. Evaluation of plans: written report
Within 20 days of the receipt of the plans from the Township Manager, the
Township Engineer shall evaluate the plans and shall submit, to the Board of
Supervisors, his estimate of the total cost of construction of any roads in the
plan. The Township Engineer shall also send to the Board of Supervisors a
written report recommending approval, disapproval, modifications or other
conditions of approval.
§ 72-34. Review of plans by Planning Commission.
At its next regular meeting after receipt from the Township Manager, the
Planning Commission shall review said plans and, within 10 days thereafter,
shall certify in writing to the Board of Supervisors that said plans comply
with all Township ordinances and regulations and any preliminary or final
subdivision plans relating thereto.
§ 72-35. Approval of plans.
At the next regular meeting after receipt of the reports of the Township
Engineer and Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall review
the plans and shall approve, modify, conditionally approve or disapprove
the same. The Board of Supervisors shall mail its decision, along with
the reasons therefor, to the Township Engineer, the Zoning Officer and
the applicant. If the Board of Supervisors modifies, conditionally approves
or disapproves said plans, the written notification shall specifically state
whether the applicant is required or permitted to submit revised plans. The
notice to the Township Engineer and Zoning Officer shall specify whether a
road and paving permit should issue and the conditions therefor.
§ 72-36. Performance bond.
The Zoning Officer shall not issue any road and paving permit until the
applicant has furnished to the Board of Supervisors a bond with suitable
requirements, guaranteeing performance of the construction of the road,
with corporate surety, or other security approved by the Township Solicitor,
monuments shall be shown upon the plan as it is prepared for recording
in the Recorder's office of Allegheny County.
§ 72-31 PINE CODE § 72-36
68:312
in the amount of 100% of the cost of construction of any roads in the plan,
as determined by the Township Engineer as hereinbefore provided. Upon
issuance of a final certificate of completion covering all the work done by
the applicant under the permit, this bond shall be released by the Township.
§ 72-37. Maintenance bond.
The Zoning Officer shall not issued any road and paving permit until the
applicant has furnished a bond to the Board of Supervisors with suitable
requirements, guaranteeing maintenance of all roads in the plan for a
period of 18 months, with corporate surety, or other security approved
by the Township Solicitor, in the amount of 15% of the amount of the
performance bond described above. Upon issuance of a certificate of
maintenance by the Township Engineer, as hereinafter provided, the
Township shall release this bond.
§ 72-38. Cure of deficiencies.
The condition of the bonds specified in §§ 72-36 and 72-37 of this article
shall be that, in the event that the work or maintenance done under the
permit shall not be performed in accordance with the terms of this article or
any special conditions imposed by the Board of Supervisors, the Township
may elect to cure any deficiencies at the expense of the applicant, in which
event the proceeds of the bonds shall be due and payable to the Township.
If the proceeds of the bonds shall be insufficient to cover the Township's
expenses of curing such deficiencies, the applicant shall forthwith pay to
the Township the amount of the difference. Any excess in the proceeds of
the bonds over the amount of the expenses to the Township to cure any such
deficiency shall be refunded to the applicant.
§ 72-39. Processing fee.71
In order to defray the costs of reviewing and processing an application for
a road and paving permit, the applicant shall submit a certified check or
money order, payable to the Township of Pine, to the Township Manager at
the time of application. The amount of the fee for such application shall be
established by and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
Township Supervisors.
§ 72-40. Inspection fee.
In order to defray the costs of inspecting the construction, surfacing and
maintenance of the roads in the applicant's plan, as provided in this article,
the applicant shall execute a formal agreement whereby the applicant shall
pay the actual engineering fees and expenses incurred by the Township as
a result of such inspections. Such formal agreement shall be submitted by
the applicant at his own expense before a road and paving permit is issued
and must be approved as to form by the Township Solicitor. Such formal
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 72-36 SEWERS § 72-40
68:313
agreement shall also include any special conditions or terms required by
the Board of Supervisors. No inspection certificates issued by the Township
Engineer under this article shall become effective until the applicant has
submitted a certified check or money order in the appropriate amount,
payable to the Township of Pine, to the Township Manager.
§ 72-41. Road specifications.
A. Before the Township will accept any road as a public road, it shall be
paved to a minimum width of 20 feet and, in addition thereto, shall have
a 24 inch width of integral reinforced curb and gutter, constructed in
accordance with Township standards, placed on both sides of the paved
road.
B. Before the Township will accept any road as a public road, there shall
be graded berm not less than five feet in width next to each curb and
gutter as specified above.
C. Concrete catch basins, constructed in accordance with Township
standards, shall be placed on both sides of the paved road at such
intervals as are approved by the Township Engineer. The distance
between catch basins on the same side of a road shall not exceed 300
linear feet on any one continuous slope. The catch basins shall be
connected with proper sized storm sewers and reinforced concrete pipe
to the nearest drainage easement, as approved by the Engineer. Catch
basins shall also be placed at road intersections and at low points
between two rising grades, and under all other conditions necessary to
provide proper drainage. Where culverts are required transferring
surface drainage from one side of the road to the other, a concrete
headwall shall be built on the lower end of the culvert, and a storm inlet
shall be built at the upper end of the culvert in a manner approved by
the Township Engineer.
D. All newly constructed Township roads shall be subject to the minimum
right-of-way requirements and other specifications of the Code of the
Township of Pine.72
E. The base of any Township road shall be constructed of not less than 10
inches of total compacted thickness of No. 4 slag or limestone, and
installed in accordance with the highest standards and specifications
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for a minimum width of
20 feet.
F. Subject to the inspection requirements of this article, upon the
completion of the construction of the base as set forth in Subsection E
of this article, the surface of such proposed road shall be topped with a
minimum of four inches of ID-2 bituminous surface course or better
material approved by the Township Engineer, installed in accordance
with the then-current specifications of the Commonwealth of
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 72-40 PINE CODE § 72-41
68:314
§ 72-42. Maintenance required.
The applicant shall fully maintain the condition of all roads in the applicant's
plan for a period of 18 months after the Supervisor's acceptance of the road
as a public road.
§ 72-43. Amendments to road specifications.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the right to adopt, amend or change
any of the road specifications contained in this article and to adopt such
other regulations as in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter. The Township
Engineer shall prepare a drawing of a typical section of a Township road
which reflects all of the current specifications for the construction and
paving of the same. Such drawing shall be attached to this chapter and shall
be on file in the office of the Township Manager, for inspection by members
of the public during business hours.
§ 72-44. Compliance with other regulations.
The applicant must also comply, where applicable, with all other Township
ordinances and regulations, all regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation and the Department of Environmental Resources and all
other federal, state, County and local laws or ordinances. No permit will be
issued until written evidence of such approvals is submitted to the Township
Zoning Officer by the applicant.
§ 72-45. Notice of intent to proceed.
Prior to the paving of any road surface according to the specifications of
this article, the applicant shall give the Township at least 72 hours' notice,
excluding weekends and holidays, of its intent to proceed with paving. The
Township Engineer shall then immediately inspect the base of all roads
in the applicant's plan; and, if the base conforms to the specifications of
this article, the Township Engineer shall issue a certificate of preliminary
inspection to the applicant. The Township Engineer shall report any
deficiencies in the base of any road to the Board of Supervisors, and all
further construction and paving of the road shall stop.
§ 72-46. Certificate of compliance.
The applicant shall notify the Township Engineer upon completion of the
construction and surfacing of any road; and, if the road conforms to the
specifications of this article, the Township Engineer shall issue a certificate
of completion to the applicant. If the Township Engineer finds any
Pennsylvania. As an alternative, the surface may be of a minimum of
eight inches of reinforced concrete or better material approved by
the Township Engineer not less than 20 feet in width, installed in
accordance with the then-current specifications of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 72-41 SEWERS § 72-46
68:315
deficiencies in the construction or surfacing of any road, he shall
immediately notify the Board of Supervisors and the applicant, in writing,
of such deficiencies.
§ 72-47. Inspection after certificate.
Eighteen months after the certificate of completion becomes effective, the
Township Engineer shall again inspect all roads in the applicant's plan,
in order to determine whether the roads have been properly maintained
according to the provisions of this article. If the roads have been properly
maintained, the Township Engineer shall issue a certificate of maintenance
to the applicant. If the roads have not been properly maintained, the
Township shall immediately notify the Board of Supervisors and the
applicant, in writing, of any deficiencies in the maintenance of such roads.
§ 72-48. Recording of plans.
All plans for newly constructed roads within the Township shall be recorded
in the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds in the same manner as, or as
part of, the recording of a final plan under the Code of the Township of
Pine.73
§ 72-49. Expiration of permit.
Every road and paving permit shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced
within six months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue,
provided that the Board of Supervisors may, if the permit holder presents
satisfactory evidence in writing that unusual difficulties have prevented the
work from being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant
a reasonable extension of time and provided, further, that the application
for the extension of time is made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 72-50. Revocation of permit or certificate.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to revoke any permit or
certificate issued according to this article, upon the written notification by
the Township Engineer that the work covered by the permit or certificate
is defective, has not been properly maintained or has been materially
extended or altered without a permit to do so.
§ 72-51. Written notice prior to revocation.
Before such revocation, the Township Engineer shall first give written
notice to the permit or certificate holder, specifying the defective condition.
If the defective condition is corrected within 30 days of notice, the permit
or certificate shall not be revoked.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 72-46 PINE CODE § 72-52
68:316
§ 72-52. Compliance with provisions.
No person shall construct, surface, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
road within the Township, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any provision of this article.
§ 72-53. Discontinuance of violation
When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
has been served by the Township Engineer on any person, such violation
shall be discontinued immediately.
§ 72-54. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable,
upon conviction thereof, before a District Justice or other proper
judicial officer for a penalty not exceeding $300 for each and every
offense, plus costs of prosecution.
B. Whenever any person has been notified by the Township Engineer by
service of summons in a prosecution or in any other way that he is
committing a violation of this article, each and every day that he shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by a separate penalty or imprisonment.
C. Such fines shall be collected as fines are now by law collected in the
Township. These fines shall be in addition to any other remedies
available to the Township.
§ 72-52 SEWERS § 72-54
68:317

ARTICLE VII
Sidewalks and Curbs
[Added 9-6-1988 by Ord. No. 170]
§ 72-55. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Pine Township Sidewalk
and Curb Specifications Ordinance."
§ 72-56. Compliance.
All curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of all
owners of real estate, contractors, subcontractors, mechanics and laborers
to comply with this article in the construction or reconstruction of curbs and
sidewalks within the Township.
§ 72-57. Materials used.
A. Concrete. All concrete used shall be true portland cement and shall
meet the requirements of the latest standard specifications for portland
cement as adopted by the American Society for Testing and Materials.
No type of cement shall be substituted without the written approval of
the Township Engineer.
B. Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall consist of stone and shall
meet the physical requirements specified in Table A and Table B and the
size and grading requirements as indicated in Table C for No. 2 or 2B
coarse aggregate, as specified in the latest revision of the specifications
issued by the Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, also known as "Form 408," unless otherwise approved in
writing by the Township Engineer.
C. Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or
manufactured sand from the controlled mechanical breakdown of stone
into sound, cubical-shaped particles or from the controlled mechanical
breakdown of conglomerate sandstone to individual grain size or white,
fine aggregate, consisting of calcite, white quartz or silica, free from
discoloring materials. It shall be composed of hard, durable grain
thoroughly cleaned by washing, free from harmful amounts of clay or
silt, vegetation and other substances determined to be deleterious.
When dry, all parts of fine aggregate shall pass through a three-eighthsinch
sieve.
D. Cement concrete. Cement concrete shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Description. Cement concrete shall consist of portland cement, fine
aggregate, coarse aggregate, water and admixtures and shall
conform to the materials, design and control requirements
specified for Class A cement concrete as set forth in the latest
§ 72-55 SEWERS § 72-57
68:319
§ 72-58. Specifications for sidewalk construction.
The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks shall be in accordance with
these specifications and in conformity to the lines, grades and dimensions
approved by the Township Engineer.
revision of specifications issued by the Department of
Transportation, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, known as "Form
408," unless otherwise approved in writing by the Township
Engineer.
(2) Proportioning. The minimum cement factor shall be 6.00 bags per
cubic yard of concrete. The quantity of water used per bag of
concrete shall be the minimum to obtain a satisfactory, workable
concrete as determined by the Township Engineer, but shall not
exceed 5.6 gallons, including the free water in the aggregates. No.
2B coarse aggregate shall be used in this concrete. The proportions
of fine and coarse aggregate per bag of concrete shall comply with
the requirements for Class A cement concrete specified in Section
704.1(g)-2A of the latest revision of specifications issued by the
Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
known as "Form 408," unless otherwise specified in writing by the
Township Engineer.
(3) Consistency. The mixed concrete shall be of uniform consistency.
The quantity of water used shall be the minimum to obtain a
satisfactory, workable concrete with the lowest allowable slump
consistent with practicable workability of the concrete as
determined by the Township Engineer. The allowable slump
determined in accordance with PTM No. 600 shall be between one
and three inches.
(4) Design strength of concrete. The concrete design mix, when
molded, cured and tested in accordance with the procedures
employed by the Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, shall meet the minimum compressive strength of
3,300 pounds per square inch in 28 days. Test cylinders and
samples shall be supplied upon request of the Township Engineer.
(5) During cold or freezing weather, calcium chloride may be added to
concrete, but not in excess of two pounds per bag of cement.
(6) If transit-mix concrete is used, the supplier shall be able to certify
compliance with the above requirements at the request of the
Township Engineer.
A. Concrete. All sidewalks shall be of one-coarse cement concrete
construction of Class A cement concrete as specified in § 72-57D.
B. Dimensions. Concrete sidewalks shall have the dimensions as set forth
on a drawing prepared by the Township Engineer showing standard
§ 72-57 PINE CODE § 72-58
68:320
dimensions. This drawing shall be available for inspection at the Pine
Township Municipal Building.
C. Forms. Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and of
sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the concrete
without springing. If wood, they shall be nominal two-inch planks
surfaced on the inside and the top; if of metal, they shall be of approved
section. Forms shall have a depth equal to the depth of the concrete and
shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete is placed
against them. Forms that are worn, bent or damaged shall not be used.
D. Preparation of foundation.
(1) Excavation shall be as required, and the foundation shall be formed
at a depth of eight inches below and parallel with the finished
surface of the sidewalk. When directed, unsuitable material shall
be removed. The foundation shall be thoroughly compacted and
finished to a firm, even surface and moistened if required.
(2) Placing aggregate for bed. Aggregate shall be spread on the
prepared foundation to form a thoroughly compacted bed four
inches deep.
E. Joints. Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs not exceeding
20 feet in length except for closures. The slabs shall be separated by a
vertical joint for the full width and full thickness of the slab. A one-halfinch
expansion joint shall be provided between each section of sidewalk
and shall be filled with approved joint filler for the full length and
thickness of the section. Expansion joints shall also be placed adjacent
to the existing structures when directed by the Township Engineer and
shall be placed longitudinally where the sidewalk is to be constructed in
contact with a curb and at such other places as may be directed by the
Township Engineer.
F. Finish. After the concrete is poured into the forms, it shall be puddled
and spaded so as to ensure a thorough mixture, eliminate air pockets
and create uniform and smooth sides. After the concrete has set
sufficiently, the forms shall be removed and the top side shall be
finished with a wood float or brush and shall be edged at all joints with a
one-fourth-inch edging tool to make a uniform finished surface. The
concrete shall be cured with either an application of an approved curing
compound or covered with a polyethylene sheet covering.
G. Backfilling. After the concrete has been cured for at least 72 hours, the
spaces adjacent to the sidewalks shall be backfilled with approved
materials in layers of not more than four inches in depth, which shall be
thoroughly compacted mechanically to the required elevation and cross
section.
§ 72-58 SEWERS § 72-59
68:321
§ 72-59. Specifications for curb construction.
The construction or reconstruction of curbs shall be in accordance with the
specifications and in conformity to the lines and grades established by the
Township Engineer.
A. Concrete. The curb shall be made of cement concrete and shall be of
the proportion and mix as specified in § 72-57D of this article.
B. Forms. Forms for the curb shall be of metal, except that wood forms
may be used on sharp curves and short tangent sections when approved
in writing by the Township Engineer. Forms shall be straight, free from
warp and of sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the
concrete without springing. At least three stakes shall be placed for
each 10 feet of form. Metal forms shall be of approved section and shall
have a flat surface on top, and wood forms, when authorized, shall be
nominal two-inch surface planks. These forms shall be of a depth equal
to the depth of the curb, designed to permit secure fastening of the face
and back forms at the tops. These fastenings shall be constructed in a
manner that will not obstruct satisfactory finishing and edging of the
top of the curb but will permit removal of the inside or face forms. All
forms and templates shall be thoroughly cleaned and treated with an
approved material as required, to prevent the concrete from adhering
thereto. Oil, bituminous paper or other material which will adhere to or
discolor the concrete shall not be used. Forms and templates which are
worn, bent, warped or broken shall not be used. The forms shall be
accurately set to line and grade in a manner to prevent settlement or
displacement.
C. Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the depth as required in
§ 72-58D of this article, and the material upon which the curb is to be
constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even surface.
D. Placing and finishing concrete. The concrete shall be placed in the
forms, and horizontal layers are not to exceed five inches and spaded
sufficiently to eliminate all voids. An approved vibrator may be used
when permitted by the Township Engineer. When indicated or directed,
drainage openings shall be made through the curb at the elevation of
the size required. The curb shall be depressed as indicated or directed.
The top surface of the curb shall be finished true to line and grade in a
smooth, neat and even manner by means of wood floats, and the edges
of the face and back shall be rounded to a radius of not more than 3/4 of
an inch and 1/4 of an inch, respectively, while the concrete is still
plastic. The finished curb shall have a surface free from voids and
honeycomb. Any additional surface finishing required shall be
performed immediately after extrusion.
E. Joints and bar dowels. The curb shall be constructed in uniform lengths
or sections of 20 feet, except where shorter sections are necessary for
closures or curves, but no section shall be less than four feet. Joints
shall be placed between sections of the curb at intervals of not more
§ 72-59 PINE CODE § 72-59
68:322
than 20 feet. These joints shall be at least 1/4 of an inch and shall be
filled with prepared strips of fiber matrix and bitumen at least 1/4 of an
inch in thickness, cut to conform to the cross section of said curb. When
a curved curb joins with a tangent curb, at curb returns and on sharp
curbs where directed, there shall be imbedded in the concrete two bar
dowels No. 4 size and 24 inches in length. The bar shall be placed
three and 12 inches, respectively, below the top of the curb and in the
center of its width and shall extend 12 inches into the curb on each
side of the joint. The portions of the bars extending into the tangent
curb shall be rendered bondless with a coating of approved material
and enclosed, in part, in an approved tube or caps which will provide a
positive clearance pocket of at least 1/2 inch.
F. Removal of forms. When the concrete has set sufficiently, the forms
shall be removed. All joints in the curb shall be opened from top to
bottom immediately after the forms are removed, and the edges
adjacent to the joints shall be sharp and clean-cut. After the forms are
removed, minor defects shall be filled with mortar composed of one part
of cement and two parts of fine aggregate.
G. Curing. The curb shall be cured with either an application of an
approved curing compound or covered with a polyethylene sheet
covering and sealed completely on both sides of the curb by weights for
a period of three days.
H. Backfilling. After the concrete has sufficiently set, the spaces in front
and back of the curb shall be backfilled with approved materials in
layers of not more than six inches in depth. The material shall be
thoroughly compacted in layers of not more than six inches.
I. Dimensions. Concrete curb and wedge curb shall have the dimensions
as set forth on a drawing prepared by the Township Engineer showing
standard dimensions. This drawing shall be available for inspection at
the Pine Township Municipal Building.
J. Depressed curb. Depressed curb shall be required in all such locations
and instances where the Township Engineer shall determine that its use
is appropriate and warranted. Dimensions for depressed curb shall be
as set forth on a drawing prepared by the Township Engineer showing
standard dimensions for same. This drawing shall be available for
inspection at the Pine Township Municipal Building.
K. Curb returns.
(1) Curb returns for alleys and streets shall be provided as follows:
(a) Alleys 20 to 30 feet wide: 6.0 feet radius.
(b) Streets 40 to 50 feet wide: 12.0 feet radius.
(c) Streets 60 to 80 feet wide: 15.0 feet radius.
(2) Depressed curb shall be confined between expansion joints.
§ 72-59 SEWERS § 72-60
68:323
§ 72-60. Replacement of curbs.
When it is necessary to replace an existing standard curb with a depressed
curb at a driveway or to replace a depressed curb, the section of standard
curb or depressed curb to be replaced, as the case may be, shall be removed
by means of a masonry saw, resulting in a smooth, vertical cut to the entire
depth of the curb. The depressed section to be installed shall be poured
to the full length as required for standard curb, less the allowance for the
depression, as set forth in this article. Expansion joints as specified in this
article shall be placed between the new and remaining curb sections.
§ 72-61. Deviations from regulations.
Any deviation from the regulations set forth in this article are subject to the
written approval of the Township Engineer or the Township Supervisors.
§ 72-62. Permit; application.
§ 72-63. Fees.
The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the Township
Supervisors, which fee schedule shall be posted for public inspection in the
office of the Township Manager and shall be based on cost. When sidewalks
or curbs are constructed or reconstructed simultaneously, only one permit
and fee shall be required.
§ 72-64. Violations and penalties.
A. Before constructing or reconstructing any curb or sidewalk, it shall be
the duty of all owners of real estate, contractors, subcontractors,
mechanics and laborers to secure the necessary permit and line and
grade from the Township, authorizing the requested construction or
reconstruction.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate, previous to the
construction or reconstruction of curbing or sidewalks, footways or
gutters on any street or alley in the Township, to make application for a
permit to the Township in order to fix the line and grade for the
construction or reconstruction of curbing, sidewalk or gutters. Such
permit, when duly issued by the Township, shall be sufficient authority
for such owner or his contractor, subcontractor, mechanic or laborer to
commence and complete along such lot or ground as may be described
in such permit and in accordance with the regulations, rules and
specifications fixed and established by this article, and none other, to
construct or reconstruct sidewalks or gutters for which such permit has
been granted. Grade stakes and offset stakes must be approved by the
Township Engineer at the time of issuance of the permit. The Township
will be given five days' notice prior to the date said owner wishes to
commence construction so that there will be sufficient time to place the
construction stakes.
§ 72-60 PINE CODE § 72-64
68:324
A. If any sidewalk or curb thereafter constructed or reconstructed is not
constructed or reconstructed in conformity to the lines and grades
established by the Township Engineer, it shall be the duty of the person
laying the same, upon notice from the Township Engineer or Township
Manager, so to alter and construct the same as to conform to the official
lines and grades. Failure within five days after such notice to comply
with said notice and the requirements of this article shall be a violation
of this article, and each day's neglect and refusal to comply with the
terms of said notice shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or
assisting in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 and
costs of suit and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 72-64 SEWERS § 72-64
68:325

ARTICLE VIII
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 333]
§ 72-65. Definitions.
The term "sidewalk," as used in this article, means and includes all paved
pedestrian pathways situated within public street rights-of-way and
abutting private or public property located within the Township of Pine.
§ 72-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to insure that sidewalks are adequately
maintained and kept in a state of good repair in order to reduce or
otherwise eliminate any condition that would constitute a hazard to or
result in possible injuries to the pedestrian public.
§ 72-67. Duty of property owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to
keep the sidewalk immediately in front of his/her/its property in good
order and repair, and at all times free and clear of all obstruction to safe
and convenient passage. This shall include keeping and maintaining such
sidewalks free and clear of all dirt, trash and similar debris, including the
removal of snow and ice and unauthorized structure or appurtenance.
§ 72-68. Notice of violation; noncompliance; cost recovery.
In the event a property owner fails to properly maintain the sidewalk
abutting his property in accordance with § 72-67 of this article, a notice of
violation shall be issued by the Township and sent to the property owner
by registered or certified mail. The property owner shall take the steps
necessary to correct such violation(s) within a reasonable period of time,
but in no case shall any violation remain uncorrected for a period of more
than 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of violation. Failure
to comply shall subject the property owner to the penalties contained in
§ 72-71 of this article. If the property owner continues to fail to comply
with such notice, the government unit with control over the street (whether
in fee or by easement) may make the necessary repairs, remove any
obstructions or eliminate any hazard to pedestrian safety. In the event that
the government unit making the repairs is not the Township, the Township
may reimburse that government unit for the cost of the same. When the
Township has incurred the costs or reimbursed another government unit for
such costs, those costs, together with a penalty of 10%, shall be paid by
the delinquent property owner and be collected by an action of assumpsit,
or the Township Board of Supervisors may file a municipal lien against the
property.
§ 72-69. Sidewalk specifications.
§ 72-65 SEWERS § 72-69
68:327
§ 72-70. Intergovernmental cooperation.
§ 72-71. Violations and penalties.
Each property owner or agent who violates any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $300.
A. Installation, repair or replacement of sidewalks or sections thereof
along Township roads shall be in accordance with current Township
specifications for same, or as such may be amended in the future. These
specifications shall be made available to the property owner to insure
that the proper requirements are met.
B. Sidewalks installed along county or state roads shall meet the
specifications established by the county or state.
A. The Township may, at its sole discretion, enter into sidewalk
agreements with other government units owning streets within the
Township to provide for enforcement of the provisions of this article
against property owners with sidewalks abutting or contained within
such streets. Such agreements may obligate the Township to reimburse
such government unit for any costs it incurs in making the necessary
repairs, removing any obstructions or eliminating any hazard to
pedestrian safety in regards to sidewalks.
B. Any agreements entered into by the Township pursuant to the
authorization set forth in this article shall be approved by resolution of
the Township Board of Supervisors and shall be in a form approved by
the Solicitor.
C. No sidewalk agreement entered into pursuant to this article shall
constitute a waiver of the Township's governmental immunity for any
reason whatsoever. [Amended 5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 344]
§ 72-69 PINE CODE § 72-71
68:328
Chapter 78
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 5.
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
28.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 38 and
Charter § C-804.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Construction Codes, Uniform — See Ch. 46.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Acceptance of private roads — See Ch. 65.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Standard details — See Ch. 70.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Transportation Improvements Program — See
Ch. 80.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 72-71 SEWERS § 72-71
68:329

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 78-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Subdivision and Land Development Regulations."
§ 78-2. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the residents of the Township, and the specific
purposes are as follows:
§ 78-3. Scope.
A. To assure sites suitable for building, subdivision, land development and
human habitation purposes;
B. To provide for the harmonious and orderly development of the Township
and the integration of subdivision and land development plans with the
Comprehensive Plan;
C. To provide adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air;
D. To provide the proper distribution of population;
E. To reduce the adverse effect of development on the environment;
F. To establish equitable subdivision and land development regulations
and procedures; and
G. To establish conditions for public improvements, which must be met
prior to the Township considering the acceptance of said public
improvements.
A. All subdivisions and land developments shall be in conformity with this
chapter and all standards, specifications, rules and regulations adopted
as a part of or pursuant to this chapter.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a
subdivision created and recorded prior to the enactment of this chapter
unless said lots are redivided or resubdivided; nor is it the intention of
this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere
with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which
the Township is a party; except that where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions upon the land than are imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, it shall be
interpreted that they are in addition to the restrictions of such other
existing regulation or ordinance.
§ 78-1 SEWERS § 78-4
68:331
§ 78-4. Authority to adopt and amend.
The governing body is authorized, by resolution, to adopt and amend
reasonable rules, regulations and fee schedules in connection with the
administration of this chapter, and the applicant, developer, landowner,
resident property owner and subdivider are specifically charged with the
responsibility of knowing and complying with said rules, regulations,
standard details and fee schedules.
§ 78-5. Compliance required.
A. No zoning permit shall be issued for any subdivision, land development
or use upon any lot until a subdivision or land development plan has
been submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with the
following provisions; provided, however, that existing structures where
only the occupancy is being changed without any change in the use
category or new construction or addition to structures and without
change in the site are exempt from this requirement.
B. For purposes of this chapter, "land development" shall be defined to
include any of the following activities:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(b) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
C. No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected and no
land development shall be effected and no street sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water main or other facilities in connection therewith shall be
laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for
the common use of occupants of buildings abutting or to abut thereon,
except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with
the provisions of any other chapters of the Township of Pine Code which
are incorporated herein by reference. Any such referred-to and
incorporated-by-reference provisions shall be applicable to the uses of
land regulated herein as if said referred-to and incorporated provisions
were set forth in their entirety in this chapter.
D. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to occupy, erect, alter or
repair or remove any structure upon land in a subdivision or land
§ 78-4 PINE CODE § 78-5
68:332
§ 78-6. Severability.
§ 78-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective from the date of its adoption. Whenever
used in this chapter, the term "effective date" shall mean adoption date
(reference only).
development may be issued and no structure may be erected in a
subdivision or land development unless and until a subdivision plat
or land development plan has been approved and, where required,
recorded and until the completion of the required improvements in
connection therewith has been completed or assured by means of a
proper completion guaranty as required by this chapter, provided,
notwithstanding said completion guaranty, that no permanent structure
shall be occupied until construction of the required improvements has
been completed and dedicated and the governing body has accepted
said improvements.
E. No consideration of or action on any application will occur until all fees
are paid and the application is filed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
F. No lot in a subdivision will be sold and no physical aspect of land
development will be started until the required improvements have
actually been completed or assured by a completion guaranty in
accordance with this chapter and a final plan has been approved and, if
required, recorded.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
the said provision to any other property, building, or structure.
§ 78-5 SEWERS § 78-7
68:333

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 78-8. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following rules of usage and
interpretation shall apply, unless the context indicates otherwise. In the
interpretation of this chapter, the provisions and rules of this chapter
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires
otherwise.
§ 78-9. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Chapter 84, Zoning, of the Township of Pine Code
shall also apply to this chapter, except when in conflict with the following
definitions, which shall specifically apply to this chapter. As used in this
chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
A. Words in the present tense include the future.
B. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.
C. The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory.
D. The word "lot" shall include the word "plot" or "parcel."
E. The word "person" shall include an individual, firm, or corporation.
F. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
G. The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
H. The word "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
I. The words "either. . .or" indicate that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply singly but not in any combination.
J. The word "Township" means the Township of Pine, Pennsylvania.
K. The word "county" means the County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania.
L. Any use of the gender specific words (his, hers, him, her) shall imply
both genders.
M. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
N. When a word or phrase is not specifically defined in this chapter, or
referenced to another chapter, then the common meaning of the word
or phrase, or the definition contained in Webster's Dictionary most
current version shall apply.
§ 78-8 SEWERS § 78-9
68:335
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start
of construction or development, including but not limited to an application
for a building permit or for the approval of a subdivision plan or plot or
development plan.
BUFFER YARD — A portion of the site intended to provide a visual barrier
and physical protection between adjacent land uses.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water, within a development site and
designed and intended for preservation and for the use or enjoyment of
residents of the development, but not including streets, off-street parking
areas, crosswalks, setback distances or areas set aside for public facilities.
Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but may
contain such improvements as are in the subdivision or development plan
as finally approved and as are required by applicable Township standards
and appropriate for the recreation of residents. Common open space may
be publicly dedicated or may be owned by a homeowners' association
consisting of the landowners within a development or may be owned by a
single landowner; provided, however, that in the event of ownership by a
single landowner or homeowners' association, such parcel or parcels shall
be subject to restrictive covenants acceptable to the Township and sufficient
to satisfy its preservation against further development and to preserve its
character.
COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Financial security
satisfactory to the governing body, in the percentage amounts of estimated
construction costs specified by Section 509 (53 P.S. § 10509) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as sufficient to construct the
improvements and to guarantee their maintenance for a period of 1 1/2
years from the date of their acceptance by the Township, whichever is
applicable, together with an agreement to the effect that the developer will
install and/or maintain required improvements.
CRITICAL AREAS — Areas of a subdivision or land development particularly
subject to erosion and sedimentation, such as areas not covered with
vegetation due to grading, cutting or filling, which contain exposed subsoils
or mixtures of soil horizons or excessively long slopes and steep grades.
CROSSWALK — A publicly or privately owned delineated right-of-way for
pedestrian use extending from one side of a street to the opposite side of
the street.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, tenant or any
other legal entity who makes or causes to be made, or takes any planning
action to make, a subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS — Minimum standards for the layout by
which a subdivision or land development is developed.
§ 78-9 PINE CODE § 78-9
68:336
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any
permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A currently licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFESSIONAL — A person certified to perform
wetlands delineation in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FRINGE LOTS — Residential lots, located along the perimeter of a planned
residential development (PRD) parcel where property lines are adjacent
to other land uses. Fringe lots within any proposed PRD must conform to
the standards set forth and further defined in Chapter 84, Zoning, of the
Township of Pine Code.
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS — Minimum standards for the
construction of the required public improvements, such as streets,
guardrails, street signs, curbs, sidewalks, retaining walls, water mains,
sewers, drainage facilities, public utilities and other items reasonably
required to render the land suitable for the use proposed and in compliance
with the purposes of this chapter.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land. The signature of any single landowner holding
land in joint tenancy shall be considered as binding upon the others.
LOT — A designated or engineered parcel, tract, or area of land, established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, conveyed, sold,
developed or built upon as a unit.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 78-9 SEWERS § 78-9
68:337
MONUMENT — A concrete monument with a flat top at least four inches in
diameter, at least 36 inches in length, containing a copper or brass dowel
(plug).
PARK (or DEDICATED OPEN SPACE or RECREATION LAND) — A parcel of
land integrated within a subdivision, planned residential development, or
land development that is dedicated, either publicly or privately, specifically
for use as a park, open space and/or active or passive recreation area.
PERENNIAL STREAMS — Blue-lined streams as designated on United
States Geological Survey mapping and further defined as a nonintermittent
flow of water that supports or is capable of supporting year-round aquatic
fauna.
PINE CODE — The Code of the Township of Pine, which constitutes a
codification of the complete body of the ordinances of the Township, as such
is amended from time to time.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor, licensed in Pennsylvania, showing the
construction details of streets, drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other
public improvements as required by this chapter.
PLAN, DEVELOPMENT — The provisions for development of a lot, parcel,
tract, or area of land, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating
to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use
or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common
open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development
plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or development plan or
plat, prepared for official recording as required by statute, which includes
all information required by this chapter.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Plan and/or Official Map or other
such plans or portions thereof as may be adopted or followed pursuant to
statute or ordinance, for the areas of the Township in which the subdivision
or land development is located or proposed.
PLAN, PREAPPLICATION — A submittal prior to applications for
preliminary plan and final plan approvals and required for all planned
residential developments and for subdivisions and land developments
greater than 10 acres in size; and requiring Resource Inventory Mapping
and a sketch plan.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development plan,
in lesser detail than a final plan, which includes all information required by
this chapter.
PLAN, RECORDED — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of Allegheny County, the Township and any other
endorsements required by any statute or ordinance and which is intended
to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 78-9 PINE CODE § 78-9
68:338
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient features of a tract and its surroundings and the general
layout of a proposed subdivision or land development.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805,
Article I, § 107, 53 P.S. § 10107, as amended, and as it may be amended in
the future.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate, sometimes public,
ownership separating a street from other adjacent properties or from
another street.
RESOURCE INVENTORY — An inventory of existing natural features of the
site, submitted on a scaled drawing, that illustrates slopes; woodlands and
other existing vegetative cover; streams, ponds and other watercourses;
wetlands; and other significant historical and cultural features of the site.
The Resource Inventory shall include the requirements set forth in the
development standards of this chapter.
RESUBDIVISION — Any plat adjustment, replatting, redevelopment or
resubdivision of land limited solely to changes in locations of lot lines (but
with no change in the number of lots) on the approved final plan and
recorded plan. Other replattings, redevelopments, and resubdivisions shall
be considered as constituting a new subdivision or development of land.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on two generally parallel streets, excluding service streets, with vehicular
access solely from one street.
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch plan, preliminary plan or final plan
by the Environmental Advisory Council, Parks and Recreation Commission,
Planning Commission, or the governing body to determine compliance with
this chapter and the administrative rules, regulations, design standards and
improvements specifications enacted pursuant thereto.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel over the street.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COMMUNITY — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to treat
sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a publicly owned central treatment and disposal plant.
SEDIMENT — The resulting residue from erosion.
SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which raw sewage is
changed into solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate further treatment
and final disposal.
§ 78-9 SEWERS § 78-9
68:339
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. "Sight distance" measurement shall be made from
a point 4.5 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5 foot
above the center line of the road surface.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by
measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
STEEP SLOPE — Any land area with a grade that exceeds four horizontal to
one vertical (4:1), or 25%.
STREAM — A channel through which surface water is conveyed, meeting
the Army Corps of Engineers' definition of either a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, ephemeral stream, stable stream, channelized stream,
or ditch acting as a stream.
STREET, ARTERIAL (PRINCIPAL OR MINOR) — A street serving a large
volume of comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic, including all
facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation; a highway on which preference is given to
the through movement of traffic at the expense of cross traffic; and a street
which meets the criteria for an arterial street as set forth in the Township's
Comprehensive Plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which carries traffic from minor local
streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a
subdivision or land development.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street which intersects another street with its
access only at one end and terminates in a vehicular turnaround at its other
end. The length of any cul-de-sac street shall be no longer than the length
needed to accommodate a maximum of 50 dwelling units or a maximum of
4,000 feet, whichever shall be less. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be
measured from the nearest edge of the pavement of the nearest intersecting
street (which is not itself a cul-de-sac street) to the center of the circle
forming the cul-de-sac.[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
STREET, MINOR LOCAL — A street which is not a cul-de-sac, but which
is used primarily to provide direct access to abutting properties and which
may also provide access to other streets of a higher classification.
STREET, PRIVATE — A strip of land or roadway intended for use as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one
lot. A private street is intended for use of only the lots served rather than
the general public.
STREET, PUBLIC — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way not
limited to the roadway, intended for general public use as a means of
vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot.
The term "public street" includes any thoroughfare intended for public use.
Public streets are further classified according to the functions they perform.
§ 78-9 PINE CODE § 78-9
68:340
STREET, SERVICE — A street, generally parallel and adjacent to a property
line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required for
improvement and use of the street and used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation or any other
legal entity or agent of the same, which undertakes the subdivision of land,
as defined by this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, improvement or building or lot
development.
SUBDIVISION, SIMPLE — Any single-dwelling-unit residential subdivision
in which all lots meet all requirements of this chapter and all other
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Township without a variance.
SURVEYOR — A currently licensed surveyor registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TILE DISPOSAL FIELD — A system of open-jointed or perforated pipe laid
in the upper strata of the soil to distribute sewage effluent into the soil for
absorption and evaporation.
TREE OF SIGNIFICANCE — Any tree or group of trees with a minimum
twelve-inch diameter at breast height (DBH).
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, COMMUNITY — A system for supplying
and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings, but generally not confined to one neighborhood.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system for supplying and
distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
WETLANDS — In accordance with the definitions/regulations established
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including
swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WOODLANDS — A community of plants characterized by areas, groves, or
stands of trees. Area measurements of woodlands shall be understood to
include the canopy. It shall be further defined as an area or stand of trees
whose combined canopy is 1/2 acre or more in extent and consists of at least
50% of canopy trees which have a diameter at breast height (DBH) of three
inches or more.
§ 78-9 SEWERS § 78-9
68:341

ARTICLE III
Subdivision Review
§ 78-10. Informal review process and requirements.
An applicant may informally review subdivision plans with the Planning
Commission by requesting an appointment. Such discussions and informal
review will alert the Commission to major new subdivisions, familiarize the
subdivider with plan requirements and submission procedures, and identify
potential problem areas with the proposed subdivision. This informal review
procedure shall not constitute a formal application for preliminary
subdivision approval.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eleven copies of the sketch plan and application shall be submitted
to the Zoning Officer.
(2) Submissions for informal review must be received 10 calendar days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting where the review is
requested.
B. Submission requirements for informal review. An applicant requesting
an informal review shall:
(1) Complete an application for informal review of the subdivision
plan. The application form shall be as provided by the Township.
(2) Prepare a sketch plan that comprises the entire site proposed for
development; the sketch plan shall:
(a) Be legibly drawn and clearly show the proposed development
plan, the date prepared, and the name(s) of the applicant and/
or owner and their agents.
(b) Include information known by the developer which will assist
the Planning Commission and Township staff in making their
recommendations, including but not limited to a simple sketch
of the proposed layout of lots, streets, existing and proposed
public improvements and community facilities, North point,
significant topographical, physical, scenic, historic or natural
resource features, recreational areas or improvements, surface
water, indication of areas exceeding a slope of 25%, tract
boundaries and legend and a description of the land
characteristics, existing covenants and area surrounding the
proposed subdivision.
C. At informal review, the Planning Commission and Township staff can
review the proposed subdivision plans and recommend guidelines for
resource protection standards and potential conflicts in the plan with
Township's subdivision standards.
§ 78-10 SEWERS § 78-10
68:343
§ 78-11. Preapplication review process and requirements.
Prior to making application for preliminary approval, proposed subdivisions
in excess of 10 acres of gross land area, and not meeting the definition of a
simple subdivision, shall be reviewed by both the Township's Environmental
Advisory Council and its Parks and Recreation Commission. This
preapplication review procedure shall not constitute a formal application
for preliminary subdivision approval. The recommendations of the
Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks and Recreation Commission
shall be communicated to the Planning Commission, the governing body and
the applicant.
D. The Planning Commission shall not formally act on plans presented for
informal review. The Planning Commission may offer suggestions that
may assist the applicant in complying with the Township's subdivision
standards.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eight copies of the preapplication plans shall be submitted to both
the Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks and Recreation
Commission Liaisons for this review.
(2) Submissions for preapplication review must be received 10
calendar days prior to the Environmental Advisory Council and the
Parks and Recreation Commission meetings where the review is
requested.
B. Submission requirements for preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council. An applicant requesting a
preapplication review by the Environmental Advisory Council shall:
(1) Complete an application for preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council. The application form shall be as
provided by the Township.
(2) Prepare and submit plans for the preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council as follows:
(a) The applicant shall prepare a scaled Resource Inventory
Mapping (on accurate topographical surveys) showing all
natural and physical features of the site as required by the
development standards in this chapter.
(b) The plans shall clearly show the proposed subdivision plan and
the date prepared.
(c) The plans shall identify any known existing or potential
environmental problems and recommended plans and
programs for the promotion and conservation of natural
resources.
§ 78-10 PINE CODE § 78-11
68:344
(d) The plans shall show the manner in which the proposed
development will protect and improve the quality of the
environment within the Township and include a narrative
report on conservation measures proposed.
(e) The plans shall index all open areas within the proposed plan
or immediately adjacent to the proposed plan that will be
publicly and privately owned, including but not limited to
public-owned areas, parks, open space, etc.; private open
areas; flood-prone areas; swamps; and unique natural features.
(f) The submission shall include a wetlands delineation report
when wetlands are suspected on the site. The wetlands
delineation report shall be prepared by an environmental
professional in accordance with the Federal Manual of
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands of January
10, 1989 (as amended).
(g) The plans shall show areas proposed for disturbance, the
proposed limits of work, site improvements proposed, grading
proposed and requirements in connection therewith,
stormwater management concepts and other elements that
may cause site disturbance.
(h) The plans shall include a tree inventory report, in table form,
that includes:
[1] Each existing tree located within an area proposed to be
disturbed by development and with a minimum of twelveinch
diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be included.
[2] The table shall also include each such tree's species,
diameter at breast height (DBH) and whether the tree is
proposed to be retained, removed or removed and
mitigated as a part of the proposed development.
(i) The plans submitted pursuant to this subsection for
preapplication review shall:
[1] Be legibly drawn.
[2] Be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet for plans
that contain 10 acres to 50 acres and to a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet for plans that contain over 50 acres.
[3] Cover the entire tract proposed for development.
[4] Show the existing topography of the site.
[5] Show the location of all existing streams, ponds, or
watercourses.
§ 78-11 SEWERS § 78-11
68:345
[6] Show the location of existing tree cover (canopy), and
show the percentage of tree cover (canopy)/woodlands.
[7] Show the location of all trees located within an area
proposed to be disturbed by development with a minimum
twelve-inch diameter at breast height (DBH). Each tree
shall be identified with an individual key number that
relates to the tree inventory report required in this
section.
[8] Show the location of steep slopes.
[9] Show the percentages of the steep slopes.
[10] Show any existing embankments or other known manmade
changes in the topography.
[11] Show any existing or proposed retaining walls.
[12] Show any existing structures or structure remnants.
[13] Show any floodplain areas.
[14] Show any active, abandoned, or capped oil wells.
[15] Show the locations of all wells, septic tanks and leech
fields, or underground storage tanks.
(3) Prior to the Environmental Advisory Council's site walk, the
applicant shall identify and mark all trees located within an area
proposed to be disturbed by development and measuring at least
12 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) with a physical
marking. The applicant shall provide the Environmental Advisory
Council with a separate and distinct means for marking disputed
trees of significance identified during its site walk.
(a) Should the applicant and the Environmental Advisory Council
agree that a tree is a tree of significances defined in this
chapter and that it must be removed for the development of the
site, then a mitigation report must be submitted identifying
each such tree(s) proposed to be removed, and the proposed
mitigation plantings. The tree of significance mitigation
plantings shall also be identified on the plans required in this
section and the required landscape plan.
(b) Should the applicant and the Environmental Advisory Council,
following a site walk, agree that any particular twelve-inch
diameter (or larger) tree, measured at breast height (DBH),
does not qualify as a tree of significance, then the applicant
shall not be required to preserve or mitigate such tree.
(c) Should the applicant and the Environmental Advisory Council,
following a site walk, disagree about the classification of any
§ 78-11 PINE CODE § 78-11
68:346
twelve-inch diameter (or larger) tree, measured at breast
height (DBH), as a tree of significance as defined in this
chapter, then the applicant shall be required to prepare a
disputed tree of significance report. Such report shall provide
a photograph of each such disputed tree and a written
explanation as to why the applicant believes such disputed
tree should be excluded from tree of significance status. The
Environmental Advisory Council shall also provide its
recommendation regarding each such disputed tree to the
Planning Commission and governing body and include the
same with its report reviewing the proposed development.
(4) Prior to the Environmental Advisory Council's site walk, the
applicant shall identify and physically mark the limits of all area(s)
proposed to be disturbed by development. Such marking shall be
separate and distinct from the required marking of all trees
measuring at least 12 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH).
C. Submission requirements for preapplication review by the Parks and
Recreation Committee. An applicant requesting preapplication review
by the Parks and Recreation Committee shall:
(1) Complete an application for preapplication review by the Parks and
Recreation Committee. The application form shall be as provided
by the Township.
(2) Prepare and submit plans for the preapplication review by the
Parks and Recreation Committee as follows:
(a) The applicant shall prepare a plan set in accordance with
§ 84-119 of Chapter 84, Zoning.
D. The Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall:
(1) After review of the submitted material and a site walk of the
property in question (if such is determined to be required by either
body), prepare their findings and generate reports to the Planning
Commission and governing body.
(2) These reports may make recommendations regarding the proposed
subdivision plan and the steps necessary to help preserve the
environment and any steps necessary to provide adequate
recreational improvements to satisfy the applicable provisions of
the Township of Pine Code.
(3) If the Environmental Advisory Council or the Parks and Recreation
Commission determines, following its review of the originally
submitted material and its site walk, that it needs more information
to properly generate its report, it shall promptly notify the
applicant of the same and specify what further information it
needs.
§ 78-11 SEWERS § 78-12
68:347
§ 78-12. Preliminary subdivision plan process and requirements.
Prior to making application for final approval, preliminary subdivision plan
review shall be required. The preliminary application shall be reviewed
by both the Planning Department of the County of Allegheny and by the
Planning Commission, which shall make recommendations regarding
approval, approval with conditions or the denial of the application to the
governing body.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eleven copies of the preliminary subdivision application, containing
the information specified in this section, and the required
application fee shall be submitted to the Township's Zoning Officer.
(2) Submissions for preliminary approval consideration must be
received by the Zoning Officer 24 calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting when the review by the Planning
Commission is requested or 24 calendar days prior to the Board of
Supervisors meeting when the review by the governing body is
requested.
(3) One copy of the plan submission shall be submitted in an electronic
format on a compact disk (CD). The plans shall be in either the
.TIFF format or Adobe .PDF format.
B. Submission requirements for preliminary subdivision plan review. An
applicant submitting a preliminary subdivision application shall:
(1) Complete an application form for preliminary subdivision approval.
The application form shall be provided by the Township.
(2) Prepare and submit plans for the preliminary subdivision review as
follows:
(a) A cover page for the drawing set, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the subdivision and the date the
plan was prepared.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the subdivider/owner and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or landscape
architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[4] A vicinity map, which shows the tract proposed for
subdivision shown on a current Township Zoning Map. The
vicinity map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed subdivision. The site proposed
for subdivision shall be indicated.
[5] A sheet index of all plans in the plan set.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:348
(b) The subdivision development plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point
and the date the plan was prepared and the latest revision
date.
[6] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[7] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line.
[8] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets. Names of streets, which are
not a continuation of existing streets, shall not duplicate or
closely approximate, phonetically, the names of other
streets located within the Township.
[9] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the street right-of-way line or the front
yard building setback line for cul-de-sac lots.
[10] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents
inhabiting the subdivision.
[11] Existing parks and common open spaces and permanent
buildings within or adjacent to the tract or within such
close proximity of the tract so as to affect the design of the
subdivision.
[12] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[13] Existing utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
[14] The approximate locations of existing sanitary sewers,
water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins,
surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements, and all aboveground or underground items
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:349
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[15] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[16] The access to the stormwater detention area, with the
grade percentage of the access road shown.
[17] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[18] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[20] The site data information, which shall include:
[a] The gross area of the parcel.
[b] The number of dwelling units.
[c] The proposed density.
[d] The gross area of common open space or areas
designated for use as public grounds.
[e] The net area of common open space or areas
designated for use as public grounds.
[f] The percentage of the parcel to be provided as
common open space or areas designated for use as
public grounds.
(c) The grading and utility plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s), surveyor(s), landscape
architect(s) and/or architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:350
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way.
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[20] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets. Names of streets, which are
not a continuation of existing streets, shall not duplicate or
closely approximate, phonetically, the names of other
streets located within the Township.
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:351
[21] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the street right-of-way line or the front
yard building setback line for cul-de-sac lots.
[22] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenants for residents
inhabiting the subdivision.
[23] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets.
[24] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[26] The required setback as required by the applicable
development standards of the Township and other
applicable regulations for all watercourses, floodplains,
wetlands, etc.
(d) Scaled resource inventory mapping (on accurate topographical
surveys) showing all natural and physical features of the site as
required by the development standards in this chapter which
shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:352
[9] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[10] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[11] The percentage of existing slopes within the tract and 100
feet immediately adjacent to the parcel proposed for
subdivision, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[12] The areas, shown as polygons, of all existing slopes from
25% to 40%, and existing slopes that exceed 40%.
[13] A legend that clearly identifies the symbols used to show
or indicate all of the natural features within the site.
[14] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or existing underground
items within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto,
with the direction of flow indicated.
[15] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[16] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, tree cover
and other natural features, including the percentage of the
site covered by woodlands or tree cover.
[17] The existing man-made features, such as retaining walls,
structures, embankments, and existing land uses.
[18] The areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or
stormwaters.
[19] The areas which have been the subject of commercial
forestry operations within the last five-year period.
[20] A plan for the mitigation and minimization of disturbance
to the natural resources on the site and providing detail of
any required or proposed revegetation for the site.
(e) The preliminary erosion and sedimentation plan and
preliminary stormwater control plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:353
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:354
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[20] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets.
[21] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the street right-of-way line or the front
yard building setback line for cul-de-sac lots.
[22] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents
inhabiting the subdivision.
[23] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets.
[24] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[27] The areas where silt fencing will be installed.
[28] The areas where the topsoil will be stockpiled during the
grading activity.
[29] The sedimentation traps to be installed during
construction.
[30] The construction driveway(s) that will be installed for use
during plan construction.
[31] The legend that clearly indicates the soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures that will be implemented
during construction.
[32] The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, which
shall be prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102) and the standards and specifications of the
Allegheny County Conservation District.
[33] The preliminary stormwater control plan.
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:355
(f) The landscaping/recreation plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line
and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled on
slopes that have been created as a result of the grading
activity.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:356
[18] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[19] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[20] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled as a
result of the grading activity needed to install the
underground utilities.
[21] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets.
[22] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the street right-of-way line or the front
yard building setback line for cul-de-sac lots.
[23] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents
inhabiting the subdivision.
[24] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets.
[25] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[26] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[27] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[28] The location and design of recreation areas, including a
detail of the proposed location and design of the recreation
area and all facilities at a scale to sufficiently show the
type of recreation area and facilities proposed. The
recreation areas shall be in accordance with the recreation
area requirements outlined in the development standards
of this chapter.
[29] The location and widths of walks, sidewalks, trails and the
proposed use of trails where they are not limited to
pedestrian use, including a detail of the proposed walks,
sidewalks and trails at a scale to sufficiently show the area
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:357
and facilities proposed. The walks, sidewalks and trails
shall be in accordance with the Township's adopted
specifications for construction of walks, sidewalks and
trails, as contained in its 1992 Park, Recreation and Open
Space Plan,74 as amended, and the parks and recreation
guidelines contained in the development standards of this
chapter.
[30] The location and design of all buffer yards, landscaping
and seeding proposed, showing the height and type of
screening, including a detail of the proposed buffer yards
and landscaping at a scale to sufficiently show the area of
buffer yards and landscaping. The buffer yards,
landscaping, and seeding shall be in accordance the
development standards of this chapter.
[31] The location of the proposed common open space or areas
designated for use as public grounds, together with the
proposed ownership and maintenance arrangements for
such land.
[32] The location and dimensions of entrances, common areas,
parking facilities, signs, outdoor lighting facilities, fences
and/or walls, fire lanes and other site improvements or
amenities, including a detail drawing of each proposed site
improvement or amenity at a scale to sufficiently show the
site improvement or amenity.
[33] The landscaping detail which shall also be shown to be
prepared in accordance with the development standards in
this chapter and § 84-111 of Chapter 84 of the Township of
Pine Code.
(g) The preliminary engineering and environmental impact
statement, on 8 1/2 inch by 11 inch paper, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or architect(s).
[4] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
74.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:358
[5] A synopsis of the stormwater controls that will be utilized
to control the stormwater runoff from the proposed
development.
[6] A synopsis of the source and routing of the water supply to
the proposed development.
[7] A synopsis of the feasibility of connection to the existing
sewerage system, including the nearest public sewers and
service load of the development and if capacity at the
treatment plant is capable of accepting the added capacity
from this development.
(h) The plan narrative, on 8 1/2 inch by 11 inch paper, which shall
contain:
[1] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or architect(s).
[4] The legend, the date the narrative was prepared and the
date the narrative was last revised.
[5] A statement outlining the proposed use of all building lots.
[6] A list of proposed house numbers referenced by lot
numbers.
[7] A statement of the proposed business or industry if such
are proposed as a part of the proposed subdivision.
[8] Any requested waivers from the Township regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property, with
statements as to why the granting of the waivers
requested are necessary and in the public interest.
[9] A schedule, where development is to be phased over a
period of years, showing proposed times for the filing of
applications for final approval for each phase of the
proposed development plan and estimates of construction
times for each phase.
[10] A statement of public interest setting forth the reasons
why the proposed subdivision plan is in the public interest,
how it meets the density standards, and how it is
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and meets all
Township development standards outlined in this chapter.
[11] A statement outlining the proposed recreational areas and
improvements, including a narrative description of the
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-12
68:359
proposed improvements, quantities to be provided and the
estimated construction costs, as based on the provisions
of the parks and recreation guidelines outlined in the
development guidelines of this chapter.
(i) Additional reports.
[1] The proposed restrictions or covenants to be imposed
upon the use of the land, buildings, and structures. If none
are proposed, then a statement to that effect shall be
included.
[2] A wetland delineation report prepared by an
environmental professional shall be required when
wetlands are suspected on site, in accordance with the
Federal Manual of Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, of January 10, 1989 (as amended).
[3] A geotechnical report prepared by a soils engineer.
[4] The stormwater management report prepared by an
engineer, which shall be prepared in accordance with the
development standards of this chapter.
[5] The Environmental Advisory Council and Parks and
Recreation Committee report of its preapplication review
findings.
[6] Traffic report as outlined in § 78-14.
[7] Any other reasonable data, evidence, plans, statements, or
information that the Planning Commission or the
governing body may require.
(3) All preliminary subdivision plans shall:
(a) Be legibly drawn.
(b) Be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
(c) Be drawn on a sheet size not to exceed 30 by 40 inches.
(d) Be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, planner,
landscape architect, or registered surveyor in accordance with
standard architectural and engineering practices.
(e) Not duplicate or be the same in spelling or alike pronunciation
with any other planned residential development or subdivision.
(f) Have an assigned project number, date drawn, sheet number
and latest revision date, as established by the preparer.
(g) Be sealed by the architect(s), surveyors(s) and/or engineer(s)
of record.
§ 78-12 PINE CODE § 78-12
68:360
§ 78-13. Final subdivision plan process and requirements.
An application for final subdivision approval may be for all land included in
the subdivision plan or, to the extent set forth in the preliminary approval,
for a section thereof. Said application shall be within the time specified,
if any, by the written communication granting preliminary subdivision
approval and accompanied by the required application fee.
C. Action on preliminary subdivision application.
(1) Approval, approval with conditions or denial of the preliminary
subdivision plan shall be by the governing body and shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Section 508 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508.
A. Application for final subdivision approval.
(1) Nine copies of the final subdivision application containing the
information specified in this section and the required application
fee shall be submitted to the Township's Zoning Officer.
(2) One copy of the plan submission shall be submitted in an electronic
format on a compact disk (CD). The plans shall be in either the
.TIFF format or Adobe .PDF format.
(3) Submissions for final approval consideration must be received by
the Zoning Officer 24 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting when the review by the Planning Commission is requested
or 24 days prior to the Board of Supervisors meeting when the
review by the governing body is requested
(4) Submission requirements for an application for final subdivision
plan approval shall include:
(a) A completed application for final subdivision plan approval.
The application form for the same shall be as provided by the
Township. All plans shall:
[1] Be legibly drawn.
[2] Be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
[3] Be drawn on a sheet size not to exceed 30 by 40 inches.
[4] Be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, planner,
landscape architect, or registered surveyor in accordance
with standard architectural and engineering practices.
[5] Not duplicate or be the same in spelling or alike
pronunciation with any other planned residential
development or subdivision.
§ 78-12 SEWERS § 78-13
68:361
[6] Have an assigned project number, date drawn, sheet
number and latest revision date established by the
preparer.
[7] Be sealed by the architect(s) and/or engineer(s) and/or
surveyor(s) of record.
(b) The plan set of the subdivision shall include:
[1] A cover page for the drawing set, which shall contain:
[a] The proposed name of the subdivision and the date the
plan was prepared.
[b] The location by township, county and state.
[c] The names and addresses of the developer/owner and
principal engineer and/or architects and/or
surveyor(s).
[2] A vicinity map, which shows the tract proposed for
subdivision shown on a current Township Zoning Map. The
vicinity map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed subdivision. The site proposed
for subdivision shall be indicated.
[3] A sheet index of all plans in the plan set.
(c) The plan for recording, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point
and the date the plan was prepared and the latest revision
date.
[6] A vicinity map, which shows the tract for development
shown on a current Township Zoning Map. The vicinity
map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed subdivision. The site proposed
for subdivision shall be indicated.
[7] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line with length of course in feet and hundredths
and with bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:362
[8] The layout of streets, including names and widths of
proposed streets.
[9] The layout, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot areas and lot
widths provided at the front yard building setback line
with length of course in feet and hundredths and with
bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
[10] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for residents inhabiting
the subdivision.
[11] Parks and common open spaces and permanent buildings
within the tract.
[12] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[13] Utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
[14] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[15] The stormwater detention area, with the access shown.
[16] The existing watercourses, floodplains, woodlands, and
wetlands.
[17] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[18] The endorsements, signature lines, and professional seal
areas required by the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds
office.
(d) The final subdivision plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point
and the date the plan was prepared and the latest revision
date.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:363
[6] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[7] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line.
[8] The layout of streets, including names and widths of
streets.
[9] The layout of lots, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot areas
and lot widths provided at the front yard building setback
line.
[10] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for residents inhabiting
the subdivision.
[11] Existing parks and open spaces and permanent buildings
within or adjacent to the tract or within such close
proximity of the tract so as to affect the design of the
development.
[12] All lots and parcels shall be delineated by bearings and
distances.
[13] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision. (Unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[14] Existing utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
[15] The locations of existing sanitary sewers, water mains,
storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface water drains
and surface water drainage easements and all
aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[16] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[17] The access to the stormwater detention area, with the
grade percentage of the access road shown.
[18] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, tree
masses, trees of significance, and other features.
[19] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets.
[20] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:364
(e) The site data information, which shall include:
[1] The gross area of the parcel.
[2] The number of dwelling units.
[3] The proposed density.
[4] The gross area of common open space or areas designated
for use as public grounds.
[5] The net area of common open space or areas designated
for use as public grounds.
[6] The percentage of the parcel to be provided as common
open space or areas designated for use as public grounds.
(f) Detailed construction and design drawings for all streets and
all other related improvements to be constructed in the
proposed subdivision, including but not limited to typical cross
sections and profiles.
(g) The grading and utility plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:365
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated that will be used to supply this plan with service.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[20] The layout of streets, including names and widths of
streets.
[21] The layout of lots, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot areas
and lot widths provided at the front yard building setback
line.
[22] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenants for residents inhabiting
the subdivision.
[23] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets.
[24] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:366
(h) Resource inventory mapping, prepared in accordance with the
development standards of this chapter, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) and/or
architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[10] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[11] The percentage of existing slopes within the tract and 100
feet immediately adjacent to the parcel proposed for
subdivision, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[12] The areas, shown as polygons, have all existing slopes
from 25% to 40% percent and existing slopes that exceed
40%.
[13] A legend that clearly identifies the symbols used to show
or indicate all of the natural features within the site.
[14] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or existing underground
items within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto,
with the direction of flow indicated.
[15] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:367
[16] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, tree cover,
and other natural features.
[17] The existing man-made features, such as retaining walls,
structures, embankments, and existing land uses.
[18] The areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or
stormwaters.
[19] The areas, which have been the subject of commercial
forestry operations within the last five-year period.
(i) The final erosion and sedimentation plan and final stormwater
control plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be subdivided indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:368
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[20] The layout of streets, including names and widths of
streets.
[21] The layout of lots, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot areas
and lot widths provided at the front yard building setback
line.
[22] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for residents inhabiting
the subdivision.
[23] The final grade percentages of all streets.
[24] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[27] The areas where silt fencing will be installed.
[28] The areas where the topsoil will be stockpiled during the
grading activity.
[29] The sedimentation traps to be installed during
construction.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:369
[30] The construction driveway(s) that will be installed for use
during plan construction.
[31] The legend that clearly indicates the soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures that will be implemented
during construction.
[32] The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, which
shall be prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102) and the standards and specifications of the
Allegheny County Conservation District and shall bear the
approval of the Allegheny County Conservation District
thereon.
[33] The final stormwater control plan, which shall be prepared
in accordance with § 84-125 of Chapter 84 of the Township
of Pine Code.
(j) The landscaping/recreation plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the subdivision.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the subdivider(s)/owner(s)
and principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
landscape architect(s) and/or surveyor(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line
and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:370
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled on
slopes that have been created as a result of the grading
activity.
[18] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all underground items within the tract or immediately
adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow indicated.
[19] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[20] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled as a
result of the grading activity needed to install the
underground utilities.
[21] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
[22] The layout of streets, including names and widths of
streets.
[23] The layout of lots, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot areas
and lot widths provided at the front yard building setback
line.
[24] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents
inhabiting the subdivision.
[25] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets.
[26] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:371
[27] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[28] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[29] The location and design of recreation areas, including a
detailed drawing of the proposed location and design of
the recreation area and all facilities at a scale to
sufficiently show the type of recreation area and facilities
proposed. The recreation areas shall be in accordance with
the recreation area requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 84, Zoning.
[30] The location and widths of walks, sidewalks, trails and the
proposed use of trails where they are not limited to
pedestrian use, including a detail of the proposed walks,
sidewalks and trails at a scale to sufficiently show the area
and facilities proposed. The walks, sidewalks and trails
shall be in accordance with the adopted Township
specifications for construction of walks, sidewalks and
trails, as set forth in the Township's 1992 Park, Recreation
and Open Space Plan,75 as amended, and Chapter 84,
Zoning, and the trail study of 2005, as amended.
[31] The location and design of all buffer yards, landscaping
and seeding proposed, showing the height and type of
screening, including a detail of the proposed buffer yards
and landscaping at a scale to sufficiently show the area of
buffer yards and landscaping. The buffer yards,
landscaping, and seeding shall be in accordance with the
specifications for buffer yards, landscaping and seeding
outlined in Chapter 84, Zoning.
[32] The location of the proposed common open space or areas
designed for use as public grounds, together with the
proposed ownership and maintenance arrangements for
such land.
[33] The location and dimensions of entrances, common areas,
parking facilities, signs, outdoor lighting facilities, fences
and/or walls, fire lanes and other site improvements or
amenities, including a detail drawing of each proposed site
75.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:372
improvement or amenity at a scale to sufficiently show the
site improvement or amenity.
[34] The landscaping which shall be shown to be prepared in
accordance with the Township of Pine Code.
(k) The formal restrictions or covenants, if any, to be imposed upon
the use of the land, buildings, and structures. Such restrictions
or covenants proposed shall be in form for recording. If no such
restrictions or covenants are proposed, then a statement to
that effect shall be included.
(l) The final stormwater management report prepared by an
engineer, in accordance with § 84-125 of the Township of Pine
Code.
(m) An acknowledgment by the owner(s) of his/their adoption of
the subdivision plan and the dedication of any applicable
streets, rights-of-way, or other public areas.
(n) The applicant's itemized estimate of the cost of all
improvements he is required to install for the following items,
utilizing the standard cost data tabulation sheets provided by
the Township:
[1] Site improvements (including grading and paving).
[2] Park and recreation improvements.
[3] Landscape improvements (including screening and buffer
yards).
(o) Evidence in the form required by the governing body of
arrangements that have been made with private utility
companies or other agencies for supplying every lot in the
subdivision with gas (if gas is to be supplied), electricity, water
and sewage disposal.
(p) Evidence that all required approvals and permits for the
subdivision or land development have been secured or have
been applied for from the appropriate Township, county,
commonwealth and federal officials, offices or agencies.
(q) For proposals in floodplains, the application for final
subdivision approval shall additionally include:
[1] Topographic contour lines at an interval of two feet.
[2] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplains, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-13
68:373
[3] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929.
[4] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures.
[5] A document, certified by a registered professional
surveyor, engineer or architect, which states that the
proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the one-hundred-yearflood
elevations, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures, which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure or
development.
[6] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(r) Any other reasonable data, evidence, plans, statements, or
information, which the Planning Commission or the governing
body may require.
B. Action on final subdivision application.
(1) Final approval, with or without conditions, if warranted, shall be
given by the governing body according to procedures set forth in
Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10508.
(2) Failure of the applicant to accept or reject any conditions imposed
by the governing body as conditions of its approval within 20 days
of its notification of such conditions shall result in automatic
recision of such conditional approval and the denial of final
approval without further action of the governing body.
(3) Denial of final approval shall, if warranted, be given by the
governing body in accordance with procedures set forth in Section
508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10508.
C. Recording of final plan and written notice.
(1) After approval and endorsement of the final subdivision plan by the
Township, the applicant shall record the plan with the Allegheny
County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the date of final
approval and endorsement by the Township. Failure to record the
final plan within this period shall render it null and void.
§ 78-13 PINE CODE § 78-13
68:374
§ 78-14. Traffic impact report for subdivisions with more than 25
units.
A traffic impact report shall be submitted with the preliminary subdivision
application for all subdivisions which contain more than 25 dwelling units,
or any land development, which, according to the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards, will generate in excess of 250
trips per day. The traffic impact report shall contain the following
information:
(2) Following recording the final plan, the applicant shall, within five
days, notify the Township Engineer in writing that the plan has
been recorded and, within 10 days, have a reproduced Mylar of the
recorded plan prepared at his own expense and shall deliver the
same to the governing body. All signatures shall be in indelible ink.
(3) After receiving written notice that the final plan has been recorded,
the Township Engineer shall physically compare the recorded plan
with the final plan approved by the governing body. If the recorded
plan does not so conform, it shall be null and void and legally
regarded as not having been recorded.
(4) After a subdivision plan has been duly recorded, the streets, parks,
and other public improvements shown thereon shall be considered
to be a part of the Official Map of the Township.
A. General site description. A detailed description of the roadway network
within 1/2 mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the
anticipated stages of construction and the anticipated completion date
of the proposed development shall be provided. This description, which
may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items:
(1) All major intersections.
(2) All proposed ingress and egress locations.
(3) All existing roadway widths and rights-of-way.
(4) All existing traffic signals and traffic control devices.
(5) Any changes to the roadway network proposed by any
governmental entity.
(6) All existing and proposed public transportation services and
facilities within a one-mile radius of the site.
B. A description of existing capacities and levels of service of all streets
and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site.
C. A determination of trip generation expected to result from the proposed
development based on the ratios and the methodology contained in the
current edition of the manuals of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE).
§ 78-13 SEWERS § 78-14
68:375
§ 78-15. Subdivisions in excess of 10 acres.
For all subdivision in excess of 10 acres, the following supplementary plans
and data shall be required:
D. A determination of the need for acceleration, deceleration or turning
lanes (upon existing or proposed roads) at the entrance or entrances to
any subdivision which is projected to generate 500 or more trips per
day.
E. The impact of the proposed development on existing roadway and
intersection levels of service within 1,000 feet of the site.
F. Cross sections and profile.
(1) After receiving notice of an approval of the preliminary plan along
with the filing of the final plan, the applicant shall submit to the
Township typical cross sections and complete profiles of streets
and other related improvements to be constructed in the proposed
subdivision.
(2) Copies of these typical cross sections and profiles shall be
transmitted to the Township Engineer.
(3) The Township, after receiving a report from the Township Engineer,
the county planning agency and any other officials or agencies
(including but not limited to the Township's Planning Commission,
Environmental Advisory Council, and the Parks and Recreation
Commission), shall notify the applicant of any recommended
changes or suggestions so that the applicant may prepare the final
plan.
A. A statement of the proposed use of lots, type of business or industry, so
as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and
congestion of population.
B. A statement outlining the method to be used and provisions to be made
for sewage disposal, surface and other drainage and flood control.
C. If zoning changes are contemplated by the applicant, the proposed
zoning must be outlined.
D. In order to determine compliance with the development standards
required by this chapter, the following data shall be submitted:
(1) Where evidence exists of undermining, strip mining, landslideprone
soils or other geologic hazards on the site, a geologic report
by a qualified registered professional engineer regarding soil and
subsurface conditions and the probable measures needed to be
considered in the design of the development, the location of
structures and the design of foundations, if any.
§ 78-14 PINE CODE § 78-15
68:376
§ 78-16. Exemptions.
(2) Data from the United States Soil Conservation Service concerning
soil conditions and water resources.
(3) A landscaping plan showing compliance with all applicable buffer
yard, landscaping and vegetation preservation requirements of this
chapter and of Chapter 84, Zoning, showing the types, sizes,
location and species of plant materials to be installed and to be
preserved.
(4) A grading plan showing existing and proposed contours and
identifying all areas of the site which have existing or finished
slopes after grading in excess of 25% but less than 40%. The
grading plan shall show compliance with the steep slope control
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 84, Zoning.
(5) The Environmental Advisory Council's and the Parks and
Recreation Committee's report of their preapplication review
findings as required by this chapter.
A. Simple subdivision. The subdivisions described in this section shall be
known as "simple subdivisions," and the governing body may waive any
of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to Township requirements,
as it deems appropriate, so long as the area of simple subdivision is no
larger than 10 acres in size.
(1) A simple subdivision shall be submitted in accordance with this
chapter for any proposed residential subdivision which:
(a) Creates a subdivision in which all lots meet all requirements of
this chapter and all other ordinances, rules and regulations of
the Township, without a variance;
(b) Provides the required frontage on a public road for each lot;
(c) Requires no large scale grading to prepare the lots for
individual home construction or internal access;
(d) No internal roads are proposed in the plan and the plan
encompasses the whole.
(2) In addition to the regular procedure for processing simple
subdivisions, the Township may submit the simple subdivision to
the Allegheny County Planning Agency, and after receiving the
written report from the Allegheny County Planning Agency and the
Planning Commission, the governing body shall approve or
disapprove the plan and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its
decision within the time limits set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
(3) Upon notification of approval of the simple subdivision by the
governing body, the applicant shall deliver a completion guaranty
§ 78-15 SEWERS § 78-16
68:377
to the Township, unless specifically waived, in writing, by the
Township and prepare and submit to the Planning Commission
and governing body a final plan which, when approved, shall be
recorded by the applicant in accordance with § 78-61 of this
chapter.
(4) This exemption does not include and shall not be construed to
include any application for a building or occupancy permit which
does not meet all of the aforementioned qualifications and which
contemplates present or future use as anything other than a
residential development to contain only one dwelling unit.
B. Resubdivisions.
(1) Applications for resubdivisions shall be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission and the governing body.
(2) In addition to the regular procedure for processing resubdivisions,
the Township may submit the resubdivision plan to the Allegheny
County Planning Agency, and after receiving the written report
from the Allegheny County Planning Agency and the Planning
Commission, the governing body shall approve or disapprove the
plan and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision within
the time limits set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
(3) Without exception, the applicant shall prepare and submit a plan
for recording, which identifies the previous record plan for
endorsement of the Planning Commission, governing body and
Township Engineer and, after approval and endorsement, shall
record the resubdivision plan within 90 days. Failure to record the
resubdivision plan within that period shall render it null and void.
§ 78-16 PINE CODE § 78-16
68:378
ARTICLE IV
Land Development Plan Review Procedures
§ 78-17. Informal review process and requirements.
An applicant may review informal plans with the Planning Commission
by requesting an appointment. Such discussions and informal review will
alert the Commission to major new land developments and familiarize the
developer with plan requirements and submission procedures and identify
potential problem areas with the proposed development. This informal
review procedure shall not constitute a formal application for land
development approval.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eleven copies of the sketch plan and application shall be submitted
to the Zoning Officer.
(2) Submissions for informal review must be received 10 calendar days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting where the review is
requested.
B. Submission requirements for informal review. An applicant requesting
an informal review shall:
(1) Complete an application for informal review; the application form
shall be as provided by the Township.
(2) Prepare a sketch plan that comprises the entire site proposed for
development; the sketch plan shall:
(a) Be legibly drawn and clearly show the proposed development
plan, the date prepared, and the name(s) of the applicant and/
or owner(s) and their agent(s).
(b) Include information known by the applicant which will assist
the Planning Commission and Township staff in making their
recommendations, including but not limited to a simple sketch
of the proposed layout of lots, streets, existing and proposed
public improvements and community facilities, North point,
significant topographical, physical, scenic, historic or natural
resource features, surface water, indication of areas exceeding
a slope of 25%, tract boundaries and legend and a description
of the land characteristics, existing covenants and area
surrounding the proposed land development.
C. At the informal review, the Planning Commission and Township staff
can review the proposed development plans and recommend guidelines
for resource protection standards and identify potential conflicts in the
plan with the Township's land development standards.
D. The Planning Commission shall not formally act on plans presented for
informal review. The Planning Commission may offer suggestions that
§ 78-17 SEWERS § 78-17
68:379
§ 78-18. Preapplication review process and requirements.
Prior to making application for preliminary approval, proposed land
developments in excess of 10 acres of gross land area shall be reviewed
by both the Township's Environmental Advisory Council and the Township's
Parks and Recreation Commission. This preapplication review procedure
shall not constitute a formal application for land development approval.
The recommendations of the Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks
and Recreation Commission shall be communicated to the Planning
Commission, the governing body and the applicant.
may assist the developer in complying with the Township's land
development standards.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eight copies of the preapplication plans shall be submitted to both
the Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks and Recreation
Committee Liaisons for this review.
(2) Submissions for preapplication review must be received 10
calendar days prior to the Environmental Advisory Council and the
Parks and Recreation Commission meetings where the review is
requested.
B. Submission requirements for preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council. An applicant requesting a
preapplication review by the Environmental Advisory Council shall:
(1) Complete an application for preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council. The application form shall be as
provided by the Township.
(2) Prepare and submit plans for the preapplication review by the
Environmental Advisory Council as follows:
(a) The applicant shall prepare a scaled Resource Inventory
Mapping (on accurate topographical surveys) showing all
natural and physical features of the site as required by the
development standards in this chapter.
(b) The plans shall clearly show the proposed subdivision plan and
the date prepared.
(c) The plans shall identify any known existing or potential
environmental problems and recommended plans and
programs for the promotion and conservation of natural
resources.
(d) The plans shall show the manner in which the proposed
development will protect and improve the quality of the
environment within the Township and include a narrative
report on conservation measures proposed.
§ 78-17 PINE CODE § 78-18
68:380
(e) The plans shall index all open areas within the proposed plan
or immediately adjacent to the proposed plan that will be
publicly and privately owned, including but not limited to
public-owned areas, parks, open space, etc.; private open
areas; flood-prone areas; swamps; and unique natural features.
(f) The submission shall include a wetlands delineation report
when wetlands are suspected on the site. The wetlands report
shall be prepared by an environmental professional in
accordance with the Federal Manual of Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands of January 10, 1989 (as
amended).
(g) The plans shall show areas proposed for disturbance, the
proposed limits of work, site improvements proposed, grading
proposed and requirements in connection therewith,
stormwater management concepts and other elements that
may cause site disturbance.
(h) The plans shall include a tree inventory report, in table form,
that includes:
[1] Each existing tree located within an area proposed to be
disturbed by development and with a minimum of twelveinch
diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be included.
[2] The table shall also include each such tree's species,
diameter at breast height (DBH) and whether the tree is
proposed to be retained, removed or removed and
mitigated as a part of the proposed development.
(i) The plans submitted pursuant to this subsection for
preapplication review shall:
[1] Be legibly drawn.
[2] Drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet for plans that
contain 10 acres to 50 acres and to a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet for plans that contain over 50 acres.
[3] Cover the entire tract proposed for development.
[4] Show the existing topography of the site.
[5] Show the location of all existing streams, ponds, or
watercourses.
[6] Show the location of existing tree cover (canopy).
[7] Show the location of all trees. Each tree shall be identified
with an individual key number that relates to the tree
inventory report required in this section.
[8] Show the location of steep slopes.
§ 78-18 SEWERS § 78-18
68:381
[9] Show the percentages of the steep slopes.
[10] Show any existing embankments or other known manmade
changes in the topography.
[11] Show any existing and proposed retaining walls.
[12] Show any existing structures or structure remnants.
[13] Show any floodplain areas.
[14] Show any active, abandoned, or capped oil wells.
(3) Prior to the Environmental Advisory Council's site walk, the
applicant shall identify and mark all trees located within an area
proposed to be disturbed by development and measuring at least
12 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) with a physical
marking. The applicant shall provide the Environmental Advisory
Council with a separate and distinct means for marking disputed
trees of significance identified during its site walk.
(a) A mitigation report shall be submitted identifying trees of
significance proposed to be removed and the proposed method
for mitigation. Any new trees to be planted shall be identified
on the plans required by this chapter and the required
landscape plan. If any mitigation funds are to be paid,
calculations shall be included to demonstrate how the total
amount was calculated.
(4) Prior to the Environmental Advisory Council's site walk, the
applicant shall identify and physically mark the limits of all area(s)
proposed to be disturbed by development. Such marking shall be
separate and distinct from the required marking of all trees
measuring at least 12 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH).
C. Submission requirements for preapplication review by the Parks and
Recreation Commission. An applicant requesting preapplication review
by the Parks and Recreation Commission shall:
(1) Complete an application for preapplication review by the Parks and
Recreation Commission. The application form shall be as provided
by the Township.
(2) Prepare and submit plans for the preapplication review by the
Parks and Recreation Commission as follows:
(a) The applicant shall prepare a plan set in accordance with
§ 78-18 of this chapter and the requirements of Chapter 84,
Zoning.
D. The Environmental Advisory Council and the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall:
§ 78-18 PINE CODE § 78-18
68:382
§ 78-19. Preliminary land development plan review process and
requirements.
The application for preliminary approval of a proposed land development
shall contain all information required by this section and shall be submitted
to the Township's Zoning Officer with 15 copies thereof and the required
application fee. Such applications shall be reviewed by the Planning
Department of the County of Allegheny and by the Planning Commission,
which shall make recommendations regarding approval, approval with
conditions or the denial of the application to the governing body. The
applicant shall also be required, at his expense, to conspicuously post
the perimeter of the development site at points deemed sufficient by the
Township to notify potentially interested citizens of the pending
development of the site. Said notices shall be in a size and form specified
by the Township and shall be posted at least one week prior to the first
consideration of the development plan by the Planning Commission and
shall remain posted throughout the time the land development plan is being
considered by the Planning Commission and governing body.
(1) After review of the submitted material and a site walk of the
property in question (if such is determined to be required by either
body), prepare their findings and generate reports to the Planning
Commission and governing body.
(2) These reports may make recommendations regarding the proposed
subdivision plan and the steps necessary to help preserve the
environment and any steps necessary to provide adequate
recreational improvements to satisfy the applicable provisions of
the Township of Pine Code.
(3) If the Environmental Advisory Council or the Parks and Recreation
Commission determines, following its review of the originally
submitted material and its site walk, that it needs more information
to properly generate its report, it shall promptly notify the
applicant of the same and specify what further information it
needs.
A. General requirements.
(1) Eleven copies of the preliminary subdivision application, containing
the information specified in this section, and the required
application fee shall be submitted to the Township's Zoning Officer.
(2) One copy of the plan submission shall be submitted in an electronic
format on a compact disk (CD). The plans shall be in either the
.TIFF format or Adobe .PDF format.
(3) Submissions for preliminary approval consideration must be
received by the Zoning Officer 24 calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting when the review by the Planning
Commission is requested or 24 calendar days prior to the Board of
§ 78-18 SEWERS § 78-19
68:383
Supervisors meeting when the review by the governing body is
requested.
(4) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the preliminary and
final approval process may be completed simultaneously.
B. Simplified process for land development approval. In the case where a
submission for land development is proposed for a lot that has been
previously approved by the Board of Supervisors as part of a master
planned development, the Planning Commission is authorized to
approve land development plans (in lieu of their submission to the
Board of Supervisors) under the following circumstances:
(1) The lot proposed for land development is a part of a master planned
development, which has been divided into developable lots and
such lots have been duly recorded at the Allegheny County
Recorder's Office, and such lots are not part of any planned
residential development.
(2) The area of impervious surfaces for the lot proposed for the land
development has been calculated and designed to be controlled by
a common stormwater management system that has been designed
and approved to control all stormwater from all lots comprising the
master plan.
(3) The anticipated traffic generated by the lot proposed for the land
development has been included in a comprehensive traffic study,
and all traffic mitigation required as part of the master plan
approval has been completed, or will be completed when the traffic
generation requires such improvements.
(4) All specifications for the lot proposed for land development are in
compliance with the specifications contained in or the conditions
imposed upon the previous approval of the master planned
development.
(5) Land development plans proposed for lots meeting the
requirements of Subsection B(1) through (4) above shall be
prepared using the requirements of § 78-19C, except that the
submission deadline shall be reduced to 10 days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting.
C. Submission requirements for land development approval. Submission
requirements for the preliminary land development plan approval shall
include:
(1) A completed application form for preliminary land development
plan approval. The application form for preliminary land
development plan submission shall be as provided by the Township.
(2) All land development plans shall:
(a) Be legibly drawn.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:384
(b) Be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
(c) Be drawn on a sheet size not to exceed 30 by 40 inches.
(d) Be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, landscape
architect, planner, or surveyor in accordance with standard
architectural and engineering practices.
(e) Not duplicate or be the same in spelling or alike pronunciation
with any other land development.
(f) Have an assigned project number, date drawn, sheet number
and latest revision date, as established by the preparer.
(g) Be sealed by the architect(s) and/or engineer(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s) of record.
(3) The plan set of the proposed land development shall include:
(a) A cover page for the drawing set, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the land development and the date
the plan was prepared.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the developer/owner and
principal engineer(s) and/or architects and/or surveyor(s)
and/or landscape architect(s).
[4] A vicinity map, which shows the tract proposed for
development shown on a current Township Zoning Map.
The vicinity map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed development. The site proposed
for development shall be indicated.
[5] A sheet index of all plans in the plan set.
(b) The land development plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point
and the date the plan was prepared and the latest revision
date.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:385
[6] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[7] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line.
[8] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets. Names of streets, which are
not a continuation of existing streets, shall not duplicate or
closely approximate, phonetically, the names of other
streets located within the Township.
[9] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the front yard building setback line and
the locations of any proposed structures, buildings and
parking areas.
[10] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for the use of
the occupants of the land development.
[11] Existing parks and open spaces and permanent buildings
within or adjacent to the tract or within such close
proximity of the tract so as to affect the design of the
development.
[12] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[13] Existing utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
[14] The approximate locations of existing sanitary sewers,
water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins,
surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[15] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[16] The access to the stormwater detention area, with the
grade percentage of the access road shown.
[17] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[18] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets and parking areas.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:386
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[20] The site data information, which shall include:
[a] The gross area of the parcel.
[b] The gross area of common open space.
[c] The net area of common open space.
[d] The percentage of the parcel to be provided as
common open space.
(c) The schematic elevations of all facades of all proposed
buildings, schematic floor plans, and descriptions of all
primary building materials proposed.
(d) The grading and utility plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or surveyors
and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way.
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:387
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[20] The layout of streets and parking areas, including
proposed names and widths of proposed streets. Names of
streets, which are not a continuation of existing streets,
shall not duplicate or closely approximate, phonetically,
the names of other streets located within the Township.
[21] The proposed development layout, lot numbering,
approximate dimensions, approximate lot areas and
approximate lot widths provided at the street right-of-way
line or the front yard building setback line for cul-de-sac
lots and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[22] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for occupants
of the land development.
[23] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets and parking areas.
[24] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:388
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[26] The required setback as required by the applicable
development standards of the Township and other
applicable regulations for all watercourses, floodplains,
wetlands, etc.
(e) Resource inventory mapping, prepared to the standards as set
forth in the development standards and Chapter 84, Zoning,
which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or surveyors
and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[10] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[11] The percentage of existing slopes within the tract and 100
feet immediately adjacent to the parcel proposed for
development, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[12] The areas, shown as polygons, of all existing slopes from
25% to 40% percent and existing slopes that exceed 40%.
[13] A legend that clearly identifies the symbols used to show
or indicate all of the natural features within the site.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:389
[14] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or existing underground
items within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto,
with the direction of flow indicated.
[15] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[16] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, tree cover,
and other natural features.
[17] The existing man-made features, such as retaining walls,
structures, embankments, and existing land uses.
[18] The areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or
stormwaters.
[19] The areas which have been the subject of commercial
forestry operations within the last five-year period.
[20] A plan for the mitigation and minimization of disturbance
to the natural resources on the site and providing detail of
any required or proposed revegetation for the site.
(f) The preliminary erosion and sedimentation plan and
preliminary stormwater control plan which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:390
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[20] The layout of streets and parking areas, including
proposed names and widths of proposed streets.
[21] The proposed development layout, lot numbering,
approximate dimensions, approximate lot areas and
approximate lot widths provided at the street right-of-way
line or the front yard building setback line for cul-de-sac
lots and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[22] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for the
occupants of the land development.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:391
[23] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets and parking areas.
[24] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[27] The areas where silt fencing will be installed.
[28] The areas where the topsoil will be stockpiled during the
grading activity.
[29] The sedimentation traps to be installed during
construction.
[30] The construction driveway(s) that will be installed for use
during the development construction.
[31] The legend that clearly indicates the soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures that will be implemented
during construction of the development.
[32] The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which
shall be prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102) and the standards and specifications of the
Allegheny County Conservation District.
[33] The preliminary stormwater control plan, which shall be
prepared in accordance with the Township of Pine Code.
(g) The landscaping/recreation plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The proposed name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:392
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of proposed new sanitary sewer lines and
manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the proposed new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled on
slopes that have been created as a result of the grading
activity.
[18] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[19] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[20] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled as a
result of the grading activity needed to install the
underground utilities.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:393
[21] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[22] The layout of streets and parking areas, including
proposed names and widths of proposed streets.
[23] The proposed development layout, lot numbering,
approximate dimensions, approximate lot areas and
approximate lot widths provided at the street right-of-way
line or the front yard building setback line for cul-de-sac
lots and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[24] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use
within the land development. Such land shall conform with
Chapter 84, Zoning, and the Township's adopted 1992
Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan.76
[25] The approximate final grade percentages of all proposed
streets and parking areas.
[26] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage.
[27] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[28] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[29] The location and design of all recreation areas, including a
detail of the proposed location and design of the recreation
area and facilities at a scale to sufficiently show the type of
recreation area and facilities proposed. The recreation
area and facilities shall be in accordance with the
recreation requirements of Chapter 84, Zoning, the
provisions of which are hereby incorporated herein by
reference, and shall also be in conformity with the
Township's adopted 1992 Recreation, Park and Open
76.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 Plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:394
Space Plan,77 as amended, which plan is also so
incorporated herein by reference.
[30] The location and widths of walks, sidewalks, trails and the
proposed use of trails where they are not limited to
pedestrian use, including a detail of the proposed walks,
sidewalks and trails at a scale to sufficiently show the area
and facilities proposed. The walks, sidewalks, and trails
shall be in accordance with the adopted specifications for
construction of walks, sidewalks and trails, as per the
Township's 1992 Park Recreation and Open Space Plan, as
amended, and the parks and recreation requirements
outlined in Chapter 84, Zoning.
[31] The location and design of all buffer yards, landscaping
and seeding proposed, showing the height and type of
screening, including a detail of the proposed buffer yards
and landscaping at a scale to sufficiently show the area of
buffer yards and landscaping. The buffer yards,
landscaping, and seeding shall be in accordance with the
specifications for buffer yards, landscaping and seeding
found in Chapter 84, Zoning.
[32] The location of any proposed common open space,
together with the proposed ownership and maintenance
arrangements for such common open space.
[33] The location and dimensions of entrances, common areas,
parking facilities, signs, lighting facilities, fences and/or
walls, fire lanes and other site improvements or amenities,
including a detail drawing of each proposed site
improvement or amenity at a scale to sufficiently show the
site improvement or amenity.
[34] The landscaping, which shall also be shown to be prepared
in accordance with the Township of Pine Code Chapter 84,
Zoning.
(h) The plan narrative, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the land development.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
77.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:395
[4] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[5] A statement outlining the proposed use of all building lots
and proposed structures.
[6] A list of proposed street numbers referenced by lot
numbers.
[7] A statement of the proposed business or industry.
[8] Any requested waivers or variances from the Township
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
with statements concerning the granting of the requested
waivers or variances as to why the granting of the waivers
or variances are necessary and in the public interest. A
schedule, where development is to be phased over a period
of years, showing proposed times for the filing of
applications for approval for each phase of the proposed
development plan and estimates of construction times for
each phase.
(i) The preliminary engineering and environmental impact
statement, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the land development.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[4] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[5] A synopsis of the stormwater controls that will be utilized
to control the stormwater runoff from the proposed
development.
[6] A synopsis of the source and routing of the water supply to
the proposed development.
[7] A synopsis of the feasibility of connection to the existing
sewerage system, including the nearest public sewers and
service load of the development, and if capacity at the
treatment plant is capable of accepting the added capacity
from this development.
[8] The geotechnical report prepared by a Soils Engineer, in
accordance with § 84-125 of the Township of Pine Code.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-19
68:396
[9] The proposed covenants to be imposed upon the use of the
land, buildings, and structures.
[10] The Environmental Advisory Council report and the Parks
and Recreation Committee report of their preapplication
review findings as required by this chapter.
[11] The wetland delineation report prepared by an
environmental professional, in accordance with the
Federal Manual of Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, of January 10, 1989.
[12] The stormwater management report prepared by an
engineer, in accordance with the Township of Pine Code.
[13] The traffic report prepared in accordance this chapter.
[14] Supplementary plans and data as follows shall be required
for land development plans in excess of 10 acres:
[a] A statement of the proposed use of lots; type of
business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion of
population; and a preliminary environmental impact
statement.
[b] Proposed covenants and restrictions.
[c] Evidence of a source of water supply.
[d] A statement outlining the method to be used and
provisions to be made for sewage disposal, surface
and other drainage and flood control.
[e] If zoning charges are contemplated by the applicant,
the proposed zoning must be outlined.
(j) In order to determine compliance with the development
standards required by this chapter, the following data shall be
submitted:
[1] Where evidence exists of undermining, strip mining,
landslide-prone soils or other geologic hazards on the site,
a geologic report by a qualified registered professional
engineer regarding soil and subsurface conditions and the
probable measures needed to be considered in the design
of the development, the location of structures and the
design of foundations, if any.
[2] Data from the United States Soil Conservation Service
concerning soil conditions and water resources.
[3] A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared by
a person trained and experienced in control methods and
§ 78-19 SEWERS § 78-19
68:397
§ 78-20. Final land development plan review process and
requirements.
techniques which conforms to the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law78 and Chapter 102 of the
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection governing erosion control. The
plan shall be approved by the Allegheny County
Conservation District.
[4] A landscaping plan showing compliance with the buffer
yard, landscaping and vegetation preservation
requirements of Chapter 84, Zoning.
[5] A grading plan showing existing and proposed contours
and identifying all areas of the site which have existing or
finished slopes after grading in excess of 25% but less than
40%. The grading plan shall show compliance with the
steep slope control requirements of the Township of Pine
Code.
D. Proposed land developments, which are of such a size that allows one or
more of the above plan requirements to be clearly shown on the same
sheet, may be combined.
E. Preliminary approval or denial of such preliminary land development
plans, whichever shall be warranted, shall be given by the governing
body in conformity with the procedures set forth in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508.
A. The application for final land development approval shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission, which shall make recommendations to the
governing body regarding the proposed final land development plan.
B. One copy of the plan submission shall be submitted in an electronic
form on a compact disk (CD). The plans shall be in either the .TIFF
format or Adobe .PDF format.
C. Submissions for final approval consideration must be received by the
Zoning Officer 24 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting when
the review by the Planning Commission is requested, or 24 days prior to
the Board of Supervisors meeting when the review by the governing
body is requested.
D. Submission requirements for an application for final land development
plan approval shall include:
(1) A completed application for final land development plan approval.
The application form for final plan submission shall be as provided
by the Township.
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 78-19 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:398
(2) All plans shall:
(a) Be legibly drawn.
(b) Be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
(c) Be drawn on a sheet size not to exceed 30 inches by 40 inches.
(d) Be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, planner,
landscape architect, or surveyor in accordance with standard
architectural and engineering practices.
(e) Not duplicate, be the same in spelling or alike pronunciation
with any other land development.
(f) Have an assigned project number, date drawn, sheet number
and latest revision date, established by the preparer.
(g) Be sealed by the architect(s) and/or engineer(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s) of record.
(3) The plan set of the proposed land development shall include:
(a) A cover page for the drawing set, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the land development and the date
the plan was prepared.
[2] The location by township, county and state.
[3] The names and addresses of the developer/owner and
principal engineer and/or architects and/or surveyor(s)
and/or landscape architect(s).
[4] A vicinity map, which shows the tract proposed for
development shown on a current Township Zoning Map.
The vicinity map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed development. The site proposed
for development shall be indicated.
[5] A sheet index of all plans in the plan set.
(b) The final land development plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:399
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point
and the date the plan was prepared and the latest revision
date.
[6] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[7] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line.
[8] The layout of streets and parking areas, including the
names and widths of streets.
[9] The land development layout, lot numbering, lot
dimensions, lot areas, lot widths provided at the front yard
building setback line and the locations of any proposed
structures, buildings and parking areas.
[10] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for the use of the
occupants of the land development.
[11] Existing parks and open spaces and permanent buildings
within or adjacent to the tract or within such close
proximity of the tract so as to affect the design of the
development.
[12] The location, widths and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[13] Existing utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
[14] The locations of existing sanitary sewers, water mains,
storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface water drains
and surface water drainage easements and all
aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[15] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[16] The access to the stormwater detention area, with the
grade percentage of the access road shown.
[17] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[18] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets and
parking areas.
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:400
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
(c) The site data information, which includes:
[1] The gross area of the parcel.
[2] The gross area of common open space.
[3] The net area of common open space.
[4] The percentage of the parcel to be provided as common
open space.
(d) The grading and utility plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:401
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated that will be used to supply this plan with service.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[20] The layout of streets and parking areas, including the
names and widths of streets.
[21] The development layout, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot
areas and lot widths provided at the street right-of-way
line or the front yard building setback line for cul-de-sac
lots and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[22] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for the occupants of the
land development.
[23] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets and
parking areas.
[24] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:402
(e) Resource inventory mapping, prepared to the standards as set
forth in the development standards and Chapter 84, Zoning:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[10] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[11] The percentage of existing slopes within the tract and 100
feet immediately adjacent to the parcel proposed for
development, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[12] The areas, shown as polygons, of all existing slopes from
25% to 40% and existing slopes that exceed 40%.
[13] A legend that clearly identifies the symbols used to show
or indicate all of the natural features within the site.
[14] The approximate locations of existing off-site sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch
basins, surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements and all aboveground or existing underground
items within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto,
with the direction of flow indicated.
[15] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:403
[16] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, tree cover,
and other natural features.
[17] The existing man-made features, such as retaining walls,
structures, embankments, and existing land uses.
[18] The areas subject to periodic overflow of floodwaters or
stormwaters.
[19] The areas, which have been the subject of commercial
forestry operations within the last five-year period.
(f) The erosion and sedimentation plan and stormwater control
plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or surveyors
and/or landscape architect(s).
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:404
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all aboveground or underground items within the tract or
immediately adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow
indicated.
[18] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[20] The layout of streets and parking areas, including names
and widths of streets.
[21] The development layout, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot
areas and lot widths provided at the street right-of-way
line or the front yard building setback line for cul-de-sac
lots and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[22] The parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for the occupants of the
land development.
[23] The final grade percentages of all streets and parking
areas.
[24] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[25] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
features.
[26] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[27] The areas where silt fencing will be installed.
[28] The areas where the topsoil will be stockpiled during the
grading activity.
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:405
[29] The sedimentation traps to be installed during
construction.
[30] The construction driveway(s) that will be installed for use
during plan construction.
[31] The legend that clearly indicates the soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures that will be implemented
during construction of the development.
[32] The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, which
shall be prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102) and the standards and specifications of the
Allegheny County Conservation District.
[33] The final stormwater control plan, which shall be prepared
in accordance with § 84-125, Stormwater management.
(g) Cross sections and profile.
[1] After receiving notice of an approval of the preliminary
plan and prior to the filing of the final plan, the applicant
shall present to the Township typical cross sections and
complete profiles of streets and other related
improvements to be constructed in the proposed land
development.
[2] Copies of these typical cross sections and profiles shall be
transmitted to the Township Engineer.
[3] The Township, after receiving a report from the Township
Engineer, the County Planning Agency, and any other
concerned officials or agencies (including but not limited
to the Township's Planning Commission and/or
Environmental Advisory Council), shall notify the applicant
of any recommended changes or suggestions so that the
applicant may prepare the final improvement plans and
final plan.
(h) The landscaping/recreation plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block.
[2] The name of the land development.
[3] The location by township, county and state.
[4] The names and addresses of the developer(s)/owner(s) and
principal engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or
surveyor(s) and/or landscape architect(s).
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:406
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, North point,
the date the plan was prepared and the date the plan was
last revised.
[6] The boundary of the site to be developed indicated by a
heavy line and the total acreage.
[7] The location, widths, and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the development (unimproved
roads shall be shown with dashed lines).
[8] Existing utility rights-of-way easements.
[9] The location of new sanitary sewer lines and manholes.
[10] The area to be cleared to install the new sanitary sewer
lines and manholes.
[11] The location of the new storm sewer lines, stormwater
detention areas, diversion ditches, swales, drainageways,
headwalls and endwalls.
[12] The area to be cleared to install the new storm sewer lines,
stormwater detention areas, diversion ditches, swales,
drainageways, headwalls, and endwalls.
[13] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated.
[14] The current grade lines indicated as a dashed line.
[15] The proposed new grade lines indicated as a solid line.
[16] The percentage of new slopes created as a result of the
proposed grading, shown as a grade percentage and ratio
(example: twenty-five-percent slope, 4:1).
[17] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled on
slopes that have been created as a result of the grading
activity.
[18] The locations of existing off-site sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins, surface
water drains and surface water drainage easements and
all underground items within the tract or immediately
adjacent thereto, with the direction of flow indicated.
[19] The limits of clearing and grading needed to install the
new underground utilities within the tract.
[20] The landscaping/vegetation that will be reinstalled as a
result of the grading activity needed to install the
underground utilities.
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:407
[21] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property, together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed development.
[22] The layout of streets and parking areas, including names
and widths of streets.
[23] The development layout, lot numbering, lot dimensions, lot
areas and lot widths provided at the front yard building
setback line and the locations of any proposed structures,
buildings and parking areas.
[24] The parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use
within the development. Land in conformity with the
requirements and specifications shall be so dedicated or a
fee in lieu thereof shall be paid to the Township in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 84, Zoning.
Such land shall also be in conformity with the Township's
adopted 1992 Recreation, Park, and Open Space Plan,79 as
amended, which plan is also so incorporated herein by
reference.
[25] The final grade percentages of all proposed streets and
parking areas.
[26] The area that is to be used for stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage.
[27] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, tree masses, trees of significance, and other
natural features.
[28] The required setback as required by the development
standards of the Township and other applicable
regulations for all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands,
etc.
[29] The location and design of recreation areas, including a
detail drawing of the proposed location and design of the
recreation area and facilities at a scale to sufficiently show
the type of recreation area and facilities proposed. The
recreation facilities shall be in accordance with Chapter
84, Zoning, and shall also be in conformity with the
Township's adopted 1992 Park, Recreation, and Open
Space Plan, as amended, which plan is also so
incorporated herein by reference.
79.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:408
[30] The location and widths of walks, sidewalks, trails and the
proposed use of trails where they are not limited to
pedestrian use, including a detail of the proposed walks,
sidewalks and trails at a scale to sufficiently show the area
and facilities proposed. The walks, sidewalks and trails
shall be in accordance with the adopted specifications for
construction of walks, sidewalks and trails as set forth in
the Township's 1992 Park, Recreation and Open Space
Plan, as amended, and Chapter 84, Zoning.
[31] The location and design of all buffer yards, landscaping
and seeding proposed, showing the height and type of
screening, including a detail of the proposed buffer yards
and landscaping at a scale to sufficiently show the area of
buffer yards and landscaping. The buffer yards,
landscaping, and seeding shall be in accordance with
Chapter 84, Zoning.
[32] The location of the proposed common open space,
together with the proposed ownership and maintenance
arrangements for such common open space.
[33] The location and dimensions of entrances, common areas,
parking facilities, signs, lighting facilities, fences and/or
walls, fire lanes and other site improvements or amenities,
including a detail drawing of each proposed site
improvement or amenity at a scale to sufficiently show the
site improvement or amenity.
[34] The landscaping, which shall also be shown to be prepared
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 84, Zoning.
(i) The formal covenants to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings, and structures.
(j) The final stormwater management report prepared by an
engineer, in accordance with § 84-125 of Township of Pine
Code.
E. Final approval. Final approval with or without conditions, as and if
warranted, shall be given according to procedures set forth in Section
508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508.
F. Denial of final approval. Denial of final approval shall, if warranted, be
given in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508.
G. Additional requirements for final approval. Additional requirements for
final approval of a land development plan shall be as follows:
(1) Land development plan approval shall not be official until and
unless the land development plan, as approved by the governing
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-20
68:409
body, including all conditions of approval by the governing body,
is compiled in a developer's agreement (which shall include the
completion guaranty required by § 78-61 of this chapter) prepared
by the Township Solicitor and signed by the appropriate developer
or developer's representative and the governing body and filed with
the Zoning Officer within 90 days of action by the governing body,
unless such is specifically waived by formal action of the governing
body.
(2) No land development shall commence until a final plan has been
approved and recorded in the Allegheny County Recorder of Deed's
office and until all necessary permits (Township, county,
commonwealth or federal) have been received for the same and
proof thereof has been provided to the Township.
(3) Building or repair permits shall not be issued for any structure on a
lot in a subdivision or land development for which a plan has not
been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this
chapter and for which all other necessary permits have not been
issued by the Township, county, commonwealth or federal agencies.
(4) No owner or agent of the owner of any land shall be entitled to a
permit for the installation of wells and septic tanks upon any lots in
a subdivision or land development for which a plan has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this chapter
and for which all other necessary permits have not been issued by
the Township, county, commonwealth or federal agencies.
(5) The Township will withhold all public improvements of whatsoever
nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of
sewerage facilities and water service, from all subdivisions and
land developments which have not been approved and from all
areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the
governing body in the manner prescribed herein.
(6) In order to defray a part of the costs incurred by the Township in
the review of proposed final land development plans, each
applicant shall pay such fees and shall reimburse the Township for
the reasonable and necessary charges of its professional
consultants (including but not limited to its engineer and solicitor)
for review and report thereon to the Township, as are fixed by
resolution or resolutions of the governing body. The appropriate fee
shall be in the form of a certified check or money order made
payable to the Township. It shall accompany the final plan at the
time it is first filed with the Township Secretary.
(7) In order to defray a part of the costs incurred by the Township in
having its professional consultants involved in inspecting the
installation of the improvements required by this chapter to assure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the subdivider or
developer shall provide escrow funds to the Township in
§ 78-20 PINE CODE § 78-20
68:410
§ 78-21. Traffic impact report for land development plans
generating 250 AADT or greater.
A traffic impact report shall be submitted with the preliminary land
development for any development, which, according to the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards, will generate in excess of 250
trips per day. The traffic impact report shall contain the following
information:
accordance with the Township fee schedule to be utilized to pay for
such costs.
(8) Land development plan approval shall be valid for a period of one
year following the governing body's action. If the proposed
improvements are not under substantial construction within one
year or completed within two years, the governing body's approval
shall be void unless an extension shall be granted by it. All
development, construction, and use shall be in strict accordance
with the approved plan, unless an application for a revised land
development plan is approved in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Any development contrary to the approved plan shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
H. Final approval—proposals in floodplains. For proposals in floodplains,
the application for final land development approval shall additionally
include:
(1) Topographic contour lines at an interval of two feet.
(2) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplains, information pertaining to the floodway and
the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
(3) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(5) A document, certified by a registered professional surveyor,
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction
or development has been adequately designed to withstand the
one-hundred-year-flood elevations, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of
floodproofing measures, which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure or development.
(6) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation
control.
§ 78-20 SEWERS § 78-21
68:411
§ 78-22. Land developments in excess of 10 acres.
For all land development plans in excess of 10 acres, the following
supplementary plans and data shall be required:
A. General site description. A detailed description of the roadway network
within 1/2 mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the
anticipated stages of construction and the anticipated completion date
of the proposed development shall be provided. This description, which
may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items:
(1) All major intersections.
(2) All proposed ingress and egress locations.
(3) All existing roadway widths and rights-of-way.
(4) All existing traffic signals and traffic control devices.
(5) Any changes to the roadway network proposed by any
governmental entity.
(6) All existing and proposed public transportation services and
facilities within a one-mile radius of the site.
B. A description of existing capacities and levels of service of all streets
and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site.
C. A determination of trip generation expected to result from the proposed
development based on the ratios and the methodology contained in the
current edition of the manuals of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE).
D. A determination of the need for acceleration, deceleration or turning
lanes (upon existing or proposed roads) at the entrance or entrances to
any land development which is projected to generate 500 or more trips
per day.
E. The impact of the proposed development on existing roadway and
intersection levels of service within 1,000 feet of the site.
A. A statement of the proposed use of lots, type of business or industry, so
as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and
congestion of population.
B. A statement outlining the method to be used and provisions to be made
for sewage disposal, surface and other drainage and flood control.
C. If zoning changes are contemplated by the applicant, the proposed
zoning must be outlined.
D. In order to determine compliance with the development standards
required by this chapter, the following data shall be submitted:
§ 78-21 PINE CODE § 78-22
68:412
§ 78-23. Additional requirements for land developments.
In addition to the development standards set forth in this chapter, the
governing body shall not approve a land development plan unless the
following standards are also met:
(1) Where evidence exists of undermining, strip mining, landslideprone
soils or other geologic hazards on the site, a geologic report
by a qualified registered professional engineer regarding soil and
subsurface conditions and the probable measures needed to be
considered in the design of the development, the location of
structures and the design of foundations, if any.
(2) Data from the United States Soil Conservation Service concerning
soil conditions and water resources.
(3) A landscaping plan showing compliance with all applicable buffer
yard, landscaping and vegetation preservation requirements of this
chapter and of Chapter 84, Zoning, showing the types, sizes,
location and species of plant materials to be installed and to be
preserved.
(4) A grading plan showing existing and proposed contours and
identifying all areas of the site which have existing or finished
slopes after grading in excess of 25% but less than 40%. The
grading plan shall show compliance with the steep slope control
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 84, Zoning.
(5) The Environmental Advisory Council's and the Parks and
Recreation Committee's report of their preapplication review
findings as required by this chapter.
A. Access. Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel
and other service vehicles shall be adequate in size and shall be so
arranged that they may be used without blockage or interference with
the use of public streets or sidewalks, other accessways or automobile
parking facilities.
B. Environmental protection.
(1) All lands, regardless of their slope, from which natural cover has
been removed or otherwise destroyed shall be appropriately
graded and seeded within a reasonable time of such clearance
activity. The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be interpreted to be
within 14 days during the growing season and shall be rigidly
applied to construction activities in order to accomplish the intent
of keeping erosion and siltation to a minimum.
(2) On hillsides exceeding 25% in slope and having a vertical elevation
change of greater than 10 feet, no more than 20% by area of the
natural cover may be removed for construction purposes or any
§ 78-22 SEWERS § 78-23
68:413
other activity. All disturbed areas shall be reforested and
landscaped as required by the provisions of Chapter 84, Zoning.
(3) No cutting or filling is permissible within 50 feet of the edge of any
flowing stream or wetlands except as expressly permitted by action
of the governing body. In such cases, permission may be granted,
provided that a mitigation plan is approved and special precautions
are taken to ensure against continuing erosion and siltation or
other circumstances, which may be harmful to the immediate
watercourse or in any way, pollute the stream or wetlands.
(4) Existing trees and woodlands shall be preserved and replaced as
provided in Chapter 84, Zoning, the provisions of which are hereby
incorporated herein by reference. All woodlands acreage cleared
shall require revegetation elsewhere on the site at a rate of 1/4
acre for each acre of woodlands cleared.
C. Interior circulation. The interior circulation of traffic in commercial
areas shall be designed so that no driveway or access lane providing
parking spaces shall be used as a through street. If parking spaces are
indicated by lines with angles other than 90°, then traffic lanes shall be
restricted to one-way, permitting head-in parking. No driveway or
street used for interior circulation shall have traffic lanes less than 10
feet in width.
D. Lighting. Parking areas, driveways and loading areas, entryways, and
pedestrian paths shall be provided with a lighting system, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. All lighting shall be
shielded from traffic on any public right-of-way and from any residential
district.
E. Storage. Any article or material stored outside an enclosed building as
an incidental part of the primary commercial or industrial operation
shall be so screened by opaque ornamental fencing, walls or evergreen
planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent
lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level.
§ 78-23 PINE CODE § 78-23
68:414
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Plan Review Procedures
§ 78-24. Applicability.
§ 78-25. Preliminary subdivisions and land development plan
stormwater plan contents.
A. Prior to submitting the preliminary subdivision and land development
plan, applicants are urged to consult with the Township, the Allegheny
County Planning Department and the County Conservation District on
the requirements for safely managing stormwater runoff from the
development site in a manner consistent with the municipal ordinances
and applicable watershed stormwater management plan. These
agencies may be helpful in providing the data that are necessary for
preparing the stormwater management plan.
B. Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a narrative
description of the proposed stormwater management controls for
general guidance and discussion with the municipal and other agencies.
C. The preapplication phase is not mandatory, and any review comments
provided by municipal or other agencies are advisory only and do not
constitute any legally binding action on the part of the municipality or
any county agency.
A. General format. The stormwater plan shall be prepared using the
general requirements for plan format contained in this chapter, and
those of § 84-125 of the Zoning Chapter, with the following additions:
(1) Watershed location. A key map showing development site location
within the designated watershed and watershed subareas (consult
watershed stormwater plans for boundaries) shall be provided. On
all site drawings, the boundaries of the watershed(s) and subareas
as they are located on the development site and identify watershed
name(s) and subarea number(s) shall be shown.
(2) Floodplain boundaries. The one-hundred-year floodplains on the
development site (as appropriate) based on the municipal Flood
Insurance Study maps or a determination by another method
acceptable to the Township shall be identified.
(3) Natural features. All bodies of water (natural and artificial),
watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales, wetlands and
other natural drainage courses on the development site or which
will be affected by runoff from the development shall be shown.
(4) Soils. An overlay showing soil types and boundaries within the
development site (consult the County Soil Conservation Service
and United States Geological Survey for information) shall be
provided.
§ 78-24 SEWERS § 78-25
68:415
(5) Contours. Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet (in
areas with slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may
be used) shall be shown.
(6) Stormwater management controls. Any existing stormwater
management or drainage controls and/or structures, such as
sanitary and storm sewers, swales, culverts, etc., which are located
on the development site or which are located off-site but will be
affected by runoff from the development shall be shown.
B. Professional certification. The stormwater management plan, including
all calculations, must be prepared and sealed by a registered
professional engineer with training and expertise in hydrology and
hydraulics. Documentation of qualifications may be required by the
Township.
C. Runoff calculations. Calculations for determining pre and postdevelopment
discharge rates and for designing proposed stormwater
control facilities must be submitted with the stormwater management
plan. All calculations shall be prepared using the method and data
prescribed by § 84-125 of the Township of Pine Code.
D. Stormwater controls. All proposed stormwater runoff control measures
must be shown on the plan, including methods for collecting,
conveying, and storing stormwater runoff on-site which are to be used
both during and after construction. Erosion/sedimentation controls
shall be shown. The preliminary plan should provide information on the
general type, location, sizing, etc., of all proposed facilities and their
relationship to the existing watershed drainage system. If the
development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant must
demonstrate that stormwater facilities will be installed to manage
stormwater runoff safely during each stage of development.
E. Easements, rights-of-way and deed restrictions. All existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/or access to
stormwater control facilities shall be shown and the proposed owner
identified. Show any areas subject to special deed restrictions relative
to or affecting stormwater management on the development site.
F. Other permits and approvals. A list of any approvals or permits relative
to stormwater management that will be required from other
governmental agencies (e.g., an obstructions permit from Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection) and anticipated date of
submission/receipt should be included with the preliminary plan
submission. Copies of applications may be requested by the Township
where they may be helpful for the stormwater plan review.
G. Maintenance program. The preliminary application shall contain a
proposed maintenance plan for all stormwater control facilities, in
accordance with the following:
§ 78-25 PINE CODE § 78-25
68:416
§ 78-26. Final subdivision and land development plan stormwater
plan contents.
This submission shall contain the following:
§ 78-27. Preliminary and final subdivision and land development
plan stormwater plan review.
(1) The identification of the proposed ownership entity (e.g., Township,
property owner, a homeowners' association or other management
entity).
(2) The inclusion of a maintenance program for all facilities, outlining
the type of maintenance activities, probable frequencies, personnel
and equipment requirements and estimated annual maintenance
costs.
(3) The identification of the method of financing continuing operation
and maintenance if facility is to be owned by other than the
Township or other governmental agency.
A. All information pertaining to stormwater management from the
preliminary plan along with any changes.
B. Final plan maps and drawings showing the exact nature and location of
all temporary and permanent management controls, along with design
and construction specifications.
C. A schedule for the installation of all temporary and permanent
stormwater control measures and devices.
D. An accurate survey showing all current and proposed easements and
rights-of-way and copies of all proposed deed restrictions.
E. A maintenance program establishing ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for all stormwater control facilities (identify specific
person or entity) and detailing financial requirements and source of
funding. Any legal agreements required to implement the maintenance
program and copies of the maintenance agreement as specified in
§ 84-125G, maintenance of stormwater control facilities, shall be
submitted.
F. Financial guaranties consistent with this chapter to ensure that all
stormwater controls will be installed properly and function
satisfactorily.
A. Preliminary and final plans required. Stormwater management plans, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, will be submitted
with the preliminary and final subdivision or land development plan
application.
B. Review by Township Engineer and Conservation District. Preliminary
and final plans will be reviewed by the Township Engineer and County
§ 78-25 SEWERS § 78-27
68:417
Conservation District. At its discretion, the Township may also engage
other specialists in hydrology or hydraulics to assist with the
stormwater plan review.
C. Preliminary plan to county planning. A copy of the preliminary plan,
along with all runoff calculations, will be forwarded to the Allegheny
County Planning Department. A report of the findings will be returned
to the Township within 30 days. If the county planning review identifies
the possibility of harmful impacts downstream of the development site,
the applicant will be advised so that the necessary modifications can be
made to the stormwater management controls for the development site.
The Township Engineer shall not approve a preliminary stormwater
plan, which receives a negative watershed impact review from county
planning.
D. Notification of affected municipalities. The Township shall notify
municipalities upstream and downstream of the development site,
which may be affected by the stormwater runoff and proposed
management system for the site, when both the preliminary and final
plan applications are submitted. Copies of the plans will be made
available to the municipalities upon request. Comments received from
any affected municipality will be considered by the Township Engineer
and will be submitted with the Engineer's report to the Planning
Commission and governing body.
E. Township Engineer's review. The Township Engineer shall approve or
disapprove the preliminary and final stormwater management plan
based on the requirements of the municipal ordinances, the standards
and criteria of the watershed plan and good engineering practice. The
Engineer shall submit a written report, along with supporting
documentation, to the Planning Commission for its consideration as
part of the overall subdivision or land development plan review.
F. Status of the Township Engineer's determination. The approval/
disapproval of the site's stormwater management plan by the Township
Engineer shall be considered final. The applicability or effectiveness of
the previously approved stormwater management controls. Further, if
for any reason development activities are suspended for two years or
more, then the same specific control measure in contradiction to the
Engineer's action. The Commission or governing body can request
modifications or alternative approaches to the stormwater management
controls, provided that these are agreed to by the Township Engineer
and the applicant's engineer.
G. Approval of stormwater plan required for subdivision/land development
approval. No preliminary or final approval shall be granted for the
overall subdivision of land development application until a stormwater
management plan for the site has been approved.
H. Permits required from other governmental agencies. Where the
subdivision or land development application requires an obstruction or
§ 78-27 PINE CODE § 78-27
68:418
§ 78-28. Approval.
No stormwater plan shall be given any approval unless it is certified by
the Township Engineer as being in compliance with all applicable standards
of the Township of Pine Code and, in particular, the provisions of Chapter
84, Zoning, relating to performance standards, design criteria, erosion and
sedimentation control and maintenance and inspections, the provisions of
which are hereby incorporated herein by reference.
§ 78-29. Status of the stormwater plan after final approval.
Upon final subdivision and land development plan approval, the applicant
may commence to install or implement the approved stormwater
management controls, subject to the provisions of § 84-125 of the Township
of Pine Code. If site development or building construction does not begin
within two years of the date of final approval of the subdivision or land
development plan, then before doing so, the applicant shall resubmit the
stormwater management plans to verify that no condition has changed
within the watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the
previously approved stormwater management controls. Further, if for any
reason development activities are suspended for two years or more, then
the same requirement for resubmission of the stormwater management
plan shall apply.
§ 78-30. Stormwater plan modifications and procedure for
approving plan modifications.
Requests for modifications in the finally approved stormwater management
controls shall be submitted to the Township Engineer as follows:
erosion or sedimentation permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, then final subdivision or land development
plan approval shall be conditional upon receipt of such permits.
However, no building permit shall be issued or construction started
until the permits are received and copies filed with the Township.
A. If a request is initiated before construction begins, the stormwater plan
must be resubmitted and reviewed according to the procedure in this
section.
B. If a request is initiated after construction is underway, the Township
Engineer shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the
modification, based on field inspection, provided that:
(1) The requested changes in stormwater controls do not result in any
modifications to other approved municipal land use and land
development requirements, such as required building setbacks,
yards, etc.; and
(2) The performance standards contained in § 84-125, Stormwater
management, of the Township of Pine Code are met. Notification of
§ 78-27 SEWERS § 78-30
68:419
the Engineer's action shall be sent to the Planning Commission and
governing body. The governing body may issue a stay of stormwater
plan modification within five days and require the permittee to
resubmit the plan modification for full stormwater plan review in
accordance with the procedures in this section.
§ 78-30 PINE CODE § 78-30
68:420
ARTICLE VI
Development Standards
§ 78-31. Purpose.
The purposes of this section, which shall regulate development standards
for subdivisions, land developments, and Planned Residential
Developments, are to effectuate the community development objectives
set forth in Chapter 84, Zoning, of the Township of Pine Code and, in
particular, to preserve and to protect the existing natural environment
and natural resources of the Township by requiring preservation and only
limited, controlled disturbance of wetlands, woodlands and steep slopes
and by establishing standards for revegetation, landscaping, construction
of buffer yards and common open space and/or public land areas for
recreation. The design standards of this section shall serve to assure that
any land development within the Township is controlled and of a high
quality so as to:
§ 78-32. Applicability.
All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the provisions of
this section, as set forth below:
A. Eliminate visual and physical blight;
B. Preserve the natural topography and steep slope areas;
C. Preserve woodlands and trees of significance;
D. Control erosion, flooding, sedimentation and other soil and water
management problems;
E. Prevent ecological problems resulting from too-extensive cut and fill
operations;
F. Encourage innovative planning, increase environmental protection and
provide neighborhood recreation opportunities by concentrating
development to prevent sprawl and through imaginative use of common
open space, public areas and a comprehensive trails and pedestrian
easement system; and
G. Encourage the correlation of housing types and the density thereof with
the natural topography, environmental conditions and capacity of
infrastructure and community facilities.
A. All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall comply fully
with all then-existing zoning and other applicable Township ordinances,
rules and regulations, unless a waiver, modification or variance is
granted pursuant to § 78-53B of this chapter and is attached to the final
plan.
B. All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall comply fully
with the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations governing any
§ 78-31 SEWERS § 78-32
68:421
§ 78-33. Required improvements for subdivisions and land
development.
matter directly related to subdivisions and land developments which
are then effective by action of the county, commonwealth and federal
government unless a modification or exception is granted, in writing,
by the appropriate authority and is attached to the final plan.
C. Subdivision and land development standards contained herein are
regarded as the minimum requirements and designs should reflect the
principles in the community development objectives, as well as newly
developed concepts of improved design.
D. Existing natural features, such as trees, trees of significance, steep
slopes, watercourses, wetlands, woodlands, historic and scenic spots
and similar natural resources and assets, shall be preserved through
harmonious and innovative design and by design of subdivisions and
land developments in strict accordance and compliance with the
Development Standards of this chapter.
E. All lands, regardless of their slope, from which structures or natural
cover have been removed or otherwise destroyed, shall be
appropriately graded and seeded according to the specifications as set
forth in this chapter and Chapter 84, Zoning, of the Township of Pine
Code. Siltation and erosion are to be controlled as per the then-current
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection specifications.
A. At no expense to the Township and as a condition of subdivision or land
development approval, the subdivider or developer shall be required to
construct and install streets (constructed to the standard specifications
adopted by the Township), suitable drainage, waterlines and water
supply, sewage disposal, monuments, utilities, fire hydrants, street
signs, streetlights (where required) and the other improvements,
including but not limited to landscaping, buffer yards, parks, trails,
open space, recreation areas and public areas to the land in accordance
with the provisions of this section and this chapter or to Chapter 84,
Zoning, of the Township of Pine Code and also to any design detail
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter or to Chapter 84 of the
Township of Pine Code, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated
herein by reference. The subdivider or developer shall be similarly
required to comply with the provisions relating to the protection,
preservation, and mitigation of disturbance to the natural resources
provided in this section and those contained in Chapter 84 of the
Township of Pine.
B. The development standards contained herein are minimum guidelines,
and the governing body is hereby authorized to adopt, amend, and
delete, by resolution, design detail regulations that will supplement the
provisions of this chapter. The design detail regulations shall be kept on
file with the Township Secretary, and applicants may obtain copies at
the cost of reproduction.
§ 78-32 PINE CODE § 78-33
68:422
§ 78-34. Blocks.
§ 78-35. Common open space conservation, dedication of recreation
lands or payment of fee in lieu of dedication.
The purpose of the standards contained in this section is to preserve,
enhance, and promote the use and retention of common open space and
recreation areas in subdivisions and land developments within the
Township. The intent is to help preserve the Township's rural character
and to promote common open space for both passive and active recreation
opportunities. These standards will provide the opportunity to organize the
preservation of steep slopes, wetlands and watercourses, woodlands and
the provision for stormwater management requirements within a logical,
unified zone and require the connection of the common open space provided
in private developments to lands and trails specified in the Township's
Greenway Plan and to the Township's adopted 1992 Recreation, Park and
Open Space Plan,80 as amended.
C. All of the required improvements shall be made in full compliance with
the specifications for each of the various units of work, as required by
the Township Engineer, the commonwealth, county and other
appropriate authorities, according to the nature of the improvements
and any natural resource protection required in connection therewith,
and the plans, installation and maintenance of them shall be subject to
the approval of the appropriate officials having jurisdiction.
D. Before the Township or other entity shall take action or the Township
shall accept any new street or other public improvement, the applicant
shall furnish the Township Manager with two complete sets of the final
as-built improvement plans.
A. No block shall be longer than 1,200 feet nor less than 500 feet.
B. Where a subdivision adjoins a major street, the greater dimension of the
block shall front along such major street to minimize the number of
points of ingress and egress and, where practicable, shall be at least
1,000 feet in length.
C. Crosswalks shall be required whenever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to allow access to community facilities.
A. The provisions of this section shall apply to residential developments
greater than 10 acres in size and having over 10 residential units and
land developments over 10 acres in size, in addition to the requirements
of § 78-124, except that simple subdivisions shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
80.Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Art. V, § 2-29B and C of the Code of the Township of Pine
authorizes and directs the Township's Parks and Recreation Commission to review and
comprehensively update the Township's Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan no less
often than every five years. The current Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan is on file in
the Township offices. This reference to the 1992 plan is intended to refer or relate to the
current plan.
§ 78-33 SEWERS § 78-35
68:423
B. Standards for common open space preservation. The following
minimum standards shall be required for areas to be preserved as
common open space in proposed subdivisions or land developments.
(1) Common open space shall be used to provide preservation of
natural resource features to the following standards:
(a) Drainageways: 50%.
(b) Wetlands: 100%.
(c) Streams and the areas within 50 feet of each side of the stream
bank: 100%.
(d) Woodlands: 40%.
(e) Slopes ranging from 15% to 25%: 40%.
(f) Slopes greater than 25%: 80%.
(2) On portions of the site where two or more of the above-named
natural features overlap, only the natural feature which has the
highest preservation standard shall be used.
(3) To the greatest extent possible the following additional
requirements shall be applicable to common open space:
(a) Common open space land shall consist of one parcel of ground,
which, while it may vary in its width, shall be continuous, and
not less than 40 feet in with at any point.
(b) Common open space shall to the extent possible be located in
an accessible, usable manner in proximity to the majority of all
residents of the development.
(c) In developments that abut the Township's Greenway Plan and/
or preexisting dedicated parks or common open spaces, the
common open space shall be located adjacent to those areas.
Public access through easements through the common open
space to such preexisting areas shall be required.
(d) Common open space land shall not be contained within any lot
within the subdivision, except provided herein. Common open
space shall be publicly dedicated or, upon agreement of the
Township and the subdivider/developer, may be deeded to a
homeowners' association created for the subdivision or land
development (if one is to be created) or reserved upon private
lots for those developments without a homeowners'
association. In the event that such common open space is to be
deeded to a homeowners' association created for the
subdivision or land development or to be preserved upon
private lots, then such areas shall be required to be subject to
restrictive covenants, acceptable to the Township and
§ 78-35 PINE CODE § 78-35
68:424
sufficient to preserve the character of the common open space
in any deed thereafter.
C. Fee in lieu of the dedication of active recreation land. When a property
owner/developer chooses to pay a fee to the Township in lieu of the
dedication of active recreation lands required herein, said fee shall be
calculated as follows:
(1) The applicant shall identify the land area that would be otherwise
publicly dedicated pursuant to the provisions of this section and
submit a reasonably accurate plan showing such location to the
Parks and Recreation Commission for their review and
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors, followed by a metes
and bounds description of such land area at the time of the filing of
the application for final approval of subdivision or land
development.
(2) The applicant shall submit an estimated value of the land area
described in this section to the Parks and Recreation Commission
for their review and recommendation to the Board of Supervisors,
followed by a real estate appraisal of the fair market value of the
land area described in this section at the time of the filing of the
application for final approval of the subdivision or land
development. Such real estate appraisal shall have been made by a
licensed real estate appraiser in accordance with standard real
estate appraisal practices and shall have been made no earlier than
30 days prior to the date of the filing of the applicant's request for
final approval of the subdivision or land development approval.
(3) In the event that the Township determines the fair market value of
such land area contained in the applicant's real estate appraisal to
be fair and reasonable, the applicant shall pay such approved fair
market value to the Township in lieu of the public dedication of
such land. The payment of such fair market value shall be a
condition precedent to final plan approval of the subdivision or land
development and shall be made in full within 30 days of the date of
such final plan approval by the Township.
(4) In the event that the Township disputes the fair market value of the
land area as contained in the applicant's real estate appraisal, it
shall notify the applicant of it prior to its action to approve/
disapprove such final subdivision or land development plan. The
Township and the applicant shall then jointly, by mutual agreement,
appoint another licensed real estate appraiser to appraise the fair
market value of such land area and such appraisal shall be binding
upon the parties. Such jointly selected real estate appraiser shall
not have been retained by or performed services for either the
Township of Pine of the applicant within the preceding three years.
§ 78-35 SEWERS § 78-35
68:425
§ 78-36. Easements.
(5) One half of the professional fee of the licensed real estate appraiser
jointly appointed by the Township and the applicant, shall be paid
by the Township and the other half shall be paid by the applicant.
(6) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the
applicant and the Township from reaching other mutual
agreements as to the fair market value of the land area, which is
the subject of a fee in lieu of its public dedication.
D. The park or recreation land (or the fees paid in lieu thereof) shall be
used by the Township for the purpose of providing park or recreation
facilities, which are available to the residents or occupants of the
subdivision/land development from which they are received.
E. Any fees collected by the Township pursuant to this section shall be
maintained, expended and refunded in accordance with he
requirements of Section 503(11) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10503(11).
A. Easements may be required along rear and side lot lines and across or
through lots where engineering design or special conditions may
necessitate the installation of water, sewer or other utility service lines.
The width of such easements shall conform to requirements as
determined by the authorities having jurisdiction and the governing
body.
B. Where a subdivision or development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines
of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose.
C. All easements shall have adequate width for workmen, equipment, and
supplies necessary to install, develop, maintain, and repair the entity
served by the easement.
D. Aerial easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the ground.
E. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the most
direct line, between any structure, existing or proposed, and any
petroleum, petroleum product, natural gas, electric or other
transmission or high-pressure line which traverses a subdivision or land
development.
F. Easements for continuous pedestrian circulation utilizing sidewalks and
trails shall be required. Where subdivision or land developments abut
the Township's Greenway System, the applicant shall provide
easements for trail connections. Easements for trails shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 84, Zoning, of the
Township of Pine Code.
§ 78-35 PINE CODE § 78-37
68:426
§ 78-37. Grading.
§ 78-38. Land suitability and grading.
§ 78-39. Lots.
A. The necessary width of the right-of-way of each street in a proposed
subdivision shall be graded and suitably prepared for the installation of
paving, drainage structures, curbs, gutters and sidewalks in
accordance with the appropriate standards for the class of the street.
B. The subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetation matter, or other similar
material. Where poor subsurface drainage conditions exist, adequate
drainage shall be installed. The subgrade shall be rolled with a roller of
not less than seven tons in weight. Subbase grade tolerance shall be not
more than one inch in 16 feet.
A. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property from any source,
including but not limited to fire, flood or disease, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless the hazards have been eliminated or
adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the
applicant.
B. The developer shall comply with all aspects of the Township Grading
Ordinance, Chapter 48, Excavations and Grading, as amended, and as it
may be amended in the future.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed, whether for residential, business or industrial use.
B. Land unsuited for development that would entail hazards to life, health,
or property or would be uneconomical to provide with public services
shall not be developed or subdivided. Land subject to flooding shall not
be subdivided or developed until such deficiencies can be eliminated.
C. The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to topography
and the character of surrounding development.
D. All side lines of lots shall be at approximate right angles to straight
street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where a variation to
this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. Lots with double
frontage should be avoided.
E. No lot shall have less area or width than that required by the zoning
regulations applying to the area in which it is located. The area of the
lot shall only be considered as that portion bounded by the side and
rear lot lines and the street right-of-way line.
F. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide the possibility of positive drainage
away from buildings, water levels, and sewage disposal fields when
developed.
§ 78-37 SEWERS § 78-39
68:427
G. In cases of unusual soil conditions or other physical factors which may
impair the health and safety of the neighborhood in which a subdivision
may be located, upon recommendation of the commonwealth and
county health authorities, the governing body may require larger lot
widths and lot areas than might otherwise be necessary.
H. No corner lot shall have a width at the building line of less than 125
feet. Each of the two sides of a corner lot fronting on a street shall be
designated and be treated as a front yard.
I. All corner lots, whether they are located at the intersection or rights-ofway
of two streets, shall have a curve with a minimum radius of 10 feet
adjoining the two side lines of said rights-of-way.
J. Business or industrial lots shall be of such size and shape as may be
suitable for their prospective use and to provide sufficient space for offstreet
parking and loading and water supply on the site and sanitary
sewage disposal on the site (if either or both are to be provided). The
minimum lot dimensions shall be as approved by the governing body.
K. Every lot shall abut on at least one public street, as such is defined in
this chapter, but not only on a service street; provided, however, that
not more than three dwelling units may be served by a private street (as
defined in § 78-9 of this chapter) of not less than 50 feet in width,
provided that a modification is granted in accordance with the
procedures of § 78-53B of this chapter. In addition to the requirements
and conditions stated this chapter, the governing body may impose such
additional requirements upon the allowance of a private street as such
a modification to the terms of this chapter, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Partial or full compliance with any or all the requirements,
standards or conditions for the approval of public roads, as set
forth in this chapter, Township Ordinance No. 116 and all other
Pennsylvania and Township laws, ordinances and regulations, now
and as amended in the future, including but not limited to design,
construction and maintenance standards and performance and
maintenance bond requirements.
(2) The execution of a formal agreement by the developer, approved by
the Township Solicitor, whereby the developer agrees to the
nondelegable duty of perpetual maintenance of the private road.
L. If remnants of land exist after subdividing or developing, they shall be
suitably incorporated in existing or proposed lots or they may be
dedicated to public use if acceptable for such public use.
M. No lot shall be divided by the Township boundary line.
N. For a lot on a cul-de-sac, the building setback line shall have length
equal to the required frontage for the zoning district in which the lot is
located. No point on the building setback line shall be closer to the
§ 78-39 PINE CODE § 78-39
68:428
§ 78-40. Monuments.
Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the
intersections of all outside boundary lines of the plat; at intersections of
those boundary lines with all street lines; at diagonally opposite corners of
each street intersection; at the beginning and end of all curves; at points
on curves where the radius or direction changes; and at such other points
as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plan except those
outlining individual lots. In general, permanent monuments shall be placed
at all critical points necessary to correctly lay out any lot in the subdivision.
§ 78-41. Sanitary sewage disposal.
The developer shall submit a report prepared by a registered engineer
setting forth the proposed method of disposing of sewage and the basis of
such determination in accordance with the following:
public right-of-way than the center point of said line. All lots on a
cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet. The side yard
requirements for a lot on a cul-de-sac shall be measured at the building
setback line.
O. No lot shall be approved for development where the driveway has a
grade of more than 15%.
A. If a subdivision or development is within reasonable distance of an
existing public sanitary sewer, a report on the feasibility of connection
to public existing sewerage system shall be made. This study shall
include the distance from the nearest existing public sewer and the
capacity of the existing system intended to handle the additional
sewage load.
B. If connection to an existing public sewerage system is not deemed to be
feasible, the feasibility of constructing a separate community sewerage
system and treatment works shall be investigated. This study shall give
the location of the treatment works, receiving stream, type of plans,
degree of treatment, and design population.
C. In the event that neither A or B is reasonably feasible, formal
application to the appropriate agencies of the federal, commonwealth
and county government and the resulting approval shall be required.
D. Individual sewage disposal facilities. In the event that it is not feasible
to connect to an existing public sewage system or construct a separate
community system, consideration may be given to the installation of onlot
sewage disposal systems for the subdivision or development.
E. All sanitary sewage disposal systems, whether public, community or
individual, shall comply with and be subject to all applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Allegheny County Health Department and the municipal
sanitary authority (if any) which shall accept such sewage for treatment
§ 78-39 SEWERS § 78-41
68:429
§ 78-42. Sidewalks.
and/or disposal, and proof thereof shall be submitted by the subdivider
or developer.
A. Construction. The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks shall be
in accordance with these specifications and in conformity to the lines,
grades, and dimensions approved by the Township Engineer.
(1) Concrete. All sidewalks shall be of one-coarse cement concrete
construction of Class A cement concrete as specified in this section.
(2) Dimensions.
(a) Concrete sidewalks shall have the dimensions as set forth on a
drawing prepared by the Township Engineer showing standard
dimensions.
(b) This drawing shall be available for inspection at the Township
of Pine Municipal Building.
(3) Forms.
(a) Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and
of sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the
concrete without springing.
(b) If wood, they shall be nominal two-inch planks surfaced on the
inside and the top; if of metal, they shall be of approved
section.
(c) Forms shall have a depth equal to the depth of the concrete
and shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete
is placed against them.
(d) Forms that are worn, bent, or damaged shall not be used.
(4) Preparation of foundation.
(a) Excavation shall be as required, and the foundation shall be
formed at a depth of eight inches below and parallel with the
finished surface of the sidewalk. When directed, unsuitable
material shall be removed. The foundation shall be thoroughly
compacted and finished to a firm, even surface and moistened
if required.
(b) Placing aggregate for bed. Aggregate shall be spread on the
prepared foundation to form a thoroughly compacted bed four
inches deep.
(5) Joints.
(a) Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs not exceeding
20 feet in length except for closures.
§ 78-41 PINE CODE § 78-42
68:430
(b) The slabs shall be separated by a vertical joint for the full width
and full thickness of the slab.
(c) A one-half-inch expansion joint shall be provided between each
section of sidewalk and shall be filled with approved joint filler
for the full length and thickness of the section.
(d) Expansion joints shall also be placed adjacent to the existing
structures when directed by the Township Engineer and shall
be placed longitudinally where the sidewalk is to be
constructed in contact with a curb and at such other places as
may be directed by the Township Engineer.
(6) Finish.
(a) After the concrete is poured into the forms, it shall be puddled
and spaded so as to ensure a thorough mixture, eliminate air
pockets and create uniform and smooth sides.
(b) After the concrete has set sufficiently, the forms shall be
removed and the top side shall be finished with a wood float or
brush and shall be edged at all joints with a one-fourth-inch
edging tool to make a uniform finished surface.
(c) The concrete shall be cured with either an application of an
approved curing compound or covered with a polyethylene
sheet covering.
(7) Backfilling. After the concrete has been cured for at least 72 hours,
the spaces adjacent to the sidewalks shall be backfilled with
approved materials in layers of not more than four inches in depth,
which shall be thoroughly compacted mechanically to the required
elevation and cross section.
B. Materials. Sidewalks shall be constructed of the following materials:
(1) Concrete.
(a) All concrete used shall be true portland cement and shall meet
the requirements of the latest standard specifications for
portland cement as adopted by the American Society for
Testing and Materials.
(b) No type of cement shall be substituted without the written
approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall consist of stone and
shall meet the physical requirements and the size and grading
requirements specified in this section for No. 2 or 2B coarse
aggregate, as specified in the latest revision of the specifications
issued by the Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, also known as "Form 408," unless otherwise
approved in writing by the Township Engineer.
§ 78-42 SEWERS § 78-42
68:431
(3) Fine aggregate.
(a) Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or manufactured
sand from the controlled mechanical breakdown of stone into
sound, cubical-shaped particles or from the controlled
mechanical breakdown of conglomerate sandstone to
individual grain size or white, fine aggregate, consisting of
calcite, white quartz, or silica, free from discoloring materials.
(b) It shall be composed of hard, durable grain thoroughly cleaned
by washing, free from harmful amounts of clay or silt,
vegetation and other substances determined to be deleterious.
(c) When dry, all parts of fine aggregate shall pass through a
three-eighths-inch sieve.
(4) Cement concrete. Cement concrete shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Description. Cement concrete shall consist of portland cement,
fine aggregate, coarse aggregate, water and admixtures and
shall conform to the materials, design and control
requirements specified for Class A cement concrete as set
forth in the latest revision of specifications issued by the
Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, known as "Form 408," unless otherwise
approved in writing by the Township Engineer.
(b) Proportioning.
[1] The minimum cement factor shall be 6.00 bags per cubic
yard of concrete.
[2] The quantity of water used per bag of concrete shall be the
minimum to obtain a satisfactory, workable concrete as
determined by the Township Engineer, but shall not
exceed 5.6 gallons, including the free water in the
aggregates. No. 2B coarse aggregate shall be used in this
concrete.
[3] The proportions of fine and coarse aggregate per bag of
concrete shall comply with the requirements for Class A
cement concrete specified in Section 704.1(g)-2A of the
latest revision of specifications issued by the Department
of Transportation, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, known
as "Form 408," unless otherwise specified in writing by the
Township Engineer.
(c) Consistency.
[1] The mixed concrete shall be of uniform consistency.
§ 78-42 PINE CODE § 78-42
68:432
§ 78-43. Site stabilization.
§ 78-44. Streets.
[2] The quantity of water used shall be the minimum to obtain
a satisfactory, workable concrete with the lowest allowable
slump consistent with practicable workability of the
concrete as determined by the Township Engineer.
[3] The allowable slump determined in accordance with PTM
No. 600 shall be between one and three inches.
(d) Design strength of concrete.
[1] The concrete design mix, when molded, cured and tested
in accordance with the procedures employed by the
Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, shall meet the minimum compressive
strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch in 28 days.
[2] Test cylinders and samples shall be supplied upon request
of the Township Engineer.
(e) During cold or freezing weather, calcium chloride may be
added to concrete, but not in excess of two pounds per bag of
cement.
(f) If transit-mix concrete is used, the supplier shall be able to
certify compliance with the above requirements at the request
of the Township Engineer.
C. Unless otherwise provided, the maintenance of sidewalks and/or trails,
including the maintenance of landscaping adjacent to such sidewalk
and/or trail, is the responsibility of the property owner on which the
sidewalk or trail is located.
A. All disturbed areas shall be seeded within 14 days of rough or
subgrading work.
B. Permanent seeding operations shall be complete within 30 days of final
grading operations with seed mixtures for grasses, grasses and
wildflowers or other seed mixtures as approved by the Township
Engineer.
A. General.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning
District Map, where applicable, and to Township ordinances
pertaining to construction of roads and drainage facilities as the
same are amended and may be amended in the future.
§ 78-42 SEWERS § 78-44
68:433
(2) Where not shown on the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning District
Map, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall
conform to the provisions found herein.
(3) Every subdivision and land development shall have access to a
public street.
B. Street layout.
(1) In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing streets and shall compose a convenient system to ensure
circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, with the exception
that minor local streets may be laid out so that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(2) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
interstate, arterial (principal or minor) or collector street, the
governing body shall require marginal access streets in order to
protect residential areas from heavy traffic and also to provide
separation between local and through traffic.
(3) Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
(4) New half or partial streets will not be permitted. Wherever a tract
to be subdivided or developed borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be platted within such tract
at required widths.
(5) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit
future street extension into adjoining tracts or when designated as
culs-de-sac. The length of any cul-de-sac street shall be no longer
than the length needed to accommodate a maximum of 50 dwelling
units or a maximum of 4,000 feet, whichever shall be less. The
length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the nearest
edge of the pavement of the nearest intersecting street (which is
not itself a cul-de-sac street) to the center of the circle forming the
cul-de-sac. The turnaround of the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum
radius to the outside edge of the paving or curb of 60 feet and a
right-of-way having a minimum radius of 75 feet. Such cul-de-sac
may include a planting area so long as the paved portion of the culde-
sac maintains a minimum width of 24 feet. [Amended
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(6) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided or developed, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions
for the proper projection of streets. Where a new subdivision
adjoins undeveloped or unsubdivided land susceptible to being
subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries
of the tract proposed to be subdivided or developed.
§ 78-44 PINE CODE § 78-44
68:434
(7) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided.
Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed
with care for safety, and suitable curbs, barriers, signs and other
devices may be required. Streets entering opposite sides of another
street shall be laid out directly opposite one another.
(8) Where new developments are adjacent to a development where
streets are carried to or proposed to be carried to any of the
boundaries that abut the parcel to be developed, then the streets
within the new development shall be extended to or connected to
the street location or street in the adjacent development.
(9) Street and driveway intersections with arterial (principal or minor)
or collector streets shall not be so numerous nor so close to each
other as to impede the flow of traffic on such arterial street or as to
create a safety hazard on such arterial or collector street.
(10)No vacation of any street or part of a street dedicated for public use
shall be approved if such vacation interferes with the uniformity of
the existing street pattern or any future street plans prepared for
the area.
C. Service streets. Service streets may be permitted under special
circumstances in residential areas, but in no case shall a service street
provide the only means of access to a lot. Service streets are required
on the rear of all commercial and industrial lots if no other provisions
are made for adequate service access or for parking.
D. Minimum street grade. No street shall have a grade less than 1%.
E. Horizontal and vertical curve design.
(1) Vertical curves should be designed to provide minimum stopping
and sight distances and comfort to the driver and be pleasing in
appearance. The minimum length of a vertical curve is given by the
following formula:
L =KA
Where:
L =The length of the vertical curve in feet.
A =The algebraic difference between the rates of grade
expressed in percent.
K =The horizontal distance in feet required to effect a onepercent
change in gradient.
(2) Minimum values of K are as follows:
§ 78-44 SEWERS § 78-44
68:435
Design Speed K Value (minimum)
15 5
20 10
25 18
30 28
35 40
40 55
50 85
60 160
(3) All center-line changes in direction shall be joined by a horizontal
curve of appropriate radius.
F. Other minimum and maximum street and crosswalk design standards
shall be in accordance with this section.
G. Traffic control and street name signs shall be installed in accordance
with Township standards where required by the Township at the
expense of developer.
H. The Planning Commission shall not recommend for approval and the
Board of Supervisors shall not approve any final plat unless all abutting
minor local, collector and arterial (principal or minor) streets shown
thereon and all minor local, collector and arterial (principal or minor)
streets which provide transportation access to or may be utilized, in
whole or in part, by traffic generated from such proposed development
presently meet the minimum level of service incorporated herein as the
Township of Pine Transportation Improvement Program Amendment, or
by reference, or will meet such minimum level of service criteria within
a reasonable period of time pursuant to the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan incorporated as to the Township of Pine
Transportation Improvements Program Amendment.
I. In order to ensure that the adopted minimum level of service is met and
to assure that the costs of the necessary transportation improvements
to accommodate the development consistent with said level of service
are funded and equitably apportioned based upon the traffic generation
characteristics of the proposed use, final approval of all such plats shall
be conditioned upon participation by the developer in the Township of
Pine Transportation Improvement Program Amendment. Said
participation shall be guaranteed by the execution of an agreement
between the Township of Pine and the traffic generator, on a form
provided by the Township of Pine, providing for payment of the
applicable impact fee at the time of issuance of a building permit for
development pursuant to the final plat as approved.
J. All streets shown on any plat shall be of sufficient width and proper
grade as outlined in this section and shall be so located as to
§ 78-44 PINE CODE § 78-44
68:436
§ 78-45. Street shoulders and embankments.
§ 78-46. Street surfacing; public road specifications.
All roads shall be subject to the standard details81 and Chapter 72 of the
Township of Pine Code.
§ 78-47. Street and traffic control signs.
Street and traffic control signs and devices shall be of the type approved by
the Township Engineer and shall be installed by the developer at no cost to
the Township, in accordance with Township's and PENNDOT standards at
locations specified by the Township or required by PENNDOT.
§ 78-48. Trees and woodlands.
The purpose of this section is to preserve existing tree vegetation by
recognizing the environmental, aesthetic, and economic benefit of trees, to
alleviate soil erosion, to control stormwater management and to reduce the
harmful effects of land disturbance to adjacent lands and watercourses.
accommodate the probable volume of traffic thereon, facilitate fire
protection, provide access for fire-fighting equipment to buildings and
provide a coordinated system of streets conforming to the Township's
plan of streets.
A. Street shoulders shall be constructed to a width of not less than five
feet on each side of the paved surface.
B. Street shoulders shall be constructed with suitable materials from
roadway or structure excavation supplemented by additional suitable
material, if directed, from borrow excavation. The entire shoulder area
shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by rolling and must be
level with the tops of curbs as directed by the Township Engineer.
C. Embankments at the sides of streets and cross sections of drainage
ditches shall not exceed a maximum slope of one foot horizontally to
two feet vertically in a cut section and two feet horizontally to one foot
vertically in a fill section; in special cases the Township Engineer may
require more rigid standards. The toe of embankments and cut or fill
slopes shall be separated from the center line of drainage ditches or
swales by a minimum of four feet.
A. Requirement standard. The standards contained in this § 78-48 shall
apply to all land development or subdivision plans containing 10 acres
or more.
B. Woodland preservation and protection of significant or unique trees
shall be according to the following standards:
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 78-44 SEWERS § 78-48
68:437
(1) No more than 60% of a woodlands may be cleared or developed.
The remaining 40% shall be maintained as permanent open space.
(2) All trees, which are identified to be retained on the development
site, shall be protected during construction by the placement of a
physical barrier outside of the drip area of all such trees.
(3) All trees of significance (those trees with a DBH of 12 inches or
greater), which are located within the area of disturbance shall be
preserved unless:
(a) The tree is diseased or dead; or
(b) The removal of the tree is mitigated pursuant to § 78-48E.
(4) Trees are not to be cleared unless they are located within an area
approved for grading, or the area to be occupied by a structure, or
can be clearly demonstrated that the tree or trees are detrimental
to the proposed development.
C. Preservation of woodlands as described above is limited based on
prioritization of site specific resources intended to be preserved, as
follows:
(1) Wooded slopes of 15% to 25%: no more than 60% of such areas
shall be cleared.
(2) Wooded slopes of 25% or more: no more than 20% of such areas
shall be cleared.
(3) Wetlands and stream corridors: no clearing within 50 feet of
designated wetlands as identified by the preapplication review
required for subdivisions and land developments in Chapter 78 or
Chapter 84, Zoning, of the Township of Pine Code or within 50 feet
of a blue-lined stream as identified by United States Geological
Survey mapping.
(4) Drainageways: no more than 50% of such areas shall be cleared,
and their development shall be limited to recreational and open
space uses.
(5) buffer yards not falling in the above categories, where existing
woodlands occur: no more than 50% of such areas shall be cleared.
D. Replacement and mitigation standards. Replacement of existing
woodlands and site vegetation cleared for site improvements shall be
according to the following standards:
(1) Tree replacement shall be compatible to the existing native
vegetation found or cleared from the site. Tree types, deciduous or
conifer, and tree species shall be required to be matched for
replacement vegetation.
§ 78-48 PINE CODE § 78-48
68:438
(2) Woodland replacement shall be on a one-fourth-to-one basis. If one
acre is cleared, 1/4 acre is to be replaced.
(3) Minimum width of new planting areas shall be 25 feet wide.
(4) Woodlands shall be established in new, unforested, or nonvegetated
areas on the property and should be contiguous where possible.
(5) Plant material requirements for replacement/mitigation shall be as
required below. Plant materials shall be pursuant to one of the
below-described options:
Option Tree Type Units/Acre Minimum Size
1 Large canopy trees 30 21/2 inches caliper
2 Large canopy trees 20 21/2 inches caliper
Understory trees 30 1 1/2 inches caliper
3 Large canopy trees 10 2 1/2 inches caliper
Understory trees 15 1 1/2 inches caliper
Deciduous shrubs 70 30 inches spread
and height
4 Understory trees 20 1 1/2 inches caliper
Deciduous shrubs 100 30 inches spread
and height
5 Conifers 45 5 feet height
(6) Existing vegetation preserved on the site shall not be included in
the above counts required for new plantings and replacement
vegetation.
E. Trees of significance. Any tree of significance removed for new
development shall either be replaced or mitigated as follows:
(1) On-site mitigation of the removed tree of significance shall be as
follows:
(a) Any tree of significance removed for new development with a
DBH between 12 inches and 24 inches shall either be replaced
with one six-inch caliper DBH tree; two four-inch caliper DBH
trees; or four three-inch caliper DBH trees elsewhere on the
development site.
(b) Any tree of significance removed for new development with a
DBH greater than 24 inches shall either be replaced with two
six-inch caliper DBH trees; four four-inch caliper DBH trees; or
eight three-inch caliper DBH trees elsewhere on the
development site.
§ 78-48 SEWERS § 78-48
68:439
§ 78-49. Wetlands and watercourses.
The purpose of this section is to promote avoidance of wetlands and to
preserve existing wetlands, streams, and watercourses to the maximum
extent possible in an effort to control flooding, to preserve the ecological
balance and to provide wildlife habitats within the Township.
(2) When on-site mitigation is not possible due to the nature of the site,
off-site mitigation of the removed tree of significance may be
permitted as follows:
(a) Any tree of significance removed for new development with a
DBH between 12 inches and 24 inches shall either be replaced
with one six-inch caliper DBH tree; or two four-inch caliper
DBH trees; or four three-inch caliper DBH trees at a location
mutually agreed by the developer and the Township.
(b) Any tree of significance removed for new development with a
DBH greater than 24 inches shall either be replaced with two
six-inch caliper DBH trees; four four-inch caliper DBH trees; or
eight three-inch caliper DBH trees at a location mutually
agreed by the developer and the Township.
(c) Payment to the Township of Pine the amount otherwise costing
the developer to purchase and install the trees for mitigation
which will be used at the Township's discretion to install trees
where the Township deems appropriate.
F. Maintenance. Developer/owner shall be responsible to replace all dead
or damaged trees installed pursuant to these requirements for a period
of two years after the installation date of the vegetation described
herein.
G. Additional clearing in excess of the above. The developer shall plant
new woodlands at 1.25 times the surface acreage of disturbed area for
that portion which exceeds the above requirements for areas of
disturbance, which exceeds 60% of woodlands.
A. Requirement standard. These standards shall apply to all land
development or subdivision plans when wetlands are suspected on the
development site or watercourses are on the development site.
B. Requirement standards.
(1) The following requirements shall apply to subdivisions and land
developments:
(a) Upon submittal of wetlands data to the Environmental
Advisory Council as part of the preapplication requirements
and after its review, if it is determined that wetlands may exist,
the applicant shall submit evidence to the Township that it has
contacted the commonwealth's Department of Environmental
§ 78-48 PINE CODE § 78-49
68:440
§ 78-50. Utilities.
§ 78-51. Walls, slopes and traffic guards.
Protection and appropriate federal agencies to determine the
applicability of state and federal wetland regulations. Any
approval shall be contingent upon full compliance with any
requirements of these agencies.
(b) For subdivisions or land developments over 25 acres or
planned residential developments of any size, the applicant
shall prepare a Stage One Wetland Delineation Report, as
defined by the Department of Environmental Protection,
prepared by a certified engineer knowledgeable in wetland
delineation for submittal.
C. Standards for preservation. Subdivision or land development may not
affect any wetland, perennial stream, or watercourse as follows:
(1) No disturbance shall be permitted within 50 feet of any
watercourse or perennial stream. For the purpose of this
subsection, "watercourse or perennial stream" shall mean any nonintermittent
stream, run, river, or other flow of water that supports
or is capable of supporting year-round aquatic fauna.
(2) No disturbance shall be permitted that would require
encroachment, regrading or the placement of fill in wetlands either
in violation of any state or federal regulations or within 50 feet of
such wetlands.
D. Mitigation standards. Approved mitigation and enhancement plans as
approved by the Township and the Department of Environmental
Protection shall be required as necessary.
A. Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by utilities,
and easements acceptable to the utility companies shall be provided.
B. All utility transmission lines and service lines shall be underground and
located within the boundaries of the easements granted for that
purpose.
C. To the fullest extent possible, underground utility transmission line or
service line location in street right-of-way shall not be installed beneath
existing or proposed paved areas and, in any case, shall be installed
prior to the placement of any paving.
A. Where the grade of the street is above or below the grade of the
adjacent land, walls (in accordance with Chapter 48 of the Township
Code) or slopes shall be constructed in a manner satisfactory to the
Township Engineer and shall be sufficient to support the street or the
adjacent land, as the individual case may require.
§ 78-49 SEWERS § 78-51
68:441
§ 78-52. Waterline and water supply.
B. Where the grade of the street is three feet or more above the grade of
the adjacent land, guardrails shall be built to protect travel.
A. Public water supply. Where public water supply is available as
determined by the governing body, the subdivider or developer shall
provide a system of water mains and connectors with such public water
supply and provide a connection for each lot. If water is to be provided
by means other than by private wells owned and maintained by the
individual owners of lots, the subdivider or developer shall present
acceptable evidence to the governing body that the development is to
be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or
utility. Such acceptable evidence shall include a copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Utility Commission or an
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate.
B. Individual water supply. Where public water supply is not available, the
subdivider or developer shall supply acceptable evidence of the
availability of water. The subdivider or developer may be required to
make one or more test wells in the area to be platted. Copies of well
logs, which are obtained, shall include the name and address of the well
driller and shall be submitted with the plan to the governing body.
C. Location and construction of individual private wells.
(1) Individual private wells shall be located at least 25 feet from
property lines.
(2) As a precaution against seepage, a watertight seal shall be
provided around the pump mounting.
(3) All abandoned wells shall be sealed in a manner that will render
them watertight.
(4) In all cases where it has been determined that on-site water
distribution is not feasible, a community water distribution system
shall be required. Where a community water distribution system is
reasonably feasible, it may be required by the governing body, at
the developer's expense.
D. All water supply, whether public or individual and private, shall comply
with and be subject to all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the Allegheny County Health
Department and any municipal authority, which shall be providing
service to the subdivision or land development, and proof thereof shall
be submitted by the subdivider or developer.
§ 78-51 PINE CODE § 78-52
68:442
ARTICLE VII
Authorities and Procedures
§ 78-53. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
A. Approval of phased plans. If the proposed subdivision or land
development is planned to be completed in two or more phases over a
reasonable number of years, the governing body may authorize
submission of final plats and plans which are in compliance with all
other sections of this chapter in sections or phases of development,
provided that the governing body mandates completion of all required
improvements or appropriate requirements and completion guaranties
for and in future sections or phases of development as it finds
reasonable for the public's protection before granting final approval to
the first section or phase of the subdivision or land development which
is to be developed.
B. Waivers and modifications. The Board of Supervisors shall have the
authority to grant modifications to any of the requirements of this
chapter, provided that the following procedures and requirements are
met. Any request for a variance to any requirement of the Township
Zoning Ordinance82 shall not be within the jurisdiction of the Board of
Supervisors and shall be referred to the Zoning Hearing Board for
disposition.
(1) Modifications in cases of physical hardship. In any particular case
where the applicant can show by plan and written statement that,
by reason of topographic or other physical conditions, the literal
enforcement of any requirement of this chapter would exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, the Board of Supervisors may modify such requirements
to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such
hardship, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the intent and purpose of this chapter is
observed.
(2) Modifications to allow equal or better specifications. When an
equal or better specification is available to comply with the
Township improvement specifications or design standards of this
chapter, the Board of Supervisors may make such reasonable
modifications to such requirements of this chapter to allow the use
of the equal or better specification, upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer. In approving such modification, the Board of
Supervisors may attach any reasonable conditions, which may be
necessary to assure adequate public improvements and protect the
public safety.
(3) Procedures for authorizing modifications.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Zoning.
§ 78-53 SEWERS § 78-53
68:443
§ 78-54. Authority of Planning Commission.
In addition to the power and authority vested in the Planning Commission
by other laws and ordinances, the Planning Commission is hereby
designated as a viewing authority of and for the governing body and is
charged with the duty of making investigations, reports and
recommendations on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions
and land developments and to review and recommend to the governing
body for approval, conditional approval or disapproval plats and plans of
subdivisions and land development.
§ 78-55. Subdivision restrictions.
(a) Any request for a modification to this chapter authorized by
this section shall be submitted, in writing, by the applicant as
part of the application of a preliminary or final application,
stating the specific requirements of this chapter which are
proposed to be modified, the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based
and the minimum modification deemed necessary.
(b) The request for a modification to this chapter shall be
considered by the Board of Supervisors at a public meeting.
The Board of Supervisors may hold a public hearing pursuant
to public notice prior to making a decision on the request for a
modification.
(c) Requests for modifications shall be first reviewed by the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
recommendation shall be entered into the official record of the
Board of Supervisors meeting.
(d) The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all
actions on all requests for modification and the reasons relied
upon by the Board of Supervisors in approving or disapproving
the request for a modification shall be entered into the minutes
of the meeting. Any decision, resolution, or ordinance adopted
governing an application, which contains a request for a
modification shall include reference to the modification and the
reasons for approval or disapproval.
C. Judicial review. Any decision of the governing body granting or denying
preliminary or final approval of a subdivision plan shall be subject to
appeal in court in the same manner and within the same time limitation
as provided for zoning appeals by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
A. Recording subdivisions.
(1) A subdivision plan, which has been granted final approval, shall be
recorded by the landowner or his agent in the office of the
§ 78-53 PINE CODE § 78-55
68:444
§ 78-56. Land development restrictions.
Commencement of development. No land development shall commence
until a final plan has been approved and recorded in the Allegheny County
Recorder of Deeds office and until all necessary permits (Township, county,
commonwealth or federal) have been received for the same and proof
thereof has been provided to the Township.
§ 78-57. Permits required.
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County according to the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) No plan of any subdivision or land development shall be entitled to
record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County or
have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner
prescribed herein. In the event that any such unapproved plan is
recorded, it shall be considered legally null, void, and as not ever
having been recorded. The governing body shall institute
proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the
county.
B. Revisions after final plan approval. No changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any plan of a subdivision or land
development after final approval has been given by the governing body
and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless said plan is first
resubmitted to the governing body.
C. Sale of lots in subdivision. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit
to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision, unless
and until a subdivision plan has been approved and, where required,
recorded and until the improvements required by the governing body in
connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed, as
herein above provided. Where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of this provision would result in unnecessary hardship, the
governing body may make such reasonable written exception thereto as
will not be contrary to the public interest and may permit the sale of a
lot, issuance of a permit or erection of a building, subject to conditions
necessary to assure adequate streets and other public improvements.
D. Failure to develop. In the event that a subdivision plan or section
thereof is given final approval and thereafter the landowner abandons
such plan or section thereof that has been finally approved and shall so
notify the governing body in writing or in the event that the landowner
shall fail to commence and carry out the development of the subdivision
within two years after final approval has been granted, no development
or further development shall take place on the property included in the
subdivision plan until after said property is resubdivided.
A. Building or repair permits shall not be issued for any structure on a lot
in a subdivision or land development for which a plan has not been
§ 78-55 SEWERS § 78-57
68:445
§ 78-58. Enforcement.
The governing body shall designate, by resolution, one or more persons
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and rules, regulations and fee
schedules made in connection herewith, including but not limited to the
duties of examining applications for compliance and inspecting actual
construction.
§ 78-59. Notification.
Notification required by this chapter shall be deemed to have been
accomplished if it is personally delivered to the residence or place of
business of the applicant or mailed postage paid, certified return receipt
requested.
§ 78-60. Time limits and extensions.
Time limits contained herein are to be strictly construed but may be
extended by mutual written agreement between the Township, or any of its
authorized officials or agencies, and the applicant.
§ 78-61. Completion guaranty, construction warranty and
developer's agreement.
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this chapter and for
which all other necessary permits have been issued by the Township,
county, commonwealth or federal agencies.
B. No owner or agent of the owner of any land shall be entitled to a permit
for the installation of wells and septic tanks upon any lots in a
subdivision or land development for which a plan has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this chapter and for
which all other necessary permits have been issued by the Township,
county, commonwealth or federal agencies.
A. The Township hereby defines its policy to be that the Township will
withhold all public improvements of whatsoever nature, including the
maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewerage facilities and
water service, from all subdivisions and land developments which have
not been approved and from all areas dedicated to the public which
have not been accepted by the governing body in the manner
prescribed herein.
B. Completion guaranty.
(1) Guaranty of required improvements and dedication of public
improvements. Prior to the issuance of any Township permits for
the development of a subdivision or land development, a
completion guaranty in the form of a bond, cash deposit, certified
check, other negotiable securities, irrevocable letter of credit or
other financial security acceptable to the Township shall be filed,
§ 78-57 PINE CODE § 78-61
68:446
which covers all streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management
facilities, water systems, fire hydrants, sidewalks and other
required improvements. The guaranty shall:
(a) Run to favor of the Township.
(b) Be in the amount of 110% of the anticipated cost of
improvements as certified by the Township Engineer.
(c) Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(d) Be part of an executed developer's agreement between the
Township and the subdivider/developer, which shall state all
conditions of approval and improvements, which the
subdivider/developer shall perform as part of a conditional
approval. Such developer's agreement shall be in a form and
content approved by the Township Solicitor and shall provide,
among other things, that all required approvals and permits for
the development have been secured from all appropriate
Township, county, commonwealth and federal officials, offices
and agencies. Also, a written contractual commitment shall be
supplied by the applicant, approved by the Township Solicitor,
confirming that the applicant is binding itself not to cause any
physical change in the land or to any structure which requires
prior approval or the issuance of a permit, or both, from any
governmental body or agency until such permits and approvals
are actually obtained and authorizing the Township to obtain
an immediate ex parte injunction and such other remedies as
the Township deems appropriate against the applicant, its
agents and contractors in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County if said work is commenced without such
permits and approvals. Such developer's agreement shall
further specify that the subdivision or land development shall
be completed and maintained in the manner approved in the
final plan and on the time schedule agreed upon and shall
specify remedies for failure to comply.
(2) Release of completion guaranty. Bonds, cash, checks or securities
filed as a completion guaranty shall be returned or released upon
written certification by the Township Engineer or a designated
agent that improvements and facilities have been satisfactorily
installed and completed in accordance with all applicable
standards and specifications and that all required fees have been
paid. A report on any requested release or return of a completion
guaranty shall be prepared by the Engineer within 30 days after
authorization to do so has been received pursuant to the provisions
of Section 510 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(53 P.S. § 10510) and the procedures for effecting the release of
such completion guaranty shall be as set forth therein.
§ 78-61 SEWERS § 78-61
68:447
(3) Default of completion guaranty. If improvements are not installed
and completed within two years of the date of recording for the plat
or do not comply with the standards and specifications of this
chapter, the Township may proceed to complete the improvements
and facilities and may use whatever proceeds from bonds, cash
deposits, checks or securities as are required to meet the expense
of completing such improvements.
(4) Dedication of public improvements. When streets, sanitary sewers,
storm drainage facilities, waterlines or other required
improvements in the subdivision or land development have been
completed in accordance with this chapter and an approved
subdivision and land development plan for the development site,
such improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they
have been offered for dedication to the Township and accepted by
separate ordinance or resolution or until they have been
condemned for use as a public facility. Prior to the acceptance of
any improvement, the Township Engineer shall inspect it to ensure
that it is constructed in accordance with the approved plan and is
functioning properly. In the case of any stormwater control facility,
it must be free of sediment and debris. In addition, the developer
shall submit as-built plans of all facilities proposed for dedication.
(5) Construction warranty. Prior to acceptance of any improvements or
facilities, the applicant shall provide to the Township, for a period
of 18 months from the date of acceptance of the improvements and
facilities, a financial security bond in the form of a bond, cash,
certified check or other negotiable securities, acceptable to the
Township, in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of the
improvements and facilities in order to guarantee against any
defect in material or installation of the improvements and facilities.
C. Construction of the public improvements approved in the subdivision or
land development plan shall be substantially commenced within one
year from the date the governing body gave approval to the final plan
unless such time period is extended by the governing body. If the
improvements are not completed within two years of the date of final
approval and in accordance with the standards approved in the final
plan, the governing body (unless it grants an extension thereof) shall
enforce the completion guaranty and seek any other legal and equitable
remedies it deems appropriate. If the amount of the completion
guaranty is insufficient to install, repair, correct, and maintain the
public improvements, the governing body may, at its option, do the
necessary work and initiate court action to recover the cost of such
work.
§ 78-61 PINE CODE § 78-61
68:448
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Violations
§ 78-62. Subdivision and land development review fee.
In order to defray a part of the costs incurred by the Township in the review
of proposed final plans for subdivision or land development, each subdivider
or developer shall pay such fees as are fixed by resolution or resolutions of
the governing body. The appropriate fee shall be in the form of a certified
check or money order made payable to Township of Pine. It shall accompany
the final plan at the time it is first filed with the Township Secretary. Each
subdivider or land developer shall also reimburse the Township for the
reasonable and necessary charges of its professional consultants (including
but not limited to its Engineer and Solicitor) for their review and reports to
the Township regarding subdivision and land development applications (to
the maximum extent permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code).
§ 78-63. Inspection fees.
In order to defray a part of the costs incurred by the Township in inspecting
the installation of the improvements required in subdivisions and land
developments by this chapter to assure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter, the subdivider or developer shall, at the time he files
the original tracing of the final plan of a subdivision with the Township
Secretary, present a certified check or money order made payable to
Township of Pine in an amount equal to 3% of the estimate of the cost of
road improvements approved by the Township Engineer. The subdivider or
developer shall also present certificates from all utility companies, whose
services it is contemplated will be employed in said subdivision, stating that
the final plan meets their requirements and specifications insofar as the
utility service which they provide is concerned.
§ 78-64. Violations, penalties and enforcement remedies.
A. In addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available to the
Township for violation of this chapter, the Township may avail itself of
all preventive remedies to restrain, correct or abate violations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to refuse to issue any
permit or grant any approval regarding land in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, all as pursuant to the provisions of Section
515.1 (53 P.S. § 10515.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
B. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment
of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township pursuant to the provisions of
§ 78-62 SEWERS § 78-64
68:449
Section 515.3 (53 P.S. 10515.3) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
§ 78-64 PINE CODE § 78-64
68:450
Chapter 80
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Impact Fee Advisory Committee — See Ch. 20.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 80-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Pine Transportation
Improvements Program Amendment."
§ 80-2. Purpose.
The purpose is to revise and amend the Township of Pine's Transportation
Improvement Program (as previously adopted August 7, 2000, by Ordinance
No. 283) and to establish a more current Transportation Improvements
Program, including a more current Transportation Capital Improvements
Plan, so as to ensure that the Township's transportation system is adequate
to support both existing volumes of traffic and the traffic projected to be
generated by continued new growth and land development. To advance
this objective, the Township's Transportation Improvement Program shall
be amended and be based upon the imposition of a revised transportation
impact fee, payable to the Township of Pine at the time of building permit
issuance, necessary and adequate to provide minimum levels of services (at
the "C" level) as outlined in Exhibit 2 (Township of Pine Roadway Sufficiency
Analysis Update of January, 2000) and Exhibit 3 (Township of Pine Capital
Improvements Plan Update of July, 2010) hereto.83 The program will provide
a continuing generation of funds necessary for the Township of Pine to
initiate and complete capacity transportation improvements needed in
support of continued new growth and land development. Such a program
will involve financial participation for capacity improvements by developers
and, also, by the local, state and federal governments. Through its
Transportation Improvements Program, the Township shall address its
future traffic needs in a timely manner, and the impact of increased traffic
volumes shall be minimized to the extent possible.
§ 80-3. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds and declares that:
A. The Township of Pine is responsible for and committed to the provision
of a transportation system at a service level necessary to adequately
support residential and nonresidential growth and development;
83.Editor's Note: Exhibits 2 and 3 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 78-64 SEWERS § 80-3
68:451
B. Such transportation service level shall be provided by the Township of
Pine utilizing funds allocated via the capital budget and capital
improvements programming processes and relying upon the funding
sources indicated in Exhibit 3 hereto.84
C. The aggregation of development in the designated transportation
service area intensifies the demand for transportation improvements
designed to accommodate traffic volumes at a level of service "C," as
defined by the Transportation Research Board of the National Academy
of Science, with such level of service "C" being the minimum acceptable
level of service to accommodate such development and the intensity
thereof;
D. The development potential of the various properties in the designated
transportation service area are reflected in the Comprehensive Plan of
the Township of Pine and Exhibit 1 hereto85 and are implemented via
the Township's Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map;
E. To the extent that such land development in the designated
transportation service area places demands upon the transportation
system, those demands should be satisfied by the establishment of a
transportation improvement program which divides and distributes the
responsibility for financing the provision of such transportation
facilities between the public at-large (through the Township, state and
federal governments) and the developers of land whose land
development projects contribute to such demands;
F. The amount of the transportation impact fee to be herein imposed shall
be determined by the cost of the transportation improvements needed
to meet the minimum level of specified services and which public
facilities shall be identified in the transportation capital improvements
plan, as shown on Exhibit 3 hereto,86 considering the projected growth
and development in the transportation service area;
G. The Township of Pine hereby finds and declares that a transportation
impact fee imposed upon new residential and nonresidential land
development to assist in the financing of specified major transportation
service improvements, the demand for which has been quantified
through the application of land use assumptions provided by the
Advisory Committee and subsequently approved and adopted by the
Board of Supervisors, is and continues to be in the best interest of the
Township and its residents. It is further found and declared that such
transportation impact fee should now and hereafter be in accord with
the provisions and specifications of Exhibits 1, 2, and 3 hereof.87
84.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
85.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is on file in the Township offices.
86.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
87.Editor's Note: Exhibits 1, 2 and 3 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 80-3 PINE CODE § 80-4
68:452
§ 80-4. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT — The Township permit required for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure pursuant to the
applicable sections of Chapters 44, 46, 48, 78, 84, and/or A144 of the Code
of the Township of Pine or any subsequent amendments thereto. The term
"building permit," as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits
required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other alteration or improvements
to an existing structure, or to the reconstruction or rebuilding of a damaged
or destroyed structure, provided that there is no increase in the structure's
gross floor area or number of dwelling units resulting therefrom.
BUILDOUT — That period in the development of the Township of Pine,
estimated to occur sometime after the year 2025, during which growth
ceases due to the unavailability of further developable land.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use by a new development which increases the
p.m. peak hour trips from that generated by a previous development and
requires an assessment of the applicable transportation impact fees in
accordance with such changed use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan for the Township of
Pine, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, dated April, 2003, and as adopted
April 1, 2003, pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
DEVELOPER — Any present or prospective landowner, agent of such
landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner (and including
but not limited to persons, partnerships, limited liability companies, and
corporations), who makes or causes to be made any undertaking which
requires any of the following in the Township of Pine: land development
application and approval; subdivision application and approval; plat
approval; or building, zoning or use permit of any kind.
DEVELOPMENT — Any commercial, industrial, residential, or other project
involving new construction, enlargement, reconstruction, development,
redevelopment, relocation, structural alteration, or use, which is expected
to generate additional vehicular traffic and which is required to be done or
undertaken pursuant to application to and approval by the Township of Pine
of any kind (including but not limited to land development, plat, subdivision,
and planned residential development proceedings) and/or requires building,
zoning, occupancy or use permits of any kind to be issued by the Township
of Pine.
FUND — The Transportation Improvement Fund established by the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Pine.
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE — A charge or fee, to be paid at the time
of building permit application and prior to its issuance, to generate revenue
for funding the costs of transportation capital improvements necessitated
by and attributable to new development, and calculated based upon the
§ 80-4 SEWERS § 80-4
68:453
costs of transportation capacity improvements in proportion to development
creating the need for such improvements.
IMPROVEMENTS, OFF-SITE — Public transportation capital improvements
which are not on-site improvements, serve the needs of more than one
development and as are listed in Exhibit 3 hereof.88
IMPROVEMENTS, ON-SITE — All improvements constructed on or on land
abutting the developer's property necessary for the ingress or egress to
such property and required to be constructed by the developer pursuant
to any ordinance or regulation of the Township of Pine including, but not
limited to, its subdivision, land development, zoning, planned residential
development and building code requirements.
TRAFFIC GENERATOR — Any land owner, developer, builder, tenant,
occupant or other user of land (including subdividers or applicants) who
increases the vehicular traffic using public streets, roads, and highways,
by the construction of new structures, by the construction of additions to
existing structures, or by changing the existing use of land or structures
thereon.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Those off-site road
improvement projects listed in Exhibit 3,89 or as same may be hereafter
amended by formal action of the Board of Supervisors.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN — The identified
transportation capital improvement projects contained in Exhibit 3.90
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE AREA — That geographically defined area
of the Township of Pine which, pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan and
applicable district zoning regulations, has an aggregation of sites with
development potential creating the need for transportation improvements
within such area to be funded by impact fees. The Township of Pine's
transportation service area shall be the geographic area delineated in
Appendix "E" of Exhibit 2 hereof.91
TRIP GENERATION RATES — Those rates of traffic for the peak hour of
adjacent street traffic between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. as determined
utilizing The Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) most current "Trip
Generation Manual," presently Eighth Edition, and any amendments thereto
and any future editions thereof, the provisions of which are hereby
specifically adopted and incorporated herein by reference as part of this
chapter.
UNIT COST PER TRIP — The dollar amount calculated by dividing the total
development community participation cost estimates by the total forecasted
new trips through buildout, as currently calculated at $1,300 per p.m. peak
hour site development trip in Exhibit 3.92
88.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
89.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
90.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
91.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is on file in the Township offices.
92.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 80-4 PINE CODE § 80-5
68:454
§ 80-5. Reference to existing ordinances.
§ 80-6. Applicability of impact fee.
This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to all development upon land
within the transportation service area for which an application for final
approval is filed with the Township of Pine subsequent to the effective
date hereof. Such developments shall be deemed to include, but not be
limited to, those within all planned residential developments, regardless
of their zoning district, regulated within Chapter 84 of the Code of the
Township of Pine. The transportation impact fee, in the amount calculated
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, shall also serve as a
condition precedent to final plat approval under the Township of Pine's
subdivision and land development ordinances.93
§ 80-7. Imposition of impact fee.
No building permit shall be issued for a development which occurs upon
land within the transportation service area, as herein defined, unless there
has been paid the transportation impact fee imposed by and calculated
pursuant to this chapter. Such developments shall include, but not be
limited to, those within all planned residential developments, regardless
of their zoning district, regulated within Chapter 84 of the Code of the
Township of Pine. The transportation impact fee, in the amount calculated
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, shall also serve as a
condition precedent to final plat approval under the Township of Pine's
subdivision and land development ordinances.94
§ 80-8. Identification of necessary public improvements.
The Board of Supervisors has completed and adopted a traffic study of
transportation sufficiency problems. The traffic study projects future traffic
volumes in the transportation service area, lists the need for and
recommends specific transportation improvements, and estimates
A. Chapter 84, Zoning, Article V, §§ 84-25 and 84-26, Planned Residential
Developments, of the Code of The Township of Pine shall be amended,
as necessary, so as to revise all references and incorporations contained
therein to the Township of Pine Transportation Improvements Program
Amendment, Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and the
exhibits thereto so as to now refer to the applicable provisions hereof.
B. Chapter 78, Subdivision of Land, Articles Ill, IV, and VI thereof, of the
Code of the Township of Pine shall be amended, as necessary, so as to
revise all references and incorporations contained therein to the
Township of Pine Transportation Improvements Program Amendment,
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and the exhibits thereto so
as to now refer to the applicable provisions hereof.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 80-5 SEWERS § 80-8
68:455
construction costs. Projects shall be scheduled by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with Herbert, Rowland, Grubic, Inc. and/or other approved
consultants' engineering and related studies and the recommendation of the
Advisory Committee.
§ 80-9. Calculation of transportation impact fee.
§ 80-10. Establishment of transportation service area.
The Township of Pine's transportation service area is established as shown
on the "Transportation Service Area Map" set forth as Appendix E of Exhibit
1 hereto96 and incorporated herein by reference.
A. The unit cost per trip shall be $1,300 per p.m. peak hour site
development trip, as is set forth in Exhibit 3 hereto,95 or as same may be
hereafter amended pursuant to the provisions hereof and Act 209 of
1990 (Article V-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10501-A et seq.).
B. The transportation impact fee imposed hereby for a specific new
development shall be determined by multiplying the unit cost per trip
for the transportation service area by the p.m. peak hour trips
generated by such development, as identified and estimated in the ITE
Trip Generation Manual, Eighth Edition, any amendments and all future
editions thereof, or by a special transportation study undertaken in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
C. If a development upon which the transportation impact fee imposed
hereby contains a mix of uses, the transportation impact fee for same
shall be separately calculated for each type of use within the
development.
D. A maximum ten-percent contingency is hereby authorized as an
additional cost to be added to construction cost estimates for
transportation capital improvements, as deemed necessary and
appropriate, in order to cover costs anticipated.
A. Additional transportation service areas or combinations of
transportation service areas may hereafter be designated by the Board
of Supervisors, consistent with the procedures for same set forth within
Act 209 of 1990.
B. The identification of the above-referenced transportation service area
and the programming of transportation improvement projects within it
ensures that projected development within the transportation service
area will be adequately served by necessary transportation
improvements which meet the minimum level of service and that
inadequate transportation capacity will not limit development therein.
95.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the Township offices.
96.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 80-8 PINE CODE § 80-10
68:456
§ 80-11. Special situations.
In the event that the Township of Pine determines that the trip generation
characteristics for a specific type of development are not sufficiently
identified in the ITE Trip Generation Manual, Eighth Edition, and any
amendments thereto and any future editions thereof, the applicable
transportation impact fee shall be determined by the Township of Pine
following review of a special transportation study that shall be submitted
by the developer at developer's expense. Such study shall be prepared by a
qualified traffic or transportation engineer or planner using procedures and
methods which are both acceptable to the Township of Pine and based upon
generally accepted transportation planning and engineering standards.
Such study shall document the projected p.m. peak hour traffic volumes at
the development's site following completion and occupancy of the proposed
development.
§ 80-12. Nonbinding impact fee estimate.
Prior to making an application for any development which will be subject
to the payment of transportation impact fees, a nonbinding transportation
impact fee estimate may be requested from the Township. Such estimate
shall be based upon the maximum development potential of the
development site pursuant to existing zoning regulations, unless a lesser
use of development is requested. Said transportation impact fee estimate
shall be provided within a reasonable period of time, subject to the
availability of appropriate Township staff or consultants, and shall be on a
form provided by the Township.
§ 80-13. Administration of impact fees.
Transportation impact fees collected from development in the
transportation service area will be expended exclusively upon
transportation improvement projects within such transportation service
area.
A. Collection of impact fees. Transportation impact fees due pursuant to
this chapter shall be collected by the Township, in the manner or
manners prescribed herein, prior to issuance of a building, zoning or
use permit.
B. Establishment of fund. Upon receipt of transportation impact fees, the
Township Manager/Secretary shall be responsible for the separate
maintenance and the proper accounting for such fees and their
utilization. All such fees shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts,
designated solely for such transportation impact fees, and maintained
in financial institutions authorized to receive deposits of Township
funds. Interest earned on such fees shall be credited to their respective
accounts. The Township Manager/Secretary shall obtain and provide an
annual accounting for such fund accounts in accordance with the
provisions of Act 209 of 1990, 53 P.S.§ 10505-A(d).
§ 80-10 SEWERS § 80-13
68:457
§ 80-14. Financing of transportation capital improvement projects.
The Township of Pine may issue bonds, notes, revenue certificates and
other obligations of indebtedness, in such manner and subject to such
limitations as may be otherwise provided by law, in furtherance of the
construction of transportation capital improvement projects. Funds pledged
toward retirement of bonds, notes, revenue certificates or other obligations
of indebtedness for such transportation capital improvement projects may
include both transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter
and other Township revenues as may be allocated by its governing body.
Impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall not be utilized for purposes
other than the construction and financing (either directly, or as a pledge
against bonds, notes, revenue certificates and other obligations of
C. Establishment and maintenance of accounts and expenditures
therefrom. The Township Manager/Secretary shall cause to be
maintained adequate financial records for each such account which
shall show the total funds collected, their sources, the interest accrued,
and the amount of funds expended on specific transportation
improvements. The expenditure of funds from each account shall be
used solely and exclusively for that portion of the transportation capital
improvements to be funded by impact fees, as specified in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, for the particular
transportation service area.
D. Advisory Committee role. The Township of Pine's Transportation Impact
Fee Advisory Committee97 shall monitor and evaluate the
implementation of the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and
report on the assessment of impact fees. In addition, the Advisory
Committee, at the request of the Township's Board of Supervisors, may
make recommendations to the Township of Pine on the need to update
or revise the adopted land use assumptions, transportation capital
improvements or impact fees based on the following:
(1) New subsequent development which has occurred in the Township
of Pine;
(2) Completed transportation capital improvements;
(3) Unavoidable delays in construction of transportation improvements
beyond the Township's control or responsibility;
(4) Significant changes in the land use assumptions;
(5) Significant changes in the estimated costs of the transportation
capital improvements proposed; and
(6) Significant changes in the projected revenue from all sources listed
needed for the construction of the transportation capital
improvements.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
§ 80-13 PINE CODE § 80-14
68:458
indebtedness) of the cost of transportation capital improvements as
specified herein or for related costs as permitted by Act 209 of 1990, Article
V-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10501-A et
seq.
§ 80-15. Method of payment.
Payment of transportation impact fees shall be made prior to the issuance
of a building or other necessary permit by the Township of Pine for
development on the applicable site. In the alternative, at the sole discretion
of the Township's Board of Supervisors, such transportation impact fees
may be paid pursuant to a written agreement providing for an extended,
regular payment schedule of said transportation impact fees over a period
of time to be set by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 80-16. Credit.
A. Any developer, traffic generator, or applicant who shall be subject to the
payment of transportation impact fees pursuant to this chapter and who
shall dedicate land to the Township for future right-of-way, realignment,
or widening of any existing roadways necessary for the construction of
projects contained in the Township's Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan or who shall perform, at its own expense, the
construction of improvements contained therein shall be eligible for a
credit against the transportation impact fee otherwise due. Such credit
shall be either the amount of the fair market value of the land so
dedicated (determined as of the date of land development application)
or the amount allocated in the transportation capital improvements
program, including contingency factors, for such construction, as the
case may be.
B. In the event credit is to be provided hereunder to any developer, traffic
generator or applicant for the construction of road improvements, a
written agreement with the Township regarding same shall be executed
prior to issuance of any building permit. The agreement shall establish
the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule for initiation and
completion of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement be
completed to Township of Pine and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation standards and design criteria, and such other terms and
conditions as deemed necessary by the Township of Pine, including the
posting of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of
construction. The Township of Pine shall determine the applicable
credit, but in no event shall the Township be required to pay the excess
amount by which any credit may exceed the applicable transportation
impact fee. If the amount of the credit is calculated to exceed the
amount of the transportation impact fee due, such excess credit shall be
thereafter applied against transportation impact fees for other
developments which would otherwise be payable by the party entitled
to such credit.
§ 80-14 SEWERS § 80-17
68:459
§ 80-17. Refunds.
Transportation impact fees (together with accrued interest thereon)
collected by the Township of Pine pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded
to the payor of such fees in the proportion specified in Act 209 of 1990,
53 P.S. § 10505-A(g), and in accordance with its provisions, only in the
following instances:
§ 80-18. Effect of transportation impact fee on zoning, planned
residential development and subdivision regulations.
This chapter shall not alter the otherwise permissible uses of land and
structures, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other Township regulation regarding the development
of land or the provision of public improvements, as contained in all
otherwise applicable zoning, subdivision, and planned residential
development regulations of the Township of Pine, which regulations shall be
and remain operative and in full force and effect, without limitation, with
respect to all such development.
§ 80-19. Transportation impact fee as additional and supplemental
requirement.
The transportation impact fee specified herein is additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed
by the Township of Pine on the development of land or the issuance of
building or other permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to further
the objectives and policies of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, and all other Township of Pine
A. If the Township has failed to commence any transportation
improvements within the designated transportation service area within
three years of the scheduled construction date set forth in the
transportation capital improvements plan; or
B. If the new development for which transportation impact fees have been
paid has not been commenced prior to the expiration of the building
permit issued therefor (pursuant to the time limits otherwise
established for such building permits by the Township of Pine), or the
project for which a building permit has been issued has been altered
resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due; or
C. If upon completion of any road improvements project, the actual
expenditures of same are less than 95% of the costs properly allocable
to the fee paid within the transportation service area in which the
improvement was adopted; or
D. In the event that the Township of Pine terminates or completes an
adopted capital improvements plan for a transportation service area
and there remains at the time of termination or completion,
undisbursed funds in the accounts established for that purpose.
§ 80-17 PINE CODE § 80-19
68:460
growth management policies, ordinances and regulations, by which the
Township seeks to ensure the provision of public facilities in conjunction
with the development of land. In addition to the transportation impact fee
specified herein, a developer or property owner may be required to pay for
or to construct, pursuant to other ordinances or regulations of the Township
or policies, other public facilities, including transportation facilities, as
required by such other ordinances and regulations.
§ 80-20. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all developments for
which application for final approval is made to the Township of Pine
subsequent to its effective date.
§ 80-21. Repealer.
The provisions of Township Ordinance No. 283, previously codified as
Chapter 80 of the Code of the Township of Pine, are repealed to the extent
specified in this Section. Such prior provisions are repealed, to the extent
they are inconsistent with this chapter for all developments for which
application for final approval is made to the Township of Pine subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter; but this chapter shall not repeal or modify
such prior provisions for those developments for which application for final
approval was made to the Township of Pine prior to its effective date. The
provisions of Township Ordinance No. 283, previously codified as Chapter
80 of the Code of the Township of Pine, shall remain in force and applicable
to developments for which application for final approval was made to the
Township of Pine prior to the effective date of this chapter. The payor of
a previous transportation impact fee pursuant to such Township Ordinance
No. 283, or prior Township Ordinance No. 210, shall not be entitled to a
refund of such fee because of the passage of this chapter.
§ 80-19 SEWERS § 80-21
68:461
Chapter 84
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 5.
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
28.
Planning Commission — See Article VIII,
§ C-804, of the Charter and Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Construction Codes, Uniform — See Ch. 46.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 56.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Standard details — See Ch. 70.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Trail Feasibility Study and Trail Design
Transportation Improvement Program — See
Ch. 80.
Adult uses — See Ch. 90.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 80-21 PINE CODE § 80-21
68:462
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 84-1. Title; authority.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Zoning Ordinance." This chapter:
§ 84-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Zoning Chapter includes the following:
A. Is passed under the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, and as thereafter
amended.
B. Provides for administrative enforcement and amendment in accordance
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Includes regulations to permit, prohibit, regulate, restrict and
determine:
(1) Uses of land, watercourses, and other bodies of water.
(2) Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal, and use of structures.
(3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by
uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards, and other open
spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures.
(4) Density of population and intensity of use.
(5) Protection and preservation of natural and historic resources and
prime agricultural land and activities.
D. For such purposes outlined above, divides the Township into zoning
districts.
E. Repeals all ordinances or portions hereof, in conflict with this chapter.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals, and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports, and
national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air,
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational
facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate
water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use,
and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural,
§ 84-1 SEWERS § 84-2
68:463
§ 84-3. General provisions.
scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger, and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life,
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography,
soil type and classification, and present use.
D. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and attached single-family dwellings,
and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various
arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks; provided,
however, that the Zoning Chapter shall not be deemed invalid for the
failure to provide for any other specific dwelling type.
E. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential use.
A. Applicability. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements, adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, codes,
deed of restricting covenants or ordinances, then the most restrictive
requirements or those imposing the highest standards shall govern. All
requirements of this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class or type
of land or structure and particularly as follows:
(1) Any lot, as well as the open space reserved on it, must equal or
exceed the minimum lot areas prescribed by this chapter for the
district in which the lot is located.
(2) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
unless in conformity with all the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the district in which such use, building or structure is
located.
(3) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered
so as to exceed height limitations, accommodate a greater number
of families, occupy a greater percentage of lot area or have
narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or open
spaces than are required by this chapter and its provisions for the
particular zoning district in question.
§ 84-2 PINE CODE § 84-3
68:464
§ 84-4. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan.
This chapter is enacted to promote an orderly plan of development
according to the Comprehensive Plan, including data on existing conditions,
statements concerning the plan and evaluation of implementation
techniques, and with reasonable consideration, among other things, of
the existing character of the various areas within the Township and their
respective suitability to particular land uses.
(4) All yard or open space requirements of this chapter are exclusive,
and a use or structure cannot share a part of a yard or open space
required by this chapter.
(5) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established
by this chapter.
B. Omitted land. This chapter intends to include the entire area of the
Township, including all land, streets, alleys, railroads, and other rightof-
way, be included in the districts established by this chapter. Any area
not shown on the Zoning District Map as being included in such a
district shall be deemed to be, and it is hereby, classified in the E-1
Estate Residential District.
C. Annexed land. All land annexed to the Township after the enactment of
this chapter shall be classified immediately and automatically as an E-1
District. The Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate
zoning for the annexed area to the Board of Supervisors within 90 days
after the date of annexation.
D. Frontage on public street required. Each single-family and attached
single-family dwelling shall have a front lot line on a public street
dedicated for public use and improved to Township standards. This
regulation also shall apply to single-family dwellings and attached
single-family dwellings located in a development consisting of varied
housing types unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter or in
Chapter 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
E. Principal building. In any E-1, S-1, R-1 or R-2 District, only one principal
building may be built on each lot.
F. References. Where any provision of this chapter incorporates by
reference the provisions of other chapters (or articles or sections
thereof) of the Pine Code, such referred-to and incorporated-byreference
provisions shall be, for the purposes of this chapter, deemed
to be fully applicable to the activities and usages regulated by this
chapter in the same manner and to the same degree as if said referredto
and incorporated provisions of such other chapters (or articles or
sections thereof) were set forth at length herein in their entirety.
§ 84-3 SEWERS § 84-5
68:465
§ 84-5. Districts enumerated.
The Township is hereby divided into 12 districts known as:
§ 84-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the 12 zoning districts of the Township are shown upon
the map, which is made a part of this chapter, which map is designated
as the "Zoning Map." The Zoning Map and all the notations, references
and other information shown thereon and including its original provisions
dated June 6, 1990, and the revisions dated February 20, 1995, the revisions
effected July 6, 1998, by Ordinance No. 261, the revisions dated July 6,
1998, by Ordinance No. 262 and revised January 6, 2003, by Ordinance No.
307 are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the
Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other information shown
thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, the original of which
Zoning Map is properly attested and is on file with the Township Manager.
The Zoning Map shall also contain the greenways overlay, stormwater
management, floodplain overlay, traditional village overlay and town center
design overlay and commercial development control overlay districts.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Base districts.
E-1 Estate Residential District
S-1 Special District
R-1 Suburban Residence District
R-2 Community Residence District
R-3 Neighborhood Residence District
B-1 Rural Business District
C-1 Community Service Center District
C-2 Planned Transition District
B. Special districts. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366]
GWO Greenways Overlay District
TVO Traditional Village Overlay District
TCDO Town Center Design Overlay District
CDC Commercial Development Control Overlay District
PIIOD Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay District
A. Where designation of a boundary line on the Zoning Map coincides with
the location of a street, alley, or right-of-way, the center line of such
street, alley and right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary of
such district.
§ 84-5 PINE CODE § 84-6
68:466
§ 84-7. Severability.
§ 84-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective from the date of its adoption. Whenever
used in this chapter, the term "effective date" shall mean adoption date
(reference only).
B. Where the designation on the Zoning Map indicates a boundary
approximately upon a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be the
boundary.
C. Distances shown on the Zoning Map are perpendicular distances from
road center lines measured to the district boundary, which boundaries
in all cases where distances are given are parallel to the road center
line.
D. In other cases, the district boundary shall be determined by the use of
the scale of the Zoning Map.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
the said provision to any other property, building, or structure.
§ 84-6 SEWERS § 84-8
68:467

ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 84-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following rules of usage and
interpretation shall apply, unless the context indicates otherwise. In the
interpretation of this chapter, the provisions and rules of this chapter
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires
otherwise.
§ 84-10. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Chapter 78, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Pine Code shall also apply to this chapter, except when in conflict with
the following definitions, which shall specifically apply to this chapter. As
used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
A. Words in the present tense include the future.
B. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.
C. The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory.
D. The word "lot" shall include the word "plot" or "parcel."
E. The word "person" shall include an individual, firm, or corporation.
F. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
G. The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
H. The word "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
I. The words "either. . .or" indicate that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply singly but not in any combination.
J. The word "Township" means the Township of Pine, Pennsylvania.
K. The word "county" means the County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania.
L. Any use of the gender specific words (his, hers, him, her) shall imply
both genders.
M. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
N. When a word or phrase is not specifically defined in this chapter, or
referenced in another chapter, then the common meaning of the word
or phrase, or the definition contained in Webster's Dictionary, most
current version, shall apply.
§ 84-9 SEWERS § 84-10
68:469
ACCESS DRIVE — An access drive is intended to provide immediate access
to adjoining uses within the nonresidential areas of the Town Center.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure clearly and customarily
subordinate to and on the same lot as the principal building and used
exclusively for purposes constituting an accessory use, including but not
to limit the applicability of the foregoing, private garages, barns, utility
sheds, greenhouses and buildings for housing household pets and excluding
signs, antennae, communications towers, communications facilities,
telecommunications equipment buildings, collocation/shared use
communications facilities and power-mounted/shared use communications
facilities.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is clearly part of, incidental to,
subordinate to, devoted exclusively to and located on the same lot occupied
by the principal use of the land or structures but excluding signs, antennae,
communications towers, communications facilities, telecommunications
equipment buildings, collocation/shared use communications facilities and
power-mounted/shared use communications facilities.
ACTIVE BUILDING ELEVATION — Building facades that include windows,
building entrances and other architectural features that enhance the
pedestrian scale and experience of the building facade.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment which has a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in, or an establishment which, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale books, films, video
cassettes or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and, in
conjunction therewith, has facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment for observation by patrons.
ADULT; EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent
contractors, who work in or at or render any service directly related to the
operation of an adult-oriented establishment.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, meaning those
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing
or appearing unclothed, pantomiming, modeling or any other personal
services offered customers.
B.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:470
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT; MODEL STUDIO —
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT; OPERATOR — A person, partnership or corporation owning,
operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT —
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed or
viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for the persons who pay
a fee or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity for the right
or opportunity to so depict the figure model or for admission to or for
permission to remain upon the premises; or any premises where there
is conducted the business of furnishing or providing or procuring, for
a fee or other consideration or compensation or gratuity, figure models
who pose in the nude to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
A.
The words "model studio" do not include:
Any study which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school, government-approved school or any governmental
agency where the person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating it has met the requirements established by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring
of and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a
diploma or honorary diploma;
(1)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
referenced in § 84-29 of this chapter; or
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
B.
Includes, without limitation, the following establishments when
operated for profit, whether direct or indirect:
(1) Adult bookstores.
(2) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(3) Adult mini-motion-picture theaters.
A.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:471
ADULT; SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The term does not include any of the
following:
ADULT; SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — Any premises to which the
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which
are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas
of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or where an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a
member of the public, a patron or a member.
(4)
Adult movie studio, adult entertainment studio or any premises that
are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic
dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio,
massage parlor, health spa or any other term of like import.
(5)
ADULT CLUB — A nightclub, bar, cabaret, theater, or other
establishment which features or presents adult entertainment.
(6)
The terms "booths," "cubicles," "stalls," "compartments," "studios" and
"rooms," for purposes of definition in connection with adult-oriented
establishments, do not mean enclosures which are private offices used
by the owner, manager or persons employed on the premises for
attending to the tasks of their employment and which are not held out
to the public for the purpose of viewing motion pictures or other adult
entertainment for a fee and which are not open to any persons other
than employees.
B.
Medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or
films.
A.
Any art or photography publications which devote at least 25% of
the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with
subjects of art or photography.
B.
Any news periodical which reports or describes current events and
which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude
persons in connection with the dissemination of the news.
C.
Any publications or films which describe and report different cultures
and which from time to time publish or show photographs or depictions
of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity
or semi-nudity is indigenous to the populations.
D.
Less than completely and opaquely, covered:
(1) Human genitals or pubic region;
(2) Buttocks; or
A.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:472
ADULT; SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The term includes any of the
following:
AGRICULTURAL USE — Includes all standard agricultural or nursery
commonly used in Allegheny County.
ALCOHOL REHABILITATION CLINIC — A facility for housing and caring for
recovering alcoholics.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities; an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or
the moving from one location or position to another.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
ANIMAL DAY CARE — A facility that cares for pet animals for less than
12 consecutive hours in the absence of the pet owner or a facility that
cares for pet animals in training with or without the facility owner receiving
compensation for such services.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility where animals are given medical or
surgical treatment for compensation, and boarding of animals is incidental
to such treatment.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities as defined below.[Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 373]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors, and
assigns.
APPLICANT, FORESTRY OR LOGGING — Any property owner, or any
individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or corporation acting on
behalf of the property owner, who applies for the required logging or timber
harvesting permit.
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
or female breasts.
C.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:473
AUTOMOTIVE DEALERSHIP, NEW — A business that is principally engaged
in the receipt of new, previously untitled motor vehicles or trailers from
their manufacturer and the resale, lease, or rental of the same directly to
the general public.
AUTOMOTIVE DEALERSHIP, USED — A business that is principally
engaged in selling, leasing, or renting previously titled and owned motor
vehicles or trailers.
BASEMENT — A story of a structure underground, having half or more than
half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — An owner-occupied and
operated dwelling originally designed as a residential structure where
limited overnight lodging and a breakfast are provided for compensation to
tourist or recreational guests.
BLOCK — An area bounded by existing or proposed street right-of-way
lines.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township of Pine.
BOARD, ZONING HEARING — The Township Zoning Hearing Board.
BOULEVARD — A boulevard is a collector street which conveys traffic
without generating cross traffic conflicts. The boulevard is intended to
provide for a greater degree of mobility than for land access, and to serve
motorists and pedestrians between local, access, and arterial streets.
BUFFER YARD — A portion of the site intended to provide a visual barrier
and physical protection between adjacent land uses.
BUILDABLE ACRE — The area of a lot remaining after subtraction of the
areas required to be preserved for woodlands, wetlands, and watercourses
and their required buffers, steep slopes, and other natural resources
required to be preserved by the Codes of the Township of Pine.
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a lot bounded by the required front
and rear and side yards.
BUILDING — An immobile structure enclosed within exterior walls or
firewalls, built, erected and framed of component structural parts and
designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or support of individuals,
animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deckline of a mansard
roof or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINES — The lines that bound the buildable area of the lot as
established by this chapter beyond which a building shall not extend.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Those materials used in the construction
industry, including but not limited to lumber, masonry, concrete, metal,
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:474
plaster and paint, and as defined in the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Zoning Officer authorizing
the construction or alteration of a building or structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
minimum required distance between any building to be erected and an
adjacent street right-of-way line.
CAR WASH — Hand or machine washing of automobiles, including steam
cleaning and detailing of vehicles.
CARRIAGE HOME — A single-family dwelling which includes a master
bedroom suite on the first (ground) floor, along with the cooking, eating and
main living areas. Carriage homes may be grouped together and consist
of two to four individual living units, each with its own entrance, attached
by at least one common wall. Each individual unit shall have an attached
garage of sufficient size for two vehicles.
CHANNEL — A natural stream that conveys water or a ditch or open
channel excavated for the flow of water.
CIVIC CLUBS — A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues and which owns, hires or leases a building, or
portion thereof, the use of such building being restricted to members and
their guests.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — See "Zoning Officer."
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which provides access from a local
roadway to the arterial transportation system in the Township. The collector
street provides for equal amounts of mobility and land access. These
roadways generally serve as major circulation routes.
COLLEGE — An institution of higher learning, whether public or private,
which offers postsecondary academic training and which is authorized by
the commonwealth to award baccalaureate or higher degrees.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including nontower
WCF, on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already
supports at least one nontower WCF.[Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No.
373]
COMMERCIAL OR PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE OR LOT — Any structure or
parcel or portion of structure or parcel used by the public to temporarily
park licensed and operable motor vehicles for less than 12 hours.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the development,
not including streets, off-street parking and areas set aside for public
facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:475
may contain such improvements in the development plan as finally approved
and as are appropriate for the recreation of the residents. Common open
space may be publicly dedicated or may be owned by a homeowners'
association consisting of the landowners within a development or may be
owned by a single landowner; provided, however, that in the event of
ownership by a single landowner or homeowners' association, such parcel
or parcels shall be subject to restrictive covenants acceptable to the
Township and sufficient to satisfy its preservation against further
development and to preserve its character.98
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A restriction against use and/or clearing
placed against property by an owner and which is recorded so as to bind
future owners to protect natural, productive, or cultural features. Such
conservation easement may be in favor of a nonprofit conservation
organization, homeowner association, government agency, or other entity
or group empowered to administer the conservation easement.
CONSULTING FORESTER or STATE FORESTER — A person employed
as a forester by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources, Bureau of Forestry, or a person listed
on said Bureau of Forestry's Register of Consulting Foresters as being
a graduate of a forestry school accredited by the Society of American
Foresters and employed full-time as a private forestry consultant.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The percentage of a lot area occupied by the
ground area of principal and accessory buildings on such lot, excluding the
area occupied by a solar collector.
COVERAGE, LOT — The percentage of a lot area occupied by the ground
area of principal or accessory buildings, driveways, swimming pools, decks
and other impermeable materials on such lot.
DAM — Any artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or a structure
for highway, railroad, or other purposes, which may impound water.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place other than an occupied residence providing
or designed to provide day care to persons of any age in structures
compliant with the building and life safety codes of the Township.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of frequency of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm)
and duration (e.g., 24 hours) and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening or attenuating of runoff flows
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area, such as detention basins,
reservoirs, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots or within the drainage
system itself, and releasing the water at a desired rate of discharge.
98.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "communications facility" and "communications
tower," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 2-2-2015 by Ord. No.
373.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:476
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, tenant or any
other person or legal entity of any kind who makes or causes to be made,
or takes any planning action to make, a subdivision of land or a land
development of any kind.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a previously
undeveloped or further development of previously developed land,
including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking lots or garages, common open
space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan,"
when used in this chapter, shall mean written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — A standard method for the
measurement of trees wherein the diameter of a tree is measured at
approximately four feet above its ground level.
DISCHARGE — Rate of flow, specifically fluid flow; a volume of fluid flowing
from a conduit or channel, or being released from detention storage, per
unit of time; commonly expressed as cubic feet per second (cfs), million
gallons per day (mgd), gallons per minute (gpm) or cubic meters per second
(cms).
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
DOMESTIC PETS — Animals or birds customarily found in a dwelling and
kept for company or pleasure, including dogs or cats, provided that there is
not a sufficient number to constitute a kennel, as defined herein; hamsters;
gerbils; parakeets; canaries; and similar small animals or birds, but not
including any exotic animals such as lions, tigers, ocelots or other feral cats,
monkeys, bears, alligators, large or poisonous snakes and similar animals
normally kept in a zoo.
DRAINAGE — The interception and removal of excess surface water or
groundwater from any land by artificial or natural means.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRIVE-IN THEATER — An open lot upon which motion pictures are shown
to the public on an outdoor screen, excluding any other accessory use.
DRIVE-THROUGH — A portion of a structure otherwise permitted by this
chapter that by physical design and location encourages or permits
customers to receive a service or obtain a product while remaining in a
motor vehicle.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation, or intended to be so used, and includes any
appurtenances belonging thereto.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:477
DWELLING UNIT — One room, or a group of rooms joined to each other,
located in a dwelling, designed and maintained as a unified living quarter,
occupied by a family, containing integrated facilities used for living,
sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. Dwelling units must contain at
least one room with a minimum area of 150 square feet, with a minimum
horizontal dimension of 10 feet.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — The maximum number of dwelling units
authorized per acre.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any
permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
ENGINEER — A currently licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENTERTAINER — A person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an
employee or an independent contractor.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — Any commercial activity conducted for gain
which is generally related to the entertainment field, including but not
limited to bowling alleys, roller-skating rinks, miniature golf, golf driving
ranges, commercial swimming pools and carnivals, but not including indoor
theaters, drive-in theaters, massage parlors, model studios or places in
which pornographic materials are displayed, sold or distributed or in which
lewd or obscene activity is conducted.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling designed for
and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open
space or yards and having no roof, wall or floor in common with any
other dwelling unit.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED — Two or more adjoining
dwelling units each on their own lot, each of which is separated from
the others by one or more unpierced walls extending from ground to
roof.
B.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multi-dwelling-unit building not exceeding
three stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less.
C.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided. [Added 2-2-2015
by Ord. No. 373]
B.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:478
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by running water,
wind, ice or other geological agents, including such process as gravitational
creep.
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities (as public utilities are specifically defined in
Pennsylvania's Public Utility Code, 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 102) or municipal or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead sewage, gas, electrical,
telephone, cable television, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, gas regulators and measuring
devices, including structures in which they are housed and equipment and
accessories in connection therewith which are reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities (as public utilities are
specifically defined in Pennsylvania Public Utility Code, 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 102)
or municipal or other governmental agencies and for the public health and
safety or general welfare, but not including offices or maintenance depots.
FACILITY — A structure necessary to a particular use.
FAMILY —
FARM MARKET — A structure or area, on property used for agricultural
purposes, to sell products grown on the premises.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 373]
FENCE — Any freestanding barrier, including a wall, which is designed to
confine, restrict, enclose, delineate, or shield from view a particular lot,
yard or area.
FENCE, BOUNDARY — A fence, including a wall, which is used to
designate, establish or set off the border line of a lot. A boundary fence
shall not constitute a "structure" only insofar as is necessary to exempt it
from the general front, rear, and side yard setback regulations of the zoning
A. One person occupying one dwelling unit;
Two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption and foster
children occupying one dwelling unit, living and cooking together as
a single, nonprofit and nontransient housekeeping unit, including any
person employed to work exclusively on the premises; or
B.
Not more than four unrelated individual persons occupying one
dwelling unit, living and cooking together as a single, nonprofit and
nontransient housekeeping unit, including individuals who require
special care or supervision and those working in a dwelling unit to
provide such care or supervision.
C.
"Family" shall not include clubs, fraternities, boarding- or rooming
houses or any groups not specifically defined above.
D.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:479
district in which the boundary fence is located. Boundary fences shall be
subject to the specifications for the same contained in this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN — A normally dry land area adjacent to stream channels that
is susceptible to being inundated by over-bank stream flows. For regulatory
purposes, the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act (Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 16699) and regulations pursuant to the Act define
the "floodplain" as the area inundated by a one-hundred-year flood and
delineated on a map by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency).
FLOOR AREA — The gross surface area of each floor for the use or activity
in question.
FORESTRY — The management and use for human benefit of forest lands
and natural resources that occur on and in association with land including
trees, other plants, animals, soil, water, related air, and climate. Forestry
includes, but is not limited to, logging for commercial purposes.
FOWL — Includes chickens, ducks, pigeons, pheasants, turkeys, guinea
hens and all other birds, whether raised for profit or not.
FREESTANDING SELF-STORAGE UNIT — An enclosed area or structure
used for the storage of items not belonging to the owner of the land on
which such enclosed area or structure is located, in exchange for rent paid
for the use of said enclosed area or structure.
FRINGE LOTS — Residential lots that are located at the perimeter of a
planned residential development (PRD) where property lines are adjacent
to other land uses.
GARAGE OR LOT, COMMERCIAL OR PUBLIC — A building or portion
thereof, other than a residential garage, designed or used for equipping,
servicing, repairing, parking, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven
vehicles.
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL — An accessory structure to a residential use or a
portion of a residential structure that is designed or used for the storage of
motor-driven vehicles owned and used for noncommercial purposes by the
occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multi-dwelling-unit building not exceeding
three stories or 35 feet in height, which ever is less.
GREENWAY — For the purpose of this chapter, a greenway shall be defined
as a strip of land adjacent to Route 19 that is to remain wooded or be
landscaped.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine or
its successor legislative body, if any.
GROUP CARE FACILITY —
A. A facility which provides room and board and specialized services for:
99.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:480
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit where room and board is provided to
not more than eight permanent residents who are mentally or physically
handicapped persons of any age, who are in need of supervision and
specialized services, and no more than two caretakers on any shift, who
may or may not reside in the dwelling and who provide health, social and/
or rehabilitative services to the residents. The service shall be provided
only by a governmental agency, its licensed or certified agents or any other
responsible nonprofit social services corporation, and the facility shall meet
all minimum requirements of the sponsoring agency. A "group home" shall
be considered a single-family dwelling and shall be authorized wherever
single-family dwellings are authorized.
HARVEST AREA — The location on the site where timber harvesting occurs.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Allegheny County Health Department.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured from
the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a towerbased
WCF, including nontower WCF mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
HELICOPTER — Any rotorcraft, other than a model or radio-controlled
rotorcraft that for its horizontal motion, depends principally on its enginedriven
rotor.
HELIPORT — Any area of land, water or structure which is used or intended
to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters and any appurtenant
areas which are used for heliport buildings or helicopter facilities or rightsof-
way, together with all heliport buildings and facilities thereon.
More than eight residents who are mentally or physically
handicapped;
(1)
Any number of permanent residents who are dependent and/or
delinquent children under the age of 18 adjudicated by the court
system;
(2)
(3) Mentally disturbed persons of any age; or
Persons assigned by a court of law or public or semipublic agency
on a short-term basis for supervision, care and counseling for a
specified period of time, including alcoholic recovery, shelters for
battered persons and their children, community reentry services
following incarceration and other such transitional and/or
supervised short-term assignments.
(4)
Staff shall be qualified by the sponsoring agency, who may or may
not reside at the facility, and who provide health, social and/or
rehabilitative services to the residents. The services shall be provided
only by a governmental agency, its licensed or certified agents or any
other responsible nonprofit social services corporation, and the facility
shall meet all minimum requirements of the sponsoring agency.
B.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:481
HIGHWAY, MAJOR — A street of substantial continuity and used primarily
as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas.
HOME OCCUPATION — See "no-impact home-based business."
HOSPITAL — A duly licensed institution providing medical or surgical care
and treatment for the sick and injured.
HOTEL — See "motel or hotel."
HYDRAULICS —
HYDROLOGY — The science dealing with the waters of the earth and their
distribution and circulation through the atmosphere. Engineering hydrology
deals with the application of hydrologic concepts to the design of projects
for use and control of water.
IMMINENT AND ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT — Development which is
reasonably expected to commence based on approved plans and permits
within 30 days of the clearing and grubbing of the site, said construction to
be undertaken on a minimum regular work schedule of eight hours per day,
40 hours per week.
INDOOR THEATER — An enclosed building or movie house where motion
pictures or live performances are shown to the public, excluding drive-in
theaters or any other accessory use.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Allegheny County Health Department
authorized and designated by the Director of such Department; the
Township of Pine's Manager, Assistant Manager, Solicitor, Director of Code
Administration and Land Development and/or Code Enforcement Officer; an
employee of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force authorized
by the commanding officer of such police force; or other persons designated
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine to inspect premises
regulated under this chapter, to cooperate in taking the required actions
authorized by this chapter where violations are found on a premises and to
request correction of unsatisfactory conditions found on a premises.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle meeting the definition of abandoned or
junked motor vehicle of Chapter 134 of the Township Code.
JUNKYARD — Any lot where waste or discarded materials are stored,
processed or sold.
KENNEL — Any dwelling, building, structure, lot, land, or establishment
not otherwise meeting this section's definition of "indoor kennel" and where
more than four dogs, four cats, or four other domesticated animals typically
kept as pets (or any combination thereof exceeding a total of four such
The branch of science concerned with the mechanics of fluids,
especially liquids.
A.
As applied in stormwater management, the study of the characteristics
of water flow in, and conveyance capacity of, a watercourse,
considering such factors as depth, velocity, and turbulence.
B.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:482
animals) of six months in age or older are kept, bred, trained, or boarded
(whether or not for profit).[Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 348]
KENNEL, INDOOR — Any dwelling, building, structure or establishment
where more than four dogs, four cats or four other domesticated animals
typically kept as pets (or any combination thereof exceeding a total of four
such animals) of six months in age or older are kept, bred, trained, or
boarded (whether or not for profit) exclusively within an enclosed dwelling,
building, or structure. An indoor kennel shall not be construed to be within
the definition of "kennel" otherwise contained in this section.[Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 348]
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The graphic and written presentation
conforming to the requirements of Article IV of Chapter 78 of the Township
of Pine Code, specifically delineating the proposed development of a site.
LANDING AREA (FORESTRY OR LOGGING) — A designated location on
land where the harvested timber, including logs, pulpwood, or firewood, is
assembled for transportation off-site to processing facilities.
LANDING AREA (HELIPORT) — Any area used, or intended to be used, for
the landing, taking off or surface maneuvering of aircraft.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land. The signature of any single landowner holding
land in joint tenancy shall be considered as binding upon the others.
LIFE CARE COMMUNITY — A corporation or association or other business
entity that, in exchange for the payment of entrance and monthly fees,
provides:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
Residential accommodations meeting the minimum standards for
residents set forth by law and ordinances and providing a design to
meet the physical, social and psychological needs of older people;
A.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:483
LIGHT MANUFACTURING, RESEARCH AND TESTING — Any
manufacturing or industrial processing which, by the nature of the
materials, equipment and process utilized, is predominantly clean, quiet
and free of any objectionable or hazardous element and which is not
objectionable by reason of odor, noise, vibration, cinders, gas, fumes, dust,
smoke, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same lot
therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and
having minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 50 feet and a vertical clearance
of 14 feet.
LOCAL STREET — A local street is intended to provide immediate access
to adjoining properties and land uses. Local roads are intended to provide
transportation access within a particular neighborhood or to provide access
to an arterial, collector, or access drive.
LOGGING OPERATOR — Any individual, partnership, company, firm,
association, or corporation engaged in logging or timber harvesting,
including agents, subcontractors, and employees thereof.
LOGGING OR TIMBER HARVESTING — The practice or operation of felling
trees, cutting them into logs and selling them, or transporting the logs
to sawmills or to market, or milling or otherwise processing them on-site
for transportation off-site or resale. Such practices or operations are a
permitted use in all zoning districts.
LOP — The process of cutting the tops of trees and slash into smaller pieces
to allow the material to settle close to the ground.
LOT — A designated or engineered parcel, tract, or area of land, established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, conveyed, sold,
developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot on which a building and its accessories are
located, provided that the area shall be measured to the street right-of-way
line only, and not including any part of an alley or areaway used in common
with the owner or occupier of other lots.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average distance to the rear lot line from the front
lot line or the street right-of-way line, whichever is lesser.
Medical and nursing care covering, under ordinary circumstances, the
balance of a resident's life;
B.
Prepaid medical consultation opportunities through independent
professionals selected by the organization or through some equivalent
arrangement; or
C.
Financial self-sufficiency, not dependent on outside support to any
significant degree, with entrance and monthly fees adjusting to meet
changing costs.
D.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:484
LOT, FRONTAGE — The unbroken length of the front lot line, measured at
the right-of-way line, which is contiguous to a public street or private road.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The horizontal distance between side lot lines at the
building setback line.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A structure or portion of a structure used by
physicians, surgeons, dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional. Medical clinic shall not include a
structure or portion of a structure used by an alcohol rehabilitation clinic,
methadone treatment facility, or veterinarian.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility licensed by the
Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance, or detoxification of persons.
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
MIXED-USE — A development or redevelopment of a structure or group
of structures for the purpose of allowing a mix of uses that are permitted
within the zoning district of the same structure or group of structures.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling which may be
towed on its own running gear and which shall be affixed to real estate
used for residential purposes and constructed with the same, or similar,
electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities as immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A designated portion of a mobile home park parcel
of land, planned and improved for the placement of one mobile home
in nontransient use, with the utility connections, patio and other
appurtenances necessary for occupants and required by law and this
chapter.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership containing
two or more mobile home lots in which each such lot has been planned and
improved for the placement of one mobile home for nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME PARK PERMIT — Written approval, in whatever form, as
issued by the Allegheny Health Department and the Township of Pine,
authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
nontower WCF and connecting appurtenances.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 373]
MORTUARY — A building which is operated by a duly licensed mortician
and which is exclusively used for the preparation of dead bodies for burial
or cremation.
MOTEL OR HOTEL — A building or group of buildings consisting of two or
more living or sleeping quarters used independently of each other and used
principally for commercial overnight accommodations.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:485
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended
December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, and as thereafter amended.100
NATURE PRESERVE — A parcel of land devoted exclusively for the
preservation of existing natural resources and natural animal habitats.
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment primarily for evening, late-night to early
morning entertainment, that typically serves food and/or alcoholic
beverages, and may provide either live or prerecorded music or video,
comedy acts, floor shows, with or without the opportunity for dancing. A
nightclub may not include any aspects of adult entertainment or an adultoriented
establishment, as either are elsewhere defined and regulated in
this chapter.[Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Any structure or part of a structure
legally existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or any of its
amendments which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process, which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:486
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use or arrangement of land or structure
legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or any of its
amendments which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All nontower wireless communications facilities, including, but not
limited to, nontower WCF and related equipment. Nontower WCF shall not
include support structures for nontower WCF or any related equipment that
is mounted to the ground or at ground-level.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No.
373]
NURSERY — An area where trees, shrubs, or plants are grown for
transplanting, for use as stocks for budding or grafting, or for sale.
NURSING HOME — A building or buildings specially equipped for and
licensed by the state for the care of the sick or aged, including a life care
community.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The document issued by the Zoning Officer
authorizing the use of the land or the occupancy of a structure.
OFFICES — A use, which is devoted exclusively to businesses or
professional services, excluding industrial activities. An office use may
include a manager's office and living space within the building containing
the office(s), if such office and living space is used by an individual or
family to manage or maintain multiple office areas. Employees without
management or maintenance responsibilities and/or cleaning or custodial
personnel shall not be eligible for the use of a manager's office and living
space area(s).[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — Any writing, printing, painting, display,
surface, fabric, emblem, drawing, electronic display, computerized display
or other device designed to convey information visually, be viewed by the
public and intended to convey a message unrelated to the premises where
such sign is located or to advertise products or services other than those
which are sold or otherwise made available on the premises where the sign
is located; and including the structure supporting such sign.
PARK (or DEDICATED OPEN SPACE or RECREATION LAND) — A parcel of
land integrated within a subdivision or land development that is dedicated,
either publicly or privately, specifically for use as a park, open space and/or
active recreation area.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY — A facility designed for patrons to park their
private vehicle and transfer to other private or public transportation.
PATIO HOME — A single-family dwelling, which includes a master bedroom
suite on the first (ground) floor, along with the cooking, eating, and living
areas. Patio homes shall have an attached garage of sufficient size for two
vehicles.
PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The Uniform
Construction Code applying to the construction, alteration, repair,
movement, equipment, removal, demolition, location, maintenance,
occupancy or change of occupancy of every building or structure which
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:487
occurs on or after April 9, 2004, and all existing structures that are not
legally occupied, including, but not limited to: The provisions of Chapters
2-29 and 31-35 of the International Building Code, the ICC Electrical Code,
the International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the
International Plumbing Code, the International Residential Code, the
International Fire Code, the International Energy Conservation Code,
Sections AE501-AE503 and AE601-AE605 of Appendix E of the International
Residential Code, the International Existing Building Code, the
International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, Appendix E of the
International Building Code, Appendix H of the International Building Code
and Appendix G of the International Residential Code.
PERENNIAL STREAMS — Blue-lined streams as designated on the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) mapping, and further defined as a
nonintermittent flow of water that supports or is capable of supporting yearround
aquatic fauna.
PERMITTEE — Any property owner, or individual, partnership, company,
firm, association, or corporation representing a property owner.
PINE CODE — The Code of the Township of Pine, which constitutes a
codification of the complete body of the ordinances of the Township, as such
is amended from time to time.
PLACES OF WORSHIP — A semipublic use, including any of the following:
church, manse, rectory, convent, synagogue, parish, school or similar
building incidental to the particular use; but this term does not include
business offices, except administrative offices incidental to the operation
of the particular use, rescue missions or the occasional use for religious
purposes of properties not regularly so used.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by
the landowner to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not comply with the required
size of lots, bulk or type of buildings, density, building or lot coverage or
open space regulations established in any one residential district created
under the provisions of this Chapter 84, Zoning, as amended from time to
time.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Township of Pine Planning Commission.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or a land development, whether
preliminary or final.
POINT OF INTEREST — A point of hydrologic and hydraulic importance
used for computing a release-rate percentage. These may include points of
stream confluences, an existing obstruction or problem area or other similar
points.
POLE-MOUNTED/SHARED USE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any
antenna used for the transmission or reception of any radio wave or radio
signal, which is to be mounted upon a preexisting steel or metal electrical
transmission tower owned or operated by a public utility.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:488
PREAPPLICATION — A submittal prior to application for preliminary plan
and final plan approvals for all planned residential developments and for
subdivisions and land developments greater than 10 acres in size, requiring
resource inventory mapping and a sketch plan.
PROPERTY OWNER or LANDOWNER (FORESTRY OR LOGGING) — Any
individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or corporation that is
in actual control of forest land, whether such control is based on legal
or equitable title, or on any other interest entitling the holder to sell or
otherwise dispose of any or all of the timber on such land in any manner,
and any agents thereof acting on their behalf, such as forestry consultants,
who set up and administer the logging or timber harvesting.
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES — Uses operated by the public or
semipublic body such as schools, public libraries, public safety buildings,
museums, public meeting halls and community centers. This definition shall
not include hospitals and continuing care facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A business or service which is engaged in regularly
supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public
consequence and need, as such is specifically defined within Pennsylvania's
Public Utility Code, 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
REASONABLE TIME — The phrase "a reasonable time," when referencing
seeding of disturbed areas, shall be interpreted to be within 14 days after
grading activities are completed, unless those activities are completed
between November 1 and April 1. In such case, the required sodding or
seeding shall occur within 14 days of April 1.
RECREATION AREA, ACTIVE — Any area required by a provision or
provisions of the applicable development requirements, which includes
recreational land, and recreational facilities, and amenities associated
therewith.
RECREATION AREA, PASSIVE — Any area required by a provision or
provisions of the applicable development requirements, which does not
necessarily contain active recreation facilities.
RECREATION FACILITIES — Land and structures which are privately or
commonly owned and which are devoted to outdoor recreational or athletic
purposes, including active recreation areas within developments, country
clubs and golf courses, none of which use artificial lighting to extend play
of golf or other recreational activity after daylight hours. Recreational
facilities also include riding stables and other private noncommercial
outdoor recreation areas and facilities or recreation centers, including
but not limited to community or club swimming pools, tennis courts and
ballparks, but excluding entertainment facilities as hereinbefore defined.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or attachment to a vehicle which is
designed for human habitation only under transient circumstances, such as
camping, traveling or other leisure-time activities, or any other recreational
equipment, such as a boat and its trailer.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:489
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based WCF or nontower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and base stations.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
RELEASE RATE — The release-rate percentage defines the percentage
of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff that can be discharged from
an outfall on the site after development. It applies uniformly to all land
developments or alterations within a subarea, and the post-development
rate of runoff discharging from each outfall of the development site cannot
exceed the release-rate percentage for the subarea in which it is located.
RELEASE-RATE PERCENTAGE — The percentage of predevelopment peak
rate of runoff from a watershed subarea.
RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA — The interior floor area of a dwelling unit,
including stairways, halls and closets, but not including basements,
porches, carports, or garages.
RESOURCE INVENTORY — An inventory of existing natural features of the
site, submitted on a scaled drawing, that illustrates slopes; woodlands and
other existing vegetative cover; streams, ponds and other watercourses;
wetlands; and other significant historical and cultural features of the site.
The Resource Inventory shall include the requirements set forth in the
development and design standards of Chapter 78.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food is prepared and available
to the general public, for a determined compensation, primarily for
consumption within a structure on the premises and where the consumption
of food in motor vehicles on the premises is neither encouraged nor
permitted.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment where food, soft
drinks, ice cream and similar confections are sold for principal consumption
outside the confines of the principal building or in automobiles, regardless
of whether or not seats are provided for patrons.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE — The sale, provision of service or onpremises
incidental production or assembly of general merchandise to the
general public for direct use or consumption, but not including the sale to
another business for resale purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The shortest total width between lines delineating any
land reserved or dedicated as a street, crosswalk or for other public
purposes.
SCHOOL — Any public, private or parochial place of instruction, not
including institutions of higher learning, having regular sessions, with
regularly employed instructors, which teaches those academic subjects that
are fundamental and essential in general education and which provide preprimary
and/or kindergarten through 12th grade, or a vocational school,
all meeting the requirements of the Department of Education of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but excluding any privately operated
school of trades, vocations, avocations or business.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:490
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at a suitable location to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material.
SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED DWELLING — Two or more adjoining
dwelling units each on their own lot, each of which is separated from the
others by one or more unpierced walls extending from ground to roof.
SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for and
occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or
yards and having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling
unit.
SITE PLAN (FORESTRY OR LOGGING) — A graphic and narrative depiction
of the land and practices involved in a logging or timber-harvesting
operation and including all information required by this chapter.
SKIDDING — The process of dragging trees on the ground, by any means
necessary, from the harvest area to the landing area.
SKID TRAIL — The trail, path, temporary roadway, or any other
unencumbered route, utilized by the logging operator to move felled trees
from the harvest area to the landing area.
SLASH — The woody debris left on the land after timber harvesting,
including logs, chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, and broken or
uprooted trees or shrubs.
SLOPE — The degree of rise or descent of the land surface calculated
by dividing the number of feet of vertical rise/descent in elevation by the
number of feet of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
SLOPE, STEEP — Any land area with a grade that exceeds four horizontal
to one vertical or 25%.
SOLICITOR — The Township of Pine Solicitor.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, nontower WCF and other facilities which render
them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted nontower WCF, building-mounted
nontower WCF painted to match the existing structure and facilities
constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other wash waters or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage
and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff from a specific development site.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:491
STREET — A strip of land, public or private, including the entire right-ofway,
not limited to the roadway, intended for general use as a means of
vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot.
"Street" is synonymous with the words "avenue," "road," "highway," "drive,"
"lane" and other similar words.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, outdoor advertising signs,
swimming pools, backstops for tennis courts and pergolas; provided,
however, that a boundary fence (as defined in this chapter) shall not
constitute a "structure" only insofar as is necessary to exempt it from the
general front, rear, and side yard setback regulations of the zoning district
in which the boundary fence is located.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE[Added 2-2-2015
by Ord. No. 373] —
SWIMMING POOL — A man-made enclosure, designed to impound water
for the purpose of creating depth of water suitable for swimming, or other
types of water recreation or therapy, including but not limited to water
slides, lap pools, whirlpools, soaking tubs, or hot tubs.101
TOP — The upper portions of a felled tree that is unmarketable because of
small size, taper, or defect.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more nontower WCF, including, but not limited to, self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS
hub facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of the Township of Pine, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, depending upon context.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The official Township Engineer or engineering
consultant of the Township.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing nontower WCF; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
101. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "telecommunications equipment," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373.
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:492
TRADE SCHOOL — Any school having regular sessions with regularly
employed instructors which, as a principal activity, provides training in a
trade or vocation and which also provides instruction in those subjects
that are fundamental and essential to elementary or secondary education,
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body or a corporation meeting the
same requirements of the commonwealth.
TREE OF SIGNIFICANCE — Any tree or a group of trees with a minimum
twelve-inch diameter at breast height (DBH).
VEHICLE REPAIR STATION — A structure used for the repair, collision
repair, painting, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts
thereof, including, but not limited to automobiles, boats, recreational
vehicles, and motorcycles.
VEHICLE SALES — Any building, land area or other premises used for the
display or sale of new or used automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, all
terrain vehicles, boats, or similar vehicle, but not including any repair work
other than warranty and other repair service conducted as an accessory use
within structures approved for such activity on the premises. A permanent
sales office building shall be located on the same lot as the vehicle sales.
Vehicle sales shall not include new or used automotive dealerships.
VEHICLE SALVAGE — The dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area or other premises,
or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for any one or a combination
of the following activities:
VEHICLE STORAGE — Any outdoor area used for the storage of vehicles.
VETERINARY SERVICES — The services supplied by a doctor of veterinary
medicine.
A. Retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels.
Retail dispensing or sales of automobile lubricants, including oil
changing and chassis lubrication where substantial disassembly is not
required.
B.
C. Retail dispensing or sales of automobile coolants.
D. Hand or machine washing in a single bay auto wash.
Incidental repair or replacement of parts, such as windshield wiper
blades, lights bulbs, air filters, oil filters, batteries, belts, tires, fuses
and the like.
E.
Vehicle wrecking, vehicle repair, muffler/exhaust systems, parking or
storing of vehicles for hire, and the operation of more than one towing
vehicle shall not be deemed permissible accessory uses of a vehicle
service station.
F.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:493
WAREHOUSE — A structure used for the acceptance of bulk deliveries,
storage of the delivered items, and/or redistribution of delivered items.
WAREHOUSE SALES — The acceptance of bulk deliveries, storage of the
delivered items, and/or redistribution of delivered items. The operations
described herein shall include both those conducted as a wholesale business
or as a retail business.
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN or WATERSHED PLAN
— The plan for managing stormwater runoff throughout a designated
watershed adopted by Allegheny County as required by the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Management Act.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et. seq.)[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
WETLANDS — In accordance with the definitions/regulations established
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturate soil conditions, including
swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WINERIES — An area devoted to the growing of grapes or other fruit and
the process of fermenting the product into wine. Wineries shall also include
the structures or areas provided for the tasting or sale of the wine so long
as such areas are on the same site as the products grown.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited
to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The nontower WCF,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.[Added 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.[Added 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
WOODLANDS — A community of plants characterized by areas, groves, or
stands of trees. Area measurements of woodlands shall be understood to
include the canopy. It shall be further defined as an area or stand of trees
whose combined canopy is 1/2 acre or more in extent and consists of at least
§ 84-10 PINE CODE § 84-10
68:494
50% of canopy trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of three inches
or more.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space, on the same lot with a structure, open
and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided
herewith.
YARD, FRONT — A yard across the full width of the lot, measured in depth
from the street right-of-way line to the nearest point of the building on the
lot. Lots that front on two streets shall provide the minimum front yard
setback from both streets.
YARD, REAR — A yard across the full width of the lot, measured in depth
from the rear property line of the lot to the nearest point of the building on
the lot. The rear yard is typically opposite the front yard, however, lots shall
only be required to provide one rear yard regardless of the number of front
yards.
YARD, SIDE — A yard along the full depth of the lot, measured in depth from
the side property line(s) of the lot to the nearest point of the building on the
lot.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — The Zoning Map or Maps of the Township,
together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or his authorized representative
appointed by the Supervisors to administer the Township of Pine Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances. For the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
may also be referred to as or include the Code Enforcement Officer, and/or
the Director of Code Administration and Land Development.
§ 84-10 SEWERS § 84-10
68:495

ARTICLE III
District Requirements
§ 84-11. Prohibited uses.
The primary purpose of this chapter is to maintain the quality of life in the
Township of Pine and ensure that the community does not include uses that
may injure the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the Township.
As such, no lot or structure in any district in the Township shall be used or
occupied in the following manner:
A. Asphalt manufacturing or refining;
B. Boiler works;
C. Commercial raising of hogs except on a farm of 50 or more acres and at
least 500 feet from any adjoining lot;
D. Concrete or asphalt batching plants;
E. Distillating coal, wood or bones;
F. Fat rendering, soap, tallow or lard manufacturing and refining in excess
of an amount needed for domestic consumption on the premises or
ordinarily done as incidental to farming;
G. Incinerator, crematory, reduction or storage of garbage, offal, dead
animals or refuse;
H. Junk, scrap or garbage storage;
I. Mass or large-scale cutting of trees and clearing of vegetation for the
sole purpose of clearing land, unless in strict conformity with the
forestry practices provisions contained in this chapter;102
J. Mobile homes on wheels;
K. Outdoor music concerts to be performed on temporary basis;
L. Repetitive use which attracts crowds without adequate off-street
parking on the premises;
M. Rock crushing;
N. Shacks, shanties or camping clubs;
O. Slaughterhouse;
P. Signs or signboards except those specifically permitted herein;
Q. Strip mining;
R. Stockyards;
102. Editor's Note: See § 84-51, Forestry.
§ 84-11 SEWERS § 84-11
68:497
§ 84-12. E-1 Estate Residential District.
S. Storage of gasoline in excess of an amount necessary for use on the
premises or in supplying retail trade at service stations;
T. Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins;
U. Used vehicle wrecking or storage yards;
V. Uses that may be unreasonably noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration or noise or which
detrimentally affect the public health, safety, morals, or the general
welfare of the Township residents;
W. Uses that are inconsistent with the community development objectives
or Comprehensive Plan of the Township or inconsistent with the
primary use of property in this Township as an essentially residential
community;
X. Uses not specifically listed as permitted or conditional uses shall be
prohibited.
A. Purpose. The E-1 Estate Residential District preserves the Township of
Pine's distinctive, low-density residential areas. These areas are
characterized predominantly by owner-occupied, single-family
detached homes and are unique in their character and scale. The
district requirements promote and protect the quality of life for
residents and the existing residential neighborhood.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the E-1 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Agriculture;
(3) Nature preserve;
(4) No-impact home-based business;
(5) Parks;
(6) Single-family dwelling, detached.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the E-1 District subject to land development review:
(1) Cemetery;
(2) Essential facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
§ 84-11 PINE CODE § 84-12
68:498
(1) Collocation/shared use communications facility on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(2) Place of worship;
(3) Public and semipublic uses;
(4) Recreation facility.
E. Planned development option. Planned residential development (PRD)
option is available in this zoning district subject to the requirements of
§ 84-26 of this chapter.
F. Public infrastructure improvement option. Public Infrastructure
Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD) option is available in this zoning
district subject to the requirements of § 84-26.1 of this chapter. [Added
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366103]
G. Area and bulk regulations. In the E-1 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 10%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 60 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Residential uses; principal use or structure: 40 feet.
[2] Nonresidential uses.
[a] Church, schools and public/semipublic: 50 feet.
[b] Other uses and structures: 80 feet.
[3] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 50 feet.
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections F
and G as Subsections G and H, respectively.
§ 84-12 SEWERS § 84-12
68:499
§ 84-13. S-1 Special District.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
H. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the E-1 District.
A. Purpose. The S-1 Special District preserves environmentally sensitive
areas in the Township of Pine. Pine is characterized by rolling
topography, wooded areas, floodplain areas, and other environmental
resources that would be protected as development occurs. The S-1
District allows for similar uses to the E-1 District to maintain the singlefamily
residential character that exists in these areas.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the S-1 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Agriculture;
(3) Nature preserve;
(4) No-impact home-based business;
(5) Parks;
(6) Single-family dwelling, detached.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the S-1 District subject to land development review:
(1) Cemetery;
(2) Essential facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Collocation/shared use communications facility on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
§ 84-12 PINE CODE § 84-13
68:500
(2) Place of worship;
(3) Public and semipublic uses;
(4) Recreation facility.
E. Planned development option. Planned residential development (PRD)
option is available in this zoning district subject to the requirements of
§ 84-26 of this chapter.
F. Public infrastructure improvement option. Public Infrastructure
Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD) option is available in this zoning
district subject to the requirements of § 84-26.1 of this chapter. [Added
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366104]
G. Area and bulk regulations. In the S-1 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 10%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Residential uses; principal use or structure: 30 feet.
[2] Nonresidential uses.
[a] Church, schools and public/semipublic: 50 feet.
[b] Other uses and structures: 80 feet.
[3] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 50 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections F
and G as Subsections G and H, respectively.
§ 84-13 SEWERS § 84-13
68:501
§ 84-14. R-1 Suburban Residence District.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
H. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the S-1 District.
A. Purpose. The R-1 Suburban Residence District is intended to be
primarily a single-family residential area. Complementary community
uses are allowed, but maintaining the overall residential character of
the neighborhoods is the primary goal of the R-1 District. Agricultural
uses are also allowed in this low-density residential district to
complement the residential nature of the community.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Agriculture;
(3) Nature preserve;
(4) No-impact home-based business;
(5) Parks;
(6) Single-family dwelling, detached;
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the R-1 District subject to land development review:
(1) Essential facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Collocation/shared use communications facility on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(2) Place of worship;
(3) Public and semipublic uses;
§ 84-13 PINE CODE § 84-14
68:502
(4) Recreation facility.
E. Planned development option. Planned residential development (PRD)
option is available in this zoning district subject to the requirements of
§ 84-26 of this chapter. The following additional uses are available when
the planned residential option is utilized:
(1) Carriage homes.
(2) Patio homes.
F. Area and bulk regulations. In the R-1 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 125 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 40 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Residential uses; principal use or structure: 20 feet.
[2] Nonresidential uses.
[a] Church, schools and public/semipublic: 50 feet.
[b] Other uses and structures: 80 feet.
[3] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 50 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
§ 84-14 SEWERS § 84-14
68:503
§ 84-15. R-2 Community Residence District.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
G. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the R-1 District.
A. Purpose. The R-2 Community Residence District is similar in nature to
the R-1 District, but smaller lot sizes characterize this district. The R-2
District is primarily residential in nature with support community
services allowed. Agricultural uses are allowed as they complement the
residential character of the community.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Agriculture;
(3) No-impact home-based business;
(4) Parks;
(5) Single-family dwelling, detached.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the R-2 District subject to land development review:
(1) Essential facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Collocation/shared use communications facility on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(2) Place of worship;
(3) Public and semipublic uses;
(4) Recreation facility.
E. Planned development options.
(1) Planned residential development (PRD) option is available in this
zoning district subject to the requirements of § 84-26 of this
chapter. The following additional uses are available when the
planned residential development option is utilized:
(a) Carriage homes.
(b) Patio homes.
§ 84-14 PINE CODE § 84-15
68:504
(2) Town Center Planned Residential Development (TC-PRD) option is
available in this zoning district subject to the requirements of
§ 84-25 of this chapter. The following additional uses are available
when the Town Center Planned Residential Development option is
utilized:
(a) Carriage homes;
(b) Garden apartments;
(c) College;
(d) Civic clubs;
(e) Day-care centers;
(f) Farm market;
(g) Hospitals;
(h) Motel or hotel;
(i) Indoor theater;
(j) Kennels;
(k) Life care communities;
(l) Mixed uses;
(m) Nature preserve;
(n) Nursing home;
(o) Offices;
(p) Restaurant without drive-throughs;
(q) Retail sales and services;
(r) Trade schools;
(s) Vehicle service station;
(t) Veterinary services.
F. Area and bulk regulations. In the R-2 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 90 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 3/4 acre.
§ 84-15 SEWERS § 84-15
68:505
§ 84-16. R-3 Neighborhood Residence District.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 30 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Residential uses; principal use or structure: 15 feet.
[2] Nonresidential uses.
[a] Church, schools and public/semipublic: 50 feet.
[b] Other uses and structures: 80 feet.
[3] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 40 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure 20 feet.
G. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the R-2 District.
A. Purpose. The R-3 Neighborhood Residence District is to provide for the
development of neighborhoods that include a mixture of single- and
multifamily housing in a primarily residential setting, but encouraging
higher densities of new development. Lot sizes are generally smaller
than the R-1 or R-2 Districts to accommodate the denser housing types.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-3 Districts:
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
§ 84-15 PINE CODE § 84-16
68:506
(2) Agriculture;
(3) No-impact home-based business;
(4) Parks;
(5) Single-family dwelling, detached.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the R-3 District subject to land development review:
(1) Essential facilities;
(2) Garden apartment (new development);
(3) Single-family dwelling; attached (new development).
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Carriage homes;
(2) Collocation/shared use communications facility on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(3) Patio home developments;
(4) Place of worship;
(5) Public and semipublic uses;
(6) Recreation facility.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the R-3 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 70 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(3) Lot width and lot area requirements are not applicable for
individual units in garden apartments (new developments),
individual single-family attached units (new developments),
individual carriage homes, and patio homes.
(4) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 25 feet.
§ 84-16 SEWERS § 84-16
68:507
§ 84-17. B-1 Rural Business District.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Residential uses; principal or accessory use or structure:
10 feet.
[2] Nonresidential uses.
[a] Church, schools and public/semipublic: 50 feet.
[b] Other uses and structures 80 feet.
[3] Side yard requirements are not applicable for individual
units in garden apartments (new developments), individual
single-family attached units (new developments), and
individual carriage home units when such units share a
common wall with one another.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 40 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(d) Rear yard, principal or accessory use or structure: 40 feet.
(5) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(6) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
F. Exceptions to area and bulk regulations.
(1) Lot width and lot area requirements. Lot width and lot area
requirements are not applicable for individual units in garden
apartments (new development), individual single-family attached
units (new developments), individual carriage homes, and patio
homes.
(2) Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements are not applicable
for individual units in garden apartments (new development),
individual single-family attached units (new developments), and
individual carriage home units when such units share a common
wall with another unit.
G. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the R-3 District.
§ 84-16 PINE CODE § 84-17
68:508
A. Purpose. The B-1 Rural Business District provides locations to
accommodate small scale, rural retail, service, finance, insurance and
real estate and related structures and uses. These districts are often
adjacent to residential districts to ensure the population of the
Township is adequately serviced.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the B-1 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Agriculture;
(2) Parks.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the B-1 District subject to land development review:
(1) Animal day care;
(2) Day-care center;
(3) Farm market;
(4) Kennel;
(5) Mixed-use in structures 6,000 square feet or less;
(6) Nursing home;
(7) Offices in structures 6,000 square feet or less;
(8) Retail sales and services without drive-throughs in structures 6,000
square feet or less;
(9) Veterinary services;
(10)Wineries.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishment;
(3) Carriage homes;
(4) Collocation/shared use communications facility, on existing
facilities only, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(5) Essential facilities;
(6) Garden apartment, in structures 6,000 square feet or less;
(7) Light manufacturing, research and testing in structures 6,000
square feet or less;
§ 84-17 SEWERS § 84-17
68:509
(8) Mortuary;
(9) No-impact home-based business;
(10) Patio home developments;
(11) Place of worship;
(12) Public and semipublic uses;
(13) Pole-mounted/shared use communications facility, subject to the
conditions of § 84-42;
(14) Recreation facility;
(15) Restaurant without drive-throughs;
(16) Single-family dwelling, attached (infill and new developments);
(17) Single-family dwelling, detached;
(18) Vehicle repair station;
(19) Vehicle sales;
(20) Vehicle service station.
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the B-1 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 125 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 0.5 acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Principal use or structure: 25 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 40 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
§ 84-17 PINE CODE § 84-17
68:510
§ 84-18. C-1 Community Service Center District.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 35 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
F. Exceptions to area and bulk regulations.
(1) Lot width and lot area requirements. Lot width and lot area
requirements are not applicable for individual units in garden
apartments in structures 6,000 square feet or less, individual
single-family attached units (new developments), individual
carriage home units, and residential units that are part of a mixed
use in buildings 6,000 square feet or less.
(2) Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements are not applicable
for individual units in garden apartments in structures 6,000
square feet or less, individual single-family attached units (new
developments), individual carriage home units, and residential
units that are part of a mixed use in buildings 6,000 square feet or
less when such units share a common wall with another unit.
G. Additional regulations. The applicable Regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the B-1 District.
A. Purpose. The C-1 Community Service Center District provides diverse
commercial development along transportation corridors and
neighborhoods. The district includes a mixture of uses such that serve
the adjacent neighborhood and the community as a whole. The C-1
District is preserved through appropriate design elements, amenities or
treatments that create, enhance and reinforce the design relationships
between the buildings, sites and streets and still establish an ambience
that reflects the character of the Township of Pine.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the C-1 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) N/A.
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the C-1 District subject to land development review:
(1) Animal day care;
(2) Automotive dealership, new;
§ 84-17 SEWERS § 84-18
68:511
(3) Automotive dealership, used;
(4) Car wash;
(5) Carriage homes;
(6) College;
(7) Day-care centers;
(8) Entertainment facilities;
(9) Hospital;
(10) Indoor theater;
(11) Life care community;
(12) Light manufacturing research and testing;
(13) Medical clinic;
(14) Mixed uses;
(15) Motel or hotel;
(16) No-impact home-based business;
(17) Nursing home;
(18) Offices;
(19) Parks;
(20) Places of worship;
(21) Public and semipublic uses;
(22) Recreation facility;
(23) Restaurants;
(24) Retail sales and services;
(25) Trade school.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Adult-oriented establishments;
(3) Alcohol rehabilitation clinic;
(4) Animal hospital;
§ 84-18 PINE CODE § 84-18
68:512
(5) Collocation/shared use communications facility, subject to the
conditions of § 84-42;
(6) Commercial or public parking garage or lot;
(7) Communications facility;
(8) Communication tower, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(9) Drive-in theater;
(10) Essential facilities;
(11) Freestanding self-storage units;
(12) Garden apartments (new developments);
(13) Group care facility;
(14) Heliport;
(15)Kennel, indoor, subject to the conditions of § 84-58B. [Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 348105]
(16) Methadone treatment facility;
(17) Mobile home parks;
(18) Nightclub. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(19) Nursery; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(20) Outdoor advertising signs; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
(21) Park-and-ride facility; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(22) Patio home development. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(23) Pole-mounted/shared use communications facility, subject to the
conditions of § 84-42; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(24) Single-family, attached (new developments); [Amended
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(25) Swimming pools, public; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
(26) Vehicle repair station; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(27) Vehicle sales; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(28) Vehicle service station; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection D(15) through (29) as
Subsection D(16) through (30).
§ 84-18 SEWERS § 84-18
68:513
(29)Warehouse; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(30)Warehouse sales; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(31) Other uses not listed in this section as permitted, permitted with
land development review or conditional uses. [Amended
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
E. Planned development option. Town Center Planned Residential
Development (TC-PRD) option is available in this zoning district subject
to the requirements of § 84-25 of this chapter. The following additional
uses are available when the Town Center Planned Residential
Development option is utilized:
(1) Civic clubs;
(2) Farm market;
(3) Kennel;
(4) Nature preserve;
(5) Patio homes;
(6) Restaurants without drive-throughs;
(7) Single-family dwelling, detached;
(8) Veterinary services.
F. Area and bulk regulations. In the C-1 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards; principal or accessory use or structure: 10 feet
unless attached to the adjacent building.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 50 feet.
§ 84-18 PINE CODE § 84-18
68:514
§ 84-19. C-2 Planned Transition District.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 45 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
G. Exceptions to area and bulk regulations.
(1) Lot width and lot area requirements. Lot width and lot area
requirements are not applicable for individual units in garden
apartment buildings (new developments), individual single-family
attached units (infill and new developments), individual carriage
home units, patio homes, individual residential units comprising
life care community buildings, and residential units that are part of
mixed uses or a Town Center Planned Residential Development.
(2) Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements are not applicable
for individual units in garden apartment buildings (new
developments), individual single-family attached units (infill and
new developments), individual carriage home units, individual
residential units comprising life care community buildings, and
residential units that are part of mixed uses or a Town Center
Planned Residential Development when such units share a common
wall with another unit.
H. Additional regulations. The applicable regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the C-1 District.
A. Purpose. The C-2 Planned Transition District also provides diverse
commercial development in transitional areas of the Township. The
District includes a mixture of uses such that serve the adjacent
neighborhood and the community as a whole. The C-2 District also
requires appropriate design elements, amenities or treatments that
create, enhance and reinforce the design relationships between the
buildings, sites and streets and still establish an ambience that reflects
the character of the Township of Pine.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the C-2 District,
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Single-family dwelling, detached.
§ 84-18 SEWERS § 84-19
68:515
C. Permitted uses subject to land development review. The following uses
are allowed in the C-2 District subject to land development review:
(1) Civic clubs;
(2) Day-care center;
(3) Medical clinic;
(4) Mixed uses in structures 6,000 square feet or less;
(5) No-impact home-based business;
(6) Nursing home;
(7) Offices. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(8) Parks; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(9) Patio home development. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(10) Place of worship; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(11) Public and semipublic use; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
(12) Recreation. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions as set
forth in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Accessory use/accessory structure; [Amended 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
(2) Carriage homes;
(3) College;
(4) Collocation/shared use communications facility, subject to the
conditions of § 84-42;
(5) Communications facility;
(6) Communication tower, subject to the conditions of § 84-42;
(7) Essential facilities;
(8) Garden apartments (infill);
(9) Group care facility;
(10) Hospital;
(11) Life care community;
(12) Nursery;
§ 84-19 PINE CODE § 84-19
68:516
(13) Offices in structures 6,000 square feet or less [outside of the Town
Center Design Overlay (TCDO) District]; [Amended 11-16-2009
by Ord. No. 352]
(14) Patio home developments; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
(15) Patio homes; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(16) Pole-mounted/shared use communications facility, subject to the
conditions of § 84-42; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(17) Single-family dwelling, attached (infill and new development);
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(18) Trade school; [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(19)Warehouse. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
E. Area and bulk regulations. In the C-2 District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter, and on each lot
upon which a building or structure hereafter is erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Lot width requirements; minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Principal use or structure: 25 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Principal use or structure: 50 feet.
[2] Accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
(4) Corner lots. All yards abutting streets shall be considered front
yards and shall follow the regulations for front yards outlined in
this article; all side and rear yards shall follow the regulations of
this article.
(5) Building height.
§ 84-19 SEWERS § 84-19
68:517
§ 84-20. Summary of zoning districts.
(a) Maximum building height; principal use or structure: 45 feet.
(b) Maximum building height; accessory use or structure: 20 feet.
F. Exceptions to area and bulk regulations.
(1) Lot width and lot area requirements. Lot width and lot area
requirements are not applicable for individual units in garden
apartment buildings in structures 6,000 square feet or less,
individual single-family attached units (new developments),
individual carriage home units, individual residential units
comprising life care community buildings, and residential units
that are part of mixed uses in structures 6,000 square feet or less.
(2) Side yard requirements. Side yard requirements are not applicable
for individual units in garden apartment buildings in structures
6,000 square feet or less, individual single-family attached units
(new developments), individual carriage home units, individual
residential units comprising life care community buildings, and
residential units that are part of mixed uses in structures 6,000
square feet or less when such units share a common wall with
another unit.
G. Additional regulations. The applicable regulations for Specified and
Conditional Uses (Article V) and Requirements Applying to All Districts
(Article VI) in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the C-2 District.
A. Permitted uses. The following table summarizes the uses permitted in
each district. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 348; 11-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 352]
P Permitted use "as of right."
P-LD Permitted use with land development approval
CU Conditional use
PRD Use permitted as part of a PRD only
TC-PRD Use permitted as part of a TC-PRD only
AVAIL PRD option available in zoning district
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Accessory
use/structure
P P P P P CU CU CU
Adultoriented
establishments
CU
Agricultural
uses
P P P P P P
§ 84-19 PINE CODE § 84-20
68:518
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Alcohol
rehabilitation
clinic
CU
Animal day
care
P-LD P-LD
Animal
hospital
CU
Automotive
dealership,
new
P-LD
Automotive
dealership,
used
P-LD
Bed-andbreakfast
establishment
CU
Car wash P-LD
Carriage
homes
PRD PRD CU CU P-LD CU
Cemetery P-LD P-LD
Clubs TC-PRD TC-PRD P-LD
College TC-PRD P-LD CU
Collocation/
shared use
communication
facility
CU CU
Collocation/
shared use
communication
facility, on
existing
facilities only
CU CU CU CU CU CU
Commercial
or public
parking
garage or lot
CU
Communication
facility
CU CU
§ 84-20 SEWERS § 84-20
68:519
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Communication
tower
CU CU
Day-care
center
TC-PRD P-LD P-LD P-LD
Drive-in
theater
CU
Entertainment
facilities
P-LD
Essential
facilities
P-LD P-LD P-LD P-LD P-LD CU CU CU
Farm market TC-PRD P-LD TC-PRD
Freestanding
self storage
units
CU
Garden
apartment, in
structures,
6,000 sq. ft.
or less
CU CU
Garden
apartment
(new
developments)
TC-PRD P-LD CU
Group care
facility
CU CU
Heliport CU
Hospital TC-PRD P-LD CU
Indoor
theater
TC-PRD P-LD
Kennel TC-PRD P-LD TC-PRD
Kennel,
indoor
CU
Life care
community
TC-PRD P-LD CU
Light
manufacturing,
research and
testing
P-LD
§ 84-20 PINE CODE § 84-20
68:520
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Light
manufacturing,
research and
testing in
structures
6,000 sq. ft.
or less
CU
Medical
clinic
P-LD P-LD
Methadone
treatment
facility
CU
Mixed uses in
structures
6,000 sq ft.
or less
P-LD P-LD
Mixed uses TC-PRD P-LD
Mobile home
parks
CU
Mortuary CU CU
Motel or
hotel
TC-PRD P-LD
Nature
preserve
P P P TC-PRD TC-PRD
Nightclub CU
No-impact
home-based
business
P P P P P CU P-LD P-LD
Nursery CU CU
Nursing
home
TC-PRD P-LD P-LD P-LD
Offices TC-PRD P-LD
Offices in
structures
6,000 sq ft.
or less
P-LD CU
Other uses
not listed
CU
Outdoor
advertising
signs
CU
§ 84-20 SEWERS § 84-20
68:521
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Park and ride
facility
CU
Park P P P P P P P-LD P-LD
Patio homes PRD
(25%)
PRD
(50%)
CU CU TC-PRD,
CU
CU
Place of
worship
CU CU CU CU CU CU P-LD P-LD
Pole-mounte/
shared use
communication
facility
CU CU CU
Public and
semi public
uses
CU CU CU CU CU CU P-LD P-LD
Recreation P-LD
Recreation
facility
CU CU CU CU CU CU P-LD
Restaurant
without
drivethroughs
TC-PRD CU TC-PRD
Restaurants P-LD
Retail sales
and services
TC-PRD P-LD
Retail sales
and services
without
drivethroughs,
in
structures
6,000 or less
P-LD
Single-family
dwelling,
attached
(infill)
CU CU
Single-family
dwelling,
attached
(new
developments)
P-LD CU CU CU
§ 84-20 PINE CODE § 84-20
68:522
Use E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Single-family
dwelling,
detached
P P P P P CU TC-PRD P
Swimming
pools, public
CU
Trade
schools
TC-PRD P-LD CU
Vehicle
repair station
CU CU
Vehicle sales CU CU
Vehicle
service
station
TC-PRD CU CU
Veterinary
services
TC-PRD P-LD TC-PRD
Warehouse CU CU
Warehouse
sales
CU
Wineries P-LD
Planned
residential
development
(PRD)
AVAIL AVAIL AVAIL AVAIL
Town Center
Planned
Residential
Development
(TC-PRD)
AVAIL AVAIL
B. Area and bulk regulations. The following table summarizes the area and
bulk regulations in each district. Exceptions may exist for certain uses.
These exceptions are not reflected in this summary.
E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Minimum lot
width
(feet)
300 200 125 90 70 125 150 100
Minimum lot area
(acres)
3 2 1 3/4 1/2 1/2 1 1
Maximum
building coverage
10% 10% 20% 20% 35% 30% 50% 50%
§ 84-20 SEWERS § 84-20
68:523
E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Maximum lot
coverage
20% 20% 40% 40% 50% 50% 80% 80%
Front yard
Principle or
accessory use or
structure
(feet)
50 50 40 30 25 20 50 50
Side yard
Principle use or
structure
(feet)
25 10 25
Residential
(feet)
30 30 20 15 10
Church, school,
public/semipublic
(feet)
50 50 50 50 50
Other
nonresidential
uses
(feet)
80 80 80 80 80
Accessory use or
structure
(feet)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Rear yard
Principle use or
structure
(feet)
50 50 50 40 40 40 50 50
Accessory use or
structure
(feet)
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
Maximum
building height
Principle use or
structure
(feet)
35 35 35 35 35 35 45 45
§ 84-20 PINE CODE § 84-20
68:524
E-1 S-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 C-1 C-2
Accessory use or
structure
(feet)
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
§ 84-20 SEWERS § 84-20
68:525

ARTICLE IV
Special Overlay Districts and Planned Residential Developments
§ 84-21. GWO — Greenways Overlay District.
A. Purpose. A Greenways Overlay District is hereby established consistent
with recommendations of the Township of Pine Comprehensive Plan.
The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that the establishment
and maintenance of a greenways system as identified is the minimum
improvement for continuing the character and welfare of the Township.
B. Greenway standards. Development or redevelopment in the Greenways
Overlay District shall not be approved unless:
(1) For existing wooded areas within the Greenways Overlay District:
(a) A wooded and landscaped strip, not less than 15 feet in width
in commercial zones and 40 feet in width in all other zones,
shall be maintained along the entire frontage of the property,
except for ingress/egress for vehicles.
(b) The landscaped strip shall be comprised of an existing stand of
mature trees meeting the minimum quantity and minimum size
requirements of § 84-21 B(2)(b)[1] or [2]. [Amended
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(c) Measurement for the greenways required by this section shall
be measured beginning at the road right-of-way line extending
away from the road parallel to the road right-of-way line.
(2) For other portions of the Greenways Overlay District:
(a) A wooded and landscaped strip, not less than 15 feet in width
in commercial zones and 40 feet in width in all other zones,
shall be created along the entire frontage of the property,
except for ingress/egress for vehicles.
(b) The landscaped strip shall include plants included in
§ 84-111B(5) and include:
[1] Commercial districts: one tree, 2 1/2 inches minimum
caliper every 30 linear feet on center.
[2] Other districts.
[a] One tree 2 1/2 inches minimum caliper, spaced no less
than 50 feet from the center of each tree to the center
of another tree.
[b] Shrubs, grasses, and groundcover plants may be
included in addition to the plantings required within
the greenway landscape strip.
§ 84-21 SEWERS § 84-21
68:527
§ 84-22. TVO — Traditional Village Overlay District.
(c) Earthen mounding shall be utilized, in areas deemed
appropriate, to help screen parking and loading areas, building
mechanical systems, or other objectionable elements or uses
on the site.
C. Structures.
(1) No structures shall be constructed within the Greenway Overlay
District or the Greenway Overlay District building setback line
unless such building setback is reduced by a provision of the
Traditional Village Overlay District (TVO) or the Town Center
Design District (TCDO).
(2) Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the setbacks for any
structure from a road right-of-way identified as a greenway for
noncommercial districts shall be 100 feet.
D. All subdivisions, land developments, and planned residential
developments shall provide easements for and connections to trails in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
portions of the Pine Code, as amended.
E. Should PennDOT have a viable plan to acquire additional right-of-way
from any property owner along Route 19 within the Town Center Design
Overlay District (TCDO), then the Board of Supervisors may defer or
relieve the applicant of any of the greenway requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enhance and preserve the Old
Wexford area as a traditional village. This section promotes the
development of livable streets, which are oriented to and accessible by
pedestrians. Development permitted within the Traditional Village
Overlay District will have specific pedestrian and neighborhood
orientation, and will be linked together through streetscape amenities,
including sidewalks, ornamental streetlighting, pedestrian-scale
signage, street trees, and screened parking. The TVO is established to
achieve the following:
(1) To build upon and preserve the existing village development
pattern which is unique to the character, scale and history of the
Old Wexford area.
(2) To maintain the significance of the Old Wexford area as a
destination point within the Township of Pine and to retain its
identifiable sense of place.
(3) To facilitate pedestrian traffic through the development of
streetscape amenities such as sidewalks, traffic calming measures,
street-edge landscaping features, pedestrian-scale lighting and
screened parking.
§ 84-21 PINE CODE § 84-22
68:528
(4) To provide for a mix of mutually supportive uses that are unified by
the streetscape design.
(5) To limit and discourage development of strip-type, auto-dependent
commercial uses that create traffic conflicts because they require
numerous individual curb cuts and generate higher traffic volumes
which are potentially detrimental to the public safety.
(6) To encourage the consolidation of curb cuts for vehicular access
and promote more efficient and economical parking lots or
garages.
(7) Encourage uses that minimize noise and congestion.
(8) Permit uses that promote conversion or reuse of existing buildings
in a manner that maintains the character and scale of existing
development within the TVO District.
(9) Prevent the deterioration of structures and protect/support
effective rehabilitation efforts.
B. Uses by right. Uses allowed in the C-1 District shall be permitted within
the TVO District with the following additions and exceptions:
(1) Prohibited uses in the TVO district:
(a) Adult-oriented establishments;
(b) College;
(c) Drive-in theaters;
(d) Group care facility;
(e) Heliports;
(f) Hospital;
(g) Life care community;
(h) Motel or hotel;
(i) Vehicle sales;
(j) Vehicle service stations.
(2) Additional uses permitted by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings, detached;
(b) Single-family dwellings, attached (new developments and
infill).
(3) Additional uses subject to land development review:
(a) Farm markets;
§ 84-22 SEWERS § 84-22
68:529
(b) Mixed use;
(c) Wineries.
(4) Additional conditional uses:
(a) Bed-and-breakfast establishments;
(b) Conversion of a single-family dwelling to mixed use.
C. Area and bulk regulations. In the TVO District, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter and on each lot
upon which a building or structure is hereafter erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Unless specified in this subsection, all other requirements (lot area,
lot width, side and rear yards, coverage and height) shall be
provided as defined in the respective base district.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet at the building setback line.
(3) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(d) Minimum landscaped area: 10%.
(4) Building square footage.
(a) Individual retail uses shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of
gross floor area.
(b) Retail uses contained in one structure shall not exceed five
individual retail uses.
(c) Buildings shall not exceed 20,000 square feet in gross floor
area.
(5) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard.
[1] The minimum building setback shall not be less than the
smaller of the front yards of the two buildings immediately
adjacent (on either side) to the proposed use, or 10 feet
from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
[2] The maximum building setback shall be 25 feet.
[3] The maximum building setback may be exceeded when a
development or use incorporates enhanced pedestrian
spaces and amenities within the setback area that consists
§ 84-22 PINE CODE § 84-22
68:530
of a combination of features such as plazas, courtyards,
arcades, outdoor seating, widened sidewalks or pedestrian
pathways, benches, shelters, street furniture, public art or
kiosks.
(b) Side yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 0 feet.
(c) Rear yard; principal or accessory use or structure: 0 feet.
(6) Building heights.
(a) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(b) Chimneys, spires, and similar projections may exceed the
prescribed height limitations by not more than 25%.
D. Nonresidential design standards. General design requirements for uses
within the TVO District shall include the following:
(1) Applicability.
(a) The requirements of this subsection shall apply to all new land
developments and existing buildings reconstructed by the
expenditure of an amount over 50% of the building's then
current estimated fair market value as established by
Allegheny County in its tax assessment.
(b) All other applicable standards and requirements as set forth in
Chapter 84 and Chapter 78 shall apply to the TVO District.
Where there may be a conflict between said ordinances and the
TVO, the TVO standards shall take precedence.
(2) Building context and compatibility.
(a) New buildings shall be constructed to be generally compatible
with buildings on the same block frontage within 200 feet. This
provision shall be satisfied by constructing the subject
structure so that at least three of the following features are
similar to the majority of other structures within 200 feet on
the block frontage on both sides of the street:
[1] Building height;
[2] Roof style/overhang;
[3] Building massing;
[4] Window coverage;
[5] Porches and steps;
[6] Exterior building material; or
[7] Pattern of window and door openings.
§ 84-22 SEWERS § 84-22
68:531
(3) Building materials.
(a) Ground-floor transparency. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 352]
[1] The street-level facade of any building facing a public
street or access drive shall be transparent between the
height of two feet and eight feet above the walkway grade
for at least 60% of the horizontal length of the structure.
[2] All glazing shall be clear, lightly tinted, or spandrel glass.
[3] Spandrel glass may be used to comply with the
transparency requirement; however, spandrel glass may
only be utilized to achieve the transparency requirement
as long as spandrel glass and visual glass are not both
utilized on the same wall plane.
[4] In special circumstances alternatives to the transparency
requirements of this section may be permitted, subject to
all of the below-stated conditions:
[a] Upon appropriate demonstration by the applicant, a
determination that strict compliance with the
transparency requirements cannot be reasonably
achieved.
[b] Proposal by the applicant of an appropriate
transparency alternative which incorporates the use
or arrangement of building materials that simulate
transparency and/or that provides enhanced
architectural amenities (which architectural amenities
are determined to be in addition to those otherwise
required by the Code of the Township of Pine).
[c] The use of the proposed transparency alternative shall
not result in a reduction of more than 25% of the
otherwise applicable transparency requirements of
this section.
(b) Exterior facade.
[1] Surface treatments such as cornices, brackets, window
and door moldings and details, recesses, projections,
awnings, decorative finish materials and other
architectural articulation shall be required along 100% of
the horizontal length of any wall.
[2] Colors.
[a] The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors or
black may be permitted based upon design features.
§ 84-22 PINE CODE § 84-22
68:532
[b] The use of fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
(4) Driveways/curb cuts.
(a) Spacing.
[1] In order to reduce pedestrian and vehicular conflict within
the TVO District, shared driveway entrances and access
drives are encouraged.
[2] Spacing of curb cuts or driveways for nonresidential uses
shall be determined according to the following schedule:
Speed Limit
(mph)
Minimum Spacing
(feet)
25 105
30 125
35 150
[a] These spaces are based on average vehicle
acceleration and deceleration rates and are
considered necessary to maintain safe traffic
operation.
[b] Spacing will be measured from the midpoint of each
driveway.
[c] In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack
sufficient road frontage to maintain adequate spacing,
the landowner may seek a variance, or the adjacent
landowners may agree to establish a common
driveway. In such cases, the driveway midpoint should
be the property line between the two parcels.
[d] The driveway must meet standard Township
specifications.
(b) When two adjacent property owners agree to combine access
points, the Township may grant an incentive bonus, in which
case the required number of parking spaces would be reduced
by 15% for each development, or the building coverage may be
increased by 10%.
(c) Driveways and curb cuts shall have direct alignment with
driveways/curb cuts on opposing lots.
(5) Off-street parking.
(a) If a Township-owned public parking lot is provided within the
TVO District within 600 feet of the use, the applicant may be
permitted, as a conditional use, to defer a portion of the
§ 84-22 SEWERS § 84-22
68:533
required off-street spaces to the public parking lot if space is
determined available.
(b) Landscaping and screening.
[1] Parking shall be screened from the view of public streets
and access drives, using a buffer strip that shall include
trees, shrubs, groundcovers, or fencing.
[2] The planting buffer strip shall be a minimum of six feet in
width and include one tree for every 200 square feet of
area.
[3] Screening shall be an average height of 3 1/2 feet and
include:
[a] A continuous hedgerow; or
[b] A decorative fence consisting of either a solid
decorative masonry or ornamental metal fencing with
brick piers, or a combination. Wire fabric fencing or
similar materials are prohibited for use as a
decorative fence.
(c) Lighting.
[1] Lighting shall be required for all off-street parking.
[2] Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
[3] Lighting shall be in accordance with an approved
photometric plan and the level of limitations as required
by Township specifications.
[4] All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting
fixtures as defined in the standard details106 of the
Township and elsewhere in the Code.
(d) Vehicular linkages.
[1] Parking lots and garages shall be connected to adjacent
parcels through a rear or side yard access drive
constructed parallel to the public street to which the use
fronts, or is located along, to provide a secondary point of
access in a grid pattern to uses within the TVO District.
[2] Access drives shall be constructed in accordance with
Township specifications.
[3] Where a parking lot or garage is constructed and is
adjacent to an undeveloped lot, the access drive or alley
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-22 PINE CODE § 84-22
68:534
shall be extended to the lot line for future connection to
the adjacent parcel.
(6) Outdoor seating.
(a) Outdoor seating is permitted to encroach upon the public
sidewalk provided that a five-foot clear sidewalk passage is
maintained.
(7) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks shall be required for all land developments, changes
of use, and for buildings reconstructed or rehabilitated over
50% of tax assessment as determined by Allegheny County or
for buildings expanded by 25% or more.
(b) Along all public streets, a sidewalk shall be constructed. The
sidewalk shall include:
[1] A minimum of 11 feet in width to accommodate a five-foot
sidewalk and a six-foot planting strip; and
[2] Include shade trees planted 30 feet on center.
[3] Sidewalks constructed along Church Road shall be a
minimum of five feet in width and begin at the curbline.
(c) Sidewalks shall be installed to connect to the lot line of
adjacent parcels.
(8) Signage. Signs shall be permitted as provided for in § 84-121 of this
chapter, with the following additions and exceptions:
(a) Prohibited signs. Signs not permitted in the TVO District
include:
[1] Backlit and internally illuminated box signs;
[2] Banners (except for banners installed by the Township);
[3] Outdoor advertising signs;
[4] Flashing or blinking signs;
[5] Marquee-type signs with changeable message;
[6] Mobile placards;
[7] Off-premises real estate signs (lease, sale, rental);
[8] Pennants/streamers;
[9] Plastic awnings that are illuminated or act as a sign;
[10] Portable signs, with the exception of sandwich board signs
as provided for in Subsection § 84-22D(8)(b)[4];
§ 84-22 SEWERS § 84-22
68:535
[11] Signs with movable parts;
[12] Signs on roofs, dormers, and balconies;
[13] Signs employing mercury vapor, low-pressure and highpressure
sodium, and plastic panel rear-lighted signs.
(b) Permitted signs.
[1] Wall projecting signs.
[a] Wall projecting signs shall be permitted, provided:
[i] The lower edge of the sign is a minimum of 10 feet
above grade;
[ii] The sign does not extend more than six feet from
the building wall;
[iii] The sign does not extend higher than the first
floor or 15 feet, whichever is less.
[b] The maximum sign area shall not exceed 10 square
feet per sign face.
[2] Window signs.
[a] Window signs (which include posters, signs, symbols
and other identification of, or information about, the
occupant or activity and/or use of the premises) may
be permitted within the allowable total sign area
applicable to the building.
[b] Window signs shall not exceed 10% of the total glass
area of the front of the building.
[c] Neon window signs may be permitted in cases where
they are custom designed to be compatible with the
architectural character and exterior color of the
building.
[d] Window signs shall be limited to ground floor or first
floor windows only.
[3] Wall signs.
[a] Wall signs, as permitted in § 84-121, may be permitted
to be located to either side of the doorway facing a
public street.
[4] Sandwich board signs. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 356]
[a] Signs which provide a menu option (or other
advertising) for the particular use and which are
§ 84-22 PINE CODE § 84-22
68:536
displayed on an easel-like frame only during normal
business hours may be permitted to be placed on or
adjacent to the sidewalk along the road frontage of the
use, provided that five feet of sidewalk width remains
unobstructed.
[b] One sandwich board sign shall be permitted per
business that has its own direct entrance to or from
the sidewalk or parking area, and such sandwich
board sign shall not exceed six square feet in area per
sign face.
[c] All sandwich board signs shall be securely anchored
so as not to create a hazard should such sign become
dislocated from its intended location.
[d] For properties that contain frontage and/or side and/
or rear yards which abut State Route 19, sandwich
board signs shall not be placed along such State Route
19 frontage.
(9) Streetlighting.
(a) Streetlights are required for all land developments, changes of
use, and for buildings reconstructed or rehabilitated over 50%
of tax assessment as determined by Allegheny County or for
buildings expanded by 25% or more within the TVO Districts.
(b) Illumination levels shall provide for adequate safety, yet not
detract from or overly emphasize the site or building.
(c) Streetlights, including all pedestrian lighting, shall not exceed
15 feet in height.
(d) Streetlights shall be located as directed by the Township.
(e) Streetlights shall be in accordance with an approved
photometric plan and the level limitations as required by
Township specifications.
(f) All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting fixtures as
defined in the standard details107 of the Township and
elsewhere in the Code.
(10) Street trees.
(a) One street tree shall be required for every 30 feet of front yard,
for all land developments, changes of use, and for buildings
reconstructed or rehabilitated over 50% of tax assessment as
determined by Allegheny County or for buildings expanded by
25% or more within the TVO District.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-22 SEWERS § 84-23
68:537
§ 84-23. TCDO Town Center Design Overlay District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the development of
a pedestrian orientated corridor that links a variety of uses through
streetscape amenities and design treatments which include sidewalks,
streetlighting, landscaping, street trees, screened and pedestrian
friendly parking lots or garages and coordinated signage. The Town
Center Design Overlay will serve as a transitional zone unifying the
unique development patterns of the Old Wexford Village Area. The
TCDO is established to achieve the following:
(1) To facilitate safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular travel along
the Route 19 Corridor through the application of coordinated
streetscape amenities, including sidewalks, streetlighting,
landscaping, building and parking orientation and signage.
(2) To manage the development of strip type, auto-dependent
commercial uses that create traffic conflicts by requiring numerous
curb cuts and generate higher traffic volumes which are potentially
detrimental to the public safety.
(3) To create a "Town Center" environment that is unique to the
Township of Pine.
B. Uses by right. Uses shall be permitted in the TCDO District as defined
within the respective base zoning districts with the following additions
and exceptions:
(1) Additional uses permitted by right.
(a) Town Center Planned Residential District (TC-PRD).
[1] The TC-PRD shall be permitted within the C-1 Community
Service Center District and the R-2 Community Residence
Districts.
[2] The TC-PRD shall be permitted only in the R-2 District
when the subject property is adjacent to a C-1 District and
is in single ownership.
C. Area and bulk regulations. In the TCDO District, the following
regulations shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter and on
each lot upon which a building or structure is hereafter erected,
altered, enlarged or maintained
(1) Unless specified in this subsection, all other requirements (lot area,
lot width, side and rear yards, coverage and height) shall be
provided as defined in the respective base district.
(2) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard.
§ 84-23 PINE CODE § 84-23
68:538
[1] The minimum building setback within the TCDO District
shall be 35 feet as measured from the street right-of-way
line.
[2] Where applicable, the applicant shall be permitted to use
an average building setback, as defined below:
[a] New development within the TCDO District shall be
permitted to use the average building setback of
existing structures located on adjacent sites.
[b] The average building setback concept may be used if
the existing front setbacks of lots within the same
block or within 1,500 feet of the subject lot, and
fronting on the same side of the street are less than
the minimum front setback.
[c] In such instances, applicants shall be permitted to use
the average front setback, where the average setback
shall be the mean (average) setback of all lots on the
same side of the street within the same block or 1,500
feet of the subject property.
[d] No more than six lots on either side of the subject
property shall be included in the calculation.
[3] The average or minimum building setback may be reduced
by 10 feet when a development or use incorporates
enhanced pedestrian spaces and amenities within the
setback area that consist of a combination of features such
as plazas, courtyards, arcades, outdoor seating, widened
sidewalks or pedestrian pathways, benches, shelters,
street furniture, public art or kiosks as determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
D. Nonresidential design standards.
(1) Applicability.
(a) The requirements of this subsection apply to all land
developments, changes of use, and for buildings reconstructed
or rehabilitated over 50% of tax assessment as determined by
Allegheny County or for buildings expanded by 25% or more of
gross floor area square footage.
(b) All other applicable standards and requirements as set forth in
Chapter 84 and Chapter 78 shall apply to the TCDO District.
Where there may be a conflict between said ordinances and the
TCDO, the TCDO standards shall take precedence.
(2) Building materials.
§ 84-23 SEWERS § 84-23
68:539
(a) Ground-floor transparency. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 352]
[1] The street-level facade of any building facing a public
street or access drive shall be transparent between the
height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway
grade for at least 50% of the horizontal length of the
structure.
[2] No more than two sides of any one building shall be
subject to the minimum transparency provisions.
[3] All glazing shall be dear, lightly tinted, or spandrel glass.
[4] Spandrel glass may be used to comply with the
transparency requirement; however, spandrel glass may
only be utilized to achieve the transparency requirement
as long as spandrel glass and visual glass are not both
utilized on the same wall plane.
[5] In special circumstances alternatives to the transparency
requirements of this section may be permitted, subject to
all of the below-stated conditions:
[a] Upon appropriate demonstration by the applicant, a
determination that strict compliance with the
transparency requirements cannot be reasonably
achieved.
[b] Proposal by the applicant of an appropriate
transparency alternative which incorporates the use
or arrangement of building materials that simulate
transparency and/or that provides enhanced
architectural amenities (which architectural amenities
are determined to be in addition to those otherwise
required by the Code of the Township of Pine).
[c] The use of the proposed transparency alternative shall
not result in a reduction of more than 25% of the
otherwise applicable transparency requirements of
this section.
(b) Exterior facade.
[1] Surface treatments such as recesses, projections, finish
materials, awnings, and other architectural articulation
shall be required along 100% of the horizontal length of
any wall.
[2] Buildings which exhibit long, flat facades and continuous
linear strip development are prohibited in the TCDO
District.
§ 84-23 PINE CODE § 84-23
68:540
[3] Building materials may include:
[a] Brick;
[b] Split-face masonry units four inch by sixteen inch or
smaller;
[c] Prefabricated architecturally designed concrete
masonry panel;
[d] Stucco, as accent material;
[e] Comparable materials may be approved by the Board
of Supervisors.
[4] Building materials shall not include:
[a] Large split face masonry units, larger than four inch
by sixteen;
[b] Tilt-up concrete masonry units;
[c] Prefabricated rolled steel wall panels;
[d] Standard eight-inch by sixteen-inch concrete masonry
units (CMU).
[5] Colors.
[a] The use of high-intensity, metallic, and fluorescent
colors shall be prohibited.
(3) Building orientation. All buildings in the TCDO District shall
provide a prominent and highly visible street-level doorway or
entrance along the front or side of the building, which faces a
public street.
(4) Driveways/curb cuts.
(a) Spacing.
[1] In order to reduce pedestrian and vehicular conflict within
the TCDO District, shared driveway entrances and access
drives are encouraged.
[2] Spacing of curb cuts or driveways for nonresidential uses
shall be determined according to the following schedule:
Speed Limit
(mph)
Minimum Spacing
(feet)
25 105
30 125
35 150
§ 84-23 SEWERS § 84-23
68:541
Speed Limit
(mph)
Minimum Spacing
(feet)
40 185
45 230
[3] These spaces are based on average vehicle acceleration
and deceleration rates and are considered necessary to
maintain safe traffic operation.
[4] Spacing will be measured from the midpoint of each
driveway.
[a] In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack
sufficient road frontage to maintain adequate spacing,
the landowner may seek a variance, or the adjacent
landowners may agree to establish a common
driveway. In such cases, the driveway midpoint should
be the property line between the two parcels.
[b] The driveway must meet standard Township
specifications.
(b) When two adjacent property owners agree to combine access
points, the Township may grant an incentive bonus, in which
case the required number of parking spaces would be reduced
by 15% for each development, or the building coverage may be
increased by 10%.
(c) Driveways and curb cuts shall have direct alignment with
driveways/curb cuts on opposing lots.
(5) Greenway requirement. Greenways, as defined in § 84-10 and
referenced in § 84-21 of this chapter, shall be provided along the
Route 19 Corridor within the TCDO District as follows:
(a) A wooded and landscaped strip of no less than 15 feet shall be
provided in all commercial zones along the Route 19 Corridor.
(b) The strip shall be provided along the entire frontage of the
parcel, except for entranceway for vehicles.
(c) The strip shall comply with the requirements of the Greenway
Overlay District.
(d) No structure within the TCDO District shall be located closer
to the edge of the greenway than 10 feet (calculating the
beginning point of the fifteen-foot-wide greenway from the
right-of-way line, measuring toward the building setback line).
(e) Should PennDOT have a viable plan to acquire additional rightof-
way from any property owner along Route 19 within the
§ 84-23 PINE CODE § 84-23
68:542
Town Center Design Overlay District (TCDO), then the Board
of Supervisors may defer or relieve the applicant of any of the
greenway requirements.
(6) Off-street parking.
(a) Location.
[1] Front yard parking.
[a] To the greatest extent possible, surface parking shall
not be located between the structure and a public
street.
[b] In all cases, screening from the street and/or access
drive is mandatory to define the street edge and soften
the visual impact of any parking area.
[c] All corner lots along the corridor shall have all parking
areas screened from all streets and/or access drives.
[2] Side yard parking. Off-street parking spaces may be
located to the side of buildings, provided that the facade of
the building facing the parking shall be transparent
between the height of three feet and eight feet above the
grade of the walkway for no less than 30% of the
horizontal length of the building facade.
[3] If a Township-owned public parking lot is provided within
the TCDO District within 600 feet of the use, the applicant
may be permitted as a conditional use to defer a portion of
the required off-street spaces to the public parking lot if
space is determined available.
(b) Landscaping and screening.
[1] Parking shall be screened from the view of public streets
and access drives, using a buffer strip that shall include
trees, shrubs, groundcovers, or fencing.
[2] The planting buffer strip shall be a minimum of eight feet
in width and include one 2 1/2 caliper tree for every 30
linear feet of frontage along any street or access drive.
[3] Screening shall be a minimum height of 3 1/2 feet and
include:
[a] A continuous hedgerow; or
[b] A decorative fence consisting of either a solid
decorative masonry or ornamental metal fencing with
brick piers, or a combination. Wire fabric fencing or
similar materials are prohibited for use as a
decorative fence.
§ 84-23 SEWERS § 84-23
68:543
(c) Lighting.
[1] Lighting shall be required for all off-street parking.
[2] Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 24 feet in height.
[3] Lighting shall be in accordance with an approved
photometric plan and the level limitations as required by
Township specifications.
[4] All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting
fixtures as defined in the standard details108 of the
Township and elsewhere in the Code.
(d) Pedestrian linkages.
[1] All main and secondary entrances to buildings shall be
directly linked with a public sidewalk.
[2] Clearly defined and marked sidewalks shall:
[a] Be required within parking lots and be provided for
the length of the parking to the entrances of
establishments.
[b] Be distinguished from driving surfaces through the
use of special paves (bricks or scored concrete).
[c] Feature benches and other amenities installed along
the pedestrian linkage approximately every 500 feet.
(e) Vehicular linkages.
[1] To reduce traffic congestion and the number of curb cuts
along public streets, parking shall be connected to
adjacent parcels through a rear or side yard access drive
constructed parallel to the public street to which the use
fronts or is located along. The intent is to provide a
secondary point of access in a grid pattern to uses within
the TCDO District.
[2] Access drives shall be constructed in accordance with
Township specifications.
[3] Where a parking lot or garage is constructed and is
adjacent to an undeveloped lot, the access drive shall be
extended to the lot line for future connection to the
adjacent parcel.
(7) Sidewalks.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-23 PINE CODE § 84-23
68:544
(a) Along all public streets, a sidewalk shall be constructed. The
sidewalk shall include:
[1] A minimum of 11 feet parallel to the street which includes
a six-foot sidewalk and five feet for landscaping and/or
screening; and
[2] Shade trees planted 30 feet on center.
(b) Sidewalks shall be installed to connect to the lot line of
adjacent parcels.
(8) Signage. Signs shall be permitted as provided for in § 84-121 of this
chapter, with the following additions and exceptions:
(a) Prohibited signs. Signs not permitted in the TCDO District
include:
[1] Banners (except for banners installed by the Township);
[2] Campus signs;
[3] Flashing or blinking signs;
[4] Marquee-type signs with changeable message;
[5] Mobile placards;
[6] Off-premises real estate signs (lease, sale, rental);
[7] Outdoor advertising signs (except as permitted by § 84-71
of this chapter);
[8] Pennants/streamers;
[9] Plastic awnings that are illuminated or act as a sign;
[10] Portable signs;
[11] Signs employing mercury vapor, low-pressure and highpressure
sodium, and plastic panel rear-lighted signs;
[12] Signs on roofs, dormers and balconies;
[13] Signs with movable parts.
(b) Permitted signs.
[1] Window signs.
[a] Window signs (which include posters, signs, symbols
and other identification of, or information about, the
occupant or activity and/or use of the premises) may
be permitted to be located inside of the glass within
the allowable total sign area applicable to the
building.
§ 84-23 SEWERS § 84-23
68:545
§ 84-24. CDC Commercial Development Control Overlay District.
[b] Window signs shall not exceed 10% of the total glass
area of the front of the building.
[c] Neon window signs may be permitted in cases where
they are custom designed to be compatible with the
architectural character and exterior color of the
building.
[d] Window signs shall be limited to ground floor or first
floor windows only.
(9) Streetlighting.
(a) Illumination levels shall provide for adequate safety, yet not
detract from or overly emphasize the site or building.
(b) Streetlights along collector commercial boulevards shall not
exceed 24 feet in height.
(c) Pedestrian lighting shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(d) Streetlights shall be located as directed by the Township.
(e) Lighting shall be in accordance with an approved photometric
plan and the level limitations as required by Township
specifications.
(f) All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting fixtures as
defined in the standard details109 of the Township and
elsewhere in the Code.
(10) Street trees.
(a) Street trees shall be planted 30 feet on center and located
within a required planting strip.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reinforce the principals of the
Town Center design concepts and to maintain the character of the State
Route 19 Corridor by providing additional regulations for the use of
land (as an overlay zoning district) located within certain of the existing
zoning districts of the Township of Pine which govern land located
within such State Route 19 Corridor. The objectives of the CDC District
shall be as follows:
(1) To reduce the visual impacts of uses that require or generate the
need for a large number of visible parking spaces or other areas for
motor vehicles or trailers.
(2) To promote the development of small-scale buildings.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-23 PINE CODE § 84-24
68:546
(3) To reduce the intensity and impact of large-scale buildings along
the northern segment of the State Route 19 Corridor.
B. Applicability. Uses of land located within the Commercial Development
Control Overlay District shall be permitted, as otherwise stated and
defined in this chapter, for the underlying, base zoning district
(including, as applicable, the C-1 Community Service Center and the
C-2 Planned Transition District). The regulations for the underlying
district shall remain applicable, subject, however, to the exceptions
noted in this section.
C. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the
Commercial Development Control Overlay District as hereinafter
specified:
(1) Automotive dealerships, used;
(2) Automobile sales, used;
(3) Drive-in theaters;
(4) Freestanding self-storage unit, individually or in groups of such
units;
(5) Retail sales and services in structures containing in excess of
40,000 square feet of floor area;
(6) Vehicle repair station, unless as an accessory use incidental to a
primary use as a new automotive dealership;
(7) Warehouses;
(8) Warehouse sales.
D. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Unless specified in this subsection, all other requirements (lot area,
lot width, side and rear yards, coverage and height) shall be
provided as defined in the respective base district.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: for new automotive dealerships and/or new
automotive showrooms shall be two acres
(b) Maximum lot area: for new automotive dealerships and/or new
automotive showrooms shall be five acres.
(3) Frontage requirements.
(a) Within the Commercial Development Control Overlay District
(CDC) new automotive dealerships and/or new automotive
showrooms shall be permitted only on lots with frontage
directly abutting State Route 19.
§ 84-24 SEWERS § 84-24
68:547
E. Nonresidential design standards. Design standards within the
Commercial Development Control Overlay District (CDC) shall be as
contained in the provisions regarding the Town Center Design Overlay
(TCDO) District, as set forth in § 84-23 of this chapter, subject, however,
to the following below-stated exceptions:
(1) Buildings and structures used for retail businesses and/or
department stores shall not exceed 40,000 square feet in gross
floor area upon any one lot;
(2) Buildings and structures which are located upon separate but
adjoining lots may be connected to each other, provided that each
building or structure complies with all other applicable standards
and requirements of the Town Center Design Overlay (TCDO)
District and also with the following, additional standards:
(a) The buildings or structures share a common wall, which wall is
constructed along a lot line;
(b) The length of the portion of the building or structure which
connects along the common wall does not exceed 30% of the
total length or depth of either of the buildings or structures on
either lot;
(c) The connection of the buildings or structures is proportional in
size and height to that of the buildings or structures that are
being connected;
(d) Visual structural breaks in facades (including recesses,
projections, finish materials, and other architectural
articulation) shall be present upon connected buildings or
structures so as to eliminate expanses of long flat walls;
(e) All buffer yard plantings otherwise required to be installed
along the common lot line shall be installed elsewhere on
either of the lots upon which such connected buildings or
structures are located.
(3) All other applicable standards and requirements as set forth in
§ 84-23 of this chapter regarding the Town Center Design Overlay
(TCDO) District shall apply to the Commercial Development
Control Overlay District. Where there may be a conflict between
the standards set forth in said § 84-23 of this chapter regarding the
Town Center Design Overlay (TCDO) District and the Commercial
Development Control Overlay District standards set forth in this
section, those of the Commercial Development Control Overlay
District shall apply.
F. TC-PRD exception. Land areas that qualify for a Town Center Planned
Residential Development (TC-PRD) are exempt from the requirements
of the Commercial Development Control Overlay District (CDC).
§ 84-24 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:548
§ 84-25. TC-PRD Town Center Planned Residential District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Town Center Planned Residential District
(TC-PRD) is to encourage the development of a special activity center,
which will serve as a focal point for the Township of Pine. The Town
Center will support a compatible mix of business, office, service, and
residential uses with a compact Town Center Core Area (TCCA). The
TCCA will support small-scale specialty retail, office, and residential
uses, and be designed to include a defined public plaza and open space
area as a central unifying design element. The Town Center will have
specific pedestrian orientation and will be tied together through
streetscape amenities and design treatments which include sidewalks,
pedestrian-scale and ornamental streetlighting, pedestrian-scale
signage, street trees and screened parking. The objectives of the TCPDR
include:
(1) To provide a defined core area and central gathering place for the
Township of Pine.
(2) To facilitate pedestrian traffic through the development of
streetscape amenities such as sidewalks, pathways, traffic calming
measures, street edge landscaping features, pedestrian-scale
lighting and screened parking.
(3) To develop a central public green space that includes a plaza for
public gatherings and which is directly integrated into the design of
the TCCA, residential uses and surrounding nonresidential uses.
(4) To provide for a mix of mutually supportive uses that are unified by
the streetscape design and enhance the character of the State
Route 19 Corridor.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted in the TC-PRD:
(1) Single-family dwellings, detached;
(2) Single-family dwellings, attached;
(3) Carriage homes;
(4) Garden apartments;
(5) College;
(6) Civic clubs;
(7) Day-care centers;
(8) Farm markets;
(9) Hospitals;
(10) Motel or hotel;
(11) Indoor theaters;
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:549
(12)Kennels;
(13) Life care communities;
(14) Mixed uses;
(15) Nature preserve;
(16) Nursing homes;
(17) Offices;
(18) Parks;
(19) Patio homes;
(20) Places of worship;
(21) Public and semipublic uses;
(22) Restaurants without drive-thus;
(23) Retail sales and services;
(24) Recreation facility;
(25) Trade school;
(26) Vehicle service stations;
(27) Veterinary services.
C. Site requirements. To be eligible for development under the Town
Center Planned Residential Development (TC-PRD), the following
requirements shall be met:
(1) The site must be comprised of at least 175 acres of contiguous land
area in single ownership.
(2) The site must be located within the C-1 Community Service Center
District, or the R-2 Community Residential District, and within the
boundaries of the TCDO — Town Center Design Overlay District.
D. Town Center Core Area (TCCA) requirements.
(1) The TC-PRD must contain a defined Town Center Core Area (TCCA)
that comprises a minimum of 2% of the total site area or a minimum
of five acres, whichever is greater.
(2) The tentative plan shall clearly define the boundaries of the TCCA,
which shall be adjacent to the required open space area described
in this section.
(3) A note shall be required on the tentative plan which requires that
construction must begin on the TCCA when 50% of the proposed
commercial/office development on the site has been completed or
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:550
when 25% of the residential development on site has been
completed, whichever is completed first.
(4) A merchants' association shall be established for the maintenance
of the streetscape area within the TCCA. The developer shall agree
to maintain the TCCA area until such time as the merchants'
association is formed and operating.
E. Mixed residential requirements.
(1) A minimum of 20% of the total site area shall be designated for
residential use.
(2) The gross site density of any residential area shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per gross acre.
(3) Dwelling units may include a combination of the following:
detached single-family dwellings, attached single-family dwellings,
multifamily and garden apartments.
(4) A note shall be placed on the tentative plan, which requires the
developer to deed and lot off the required percentage of residential
land area at or before build-out of 40% of the nonresidential area
(retail/office area) of the site.
F. Open space requirement.
(1) A minimum of 25% of the total site area shall be designated for
public or common open space. The calculation of open space shall
not include streets, parking, rights-of-way, detention ponds, or
access to detention ponds.
(2) The open space shall be dedicated or otherwise preserved and
maintained so as to always remain open to the public.
(3) The common open space, including all improvements and facilities,
shall be offered for dedication for public use to a public body, which
agrees to accept, operate, and maintain the dedicated land and
facilities.
(a) If the public body elects not to accept the dedicated land, an
appropriate maintenance or ownership mechanism must be in
place prior to final plan approval or prior to final plan approval
for Phase I, if the project is developed in phases.
(b) The applicant/developer must provide for and establish an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of common
open space, and that such organization shall not be dissolved
nor shall it dispose of the common open space by sale or
otherwise (except to a successor organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the common open space),
without first offering to dedicate the same to the public.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:551
(c) Maintenance of the open space area shall be undertaken in
accordance with § 84-119.
(4) A minimum of three acres of the dedicated open space shall be
located adjacent to, or incorporated into, the design of the TCCA
area as a developed public space with a traditional plaza area or
town square designed to resemble the mixed-use centers of small
towns. The plazas or town squares may include features such as
green spaces, lakes, fountains, etc.
(5) The three acres of dedicated open space shall be in addition to the
land required for the TCCA as specified in this section and offered
to the Township of Pine for ownership and maintenance.
(6) Any land lying within 15 feet of any multifamily structure or within
a deeded residential lot shall not be considered part of the required
open space.
G. Retail sales and service requirements.
(1) A minimum of 20% of the total site area shall be designated for
retail/office use.
(2) Up to a maximum of 55% of the total site area shall be permitted for
retail/office use.
(3) A maximum of 450,000 square feet of gross floor area for retail or
office uses shall be permitted. An additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area for retail or office space shall be permitted,
provided that the calculation of parking spaces required for all
retail space within the Town Center is designed and constructed
based upon four spaces per 1,000 square feet or less.
H. Frontage and access requirements. The TC-PRD shall have frontage
abutting one of the following roads:
(1) State Route 19;
(2) State Route 910;
(3) Wallace Road.
I. Area and bulk regulations. In the TC-PRD, the following regulations
shall be observed on each lot that is used hereafter and on each lot
upon which a building or structure is hereafter erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained:
(1) Unless specified in this article, all other requirements (lot area, lot
width, side and rear yards, coverage and height) shall be provided
as defined in the respective base district.
(2) Lot area requirements.
(a) Maximum building coverage is 50%.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:552
(3) Building dimensions.
(a) All uses.
[1] No structure shall have a length greater than 300 feet.
(4) Building square footage.
(a) The maximum office building shall be 150,000 square feet.
(b) The maximum retail building shall be 200,000 square feet.
(5) Yard requirements.
(a) Front yard.
[1] The maximum setback for any building facade for
nonresidential uses shall be 35 feet.
[2] Maximum building setbacks may be exceeded when a
development or use incorporates enhanced pedestrian
spaces and amenities consisting of features such as plazas,
courtyards, arcades, outdoor seating, widened sidewalks
or pedestrian pathways, benches, shelters, street
furniture, or kiosks.
(6) Building heights.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] No single dwelling or attached dwelling shall have a height
greater than 35 feet.
[2] No garden apartment or garden apartment/attached
single-family dwelling complex shall have a height greater
than three habitable stories or 45 feet.
[3] No attached single-family dwelling complex shall have a
height greater than 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
[4] Chimneys, spires, tanks, or similar projections may exceed
the prescribed height by not more than 25%.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Nonresidential uses shall be limited to 45 feet. Chimneys,
spires, and similar projections may exceed the prescribed
height limitations by not more than 25%.
[2] Nonresidential structures may exceed the height limit by
no more than 15 feet if the structure provides first-floor
parking with the design in accordance with § 84-41. The
structure must adhere to all design and yard requirements
of this chapter.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:553
J. Nonresidential design standards. The following design standards shall
apply to all nonresidential uses permitted within the TC-PRD:
(1) Applicability. All other applicable standards and requirements as
set forth in Chapter 84 and Chapter 78 shall apply to the TC-PRD.
Where there may be a conflict between said ordinances and the TCPRD,
the TC-PRD standards shall control.
(2) Building entrances.
(a) All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting
street shall feature at least one customer entrance.
(3) Building materials.
(a) Ground-floor transparency. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 352]
[1] The street-level facade of any building facing a public
street or access drive shall be transparent between the
height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway
grade for at least 50% of the horizontal length of the
structure.
[2] No more than two sides of any one building shall be
subject to the minimum transparency provisions.
[3] All glazing shall be clear, lightly tinted, or spandrel glass.
[4] Spandrel glass may be used to comply with the
transparency requirement; however, spandrel glass may
only be utilized to achieve the transparency requirement
as long as spandrel glass and visual glass are not both
utilized on the same wall plane.
[5] In special circumstances alternatives to the transparency
requirements of this section may be permitted, subject to
all of the below-stated conditions:
[a] Upon appropriate demonstration by the applicant, a
determination that strict compliance with the
transparency requirements cannot be reasonably
achieved.
[b] Proposal by the applicant of an appropriate
transparency alternative which incorporates the use
or arrangement of building materials that simulate
transparency and/or that provides enhanced
architectural amenities (which architectural amenities
are determined to be in addition to those otherwise
required by the Code of the Township of Pine).
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:554
[c] The use of the proposed transparency alternative shall
not result in a reduction of more than 25% of the
otherwise applicable transparency requirements of
this section.
(b) Exterior facade.
[1] Colors.
[a] The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors or
black may be permitted, based upon design features.
[b] The use of fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
(4) Detention ponds.
(a) Detention ponds shall be designed to be integrated into the
overall site design and incorporate landscaping features,
fountains, and passive recreational amenities such as benches
for sitting and pathways, etc. The intent is to provide an
aesthetic and functional facility that fits within the character of
the Town Center.
(b) Where aesthetic and passive recreational amenities are
incorporated into the design of the detention pond, the
detention pond may be calculated as part of the required open
space as required within the TC-PRD.
(c) Side slopes of such ponds shall not exceed a ratio of four to one
horizontal to vertical dimension, unless such detention pond
side slopes are existing prior to the adoption of this article.
(5) Off-street parking.
(a) Location.
[1] To the greatest extent possible, surface parking lots shall
not be located between the structure and a public street.
[2] In all cases, screening from the street and/or access drive
is mandatory to define the street edge and soften the
visual impact of any parking area.
[3] All corner lots along the corridor shall have all parking
areas screened from all streets and or access drives.
(b) Landscaping and screening.
[1] Parking shall be screened from the view of public streets
and access drives, using a buffer strip that shall include
trees, shrubs, groundcovers, or fencing.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:555
[2] The planting buffer strip shall be a minimum of eight feet
in width and include one tree for every 200 square feet of
area.
[3] Screening shall be a maximum height of four feet and
include:
[a] A continuous hedgerow; or
[b] A decorative fence consisting of either a solid
decorative masonry or ornamental metal fencing with
brick piers, or a combination. Wire fabric fencing or
similar materials are prohibited for use as a
decorative fence.
(c) Lighting.
[1] Lighting shall be required for all off-street parking.
[2] Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
[3] Lighting shall be in accordance with an approved
photometric plan and the level limitations as required by
Township specifications.
[4] All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting
fixtures as defined in the standard details110 of the
Township and elsewhere in the Code.
(d) Pedestrian linkages.
[1] All main and secondary entrances to buildings shall be
directly linked with a public sidewalk.
[2] Clearly defined and marked sidewalks shall:
[a] Be required within parking lots and be provided for
the length of the parking to the entrances of
establishments.
[b] Be distinguished from driving surfaces through the
use of special pavers (bricks or scored concrete).
[c] Feature benches and other amenities installed along
the pedestrian linkage approximately every 500 feet.
(6) On-street parking.
(a) Pockets of on-street parking shall be provided along public
streets and access drives within the residential and
nonresidential areas of the Town Center. The design of
"protected on-street parking spaces" is encouraged and shall
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:556
include landscaped islands, which project out from the curb;
the island creates a protected parking bay.
(b) The number of parking spaces provided on-street shall be
subtracted from the number of off-street parking spaces
required for the use in which the on-street spaces serve.
(c) Decorative planters, unique directional signage, and sitting
areas shall be located on the landscaped islands (created by
protected on-street parking areas) at intersections throughout
the nonresidential areas of the Town Center.
(d) Curbside parking shall not be located within 25 feet of an
intersection. This distance may be greater in order to maintain
a clear sight triangle as required in Chapter 78.
(7) Outdoor seating.
(a) Outdoor seating with tables shall be required when a food
concession use is anticipated.
(b) Outdoor seating is permitted to encroach upon the public
sidewalk provided that a five-foot clear sidewalk passage is
maintained.
(8) Signage. Signage shall be permitted as provided in § 84-121, with
the following exceptions:
(a) Prohibited signs.
[1] The use of internally illuminating signs, flashing, moving
or intermittently illuminated box signs, internally
illuminated awnings, freestanding signs and any sign
using neon or other similar light sources shall be
prohibited, except freestanding signs for restaurants and
buildings over 50,000 square feet of floor area may be
permitted when designed as a part of an architectural
feature of the building.
(9) Street design standards.
(a) TC-PRD street design standards are to be utilized for public
streets within a TC-PRD, as selected by the developer, which
are sufficient for the anticipated traffic volumes to maintain
the required level of service.
(b) Protected on-street parking areas shall only be located where
determined to be safe and appropriate.
(c) Trails may be incorporated along streets in lieu of sidewalks
where dictated by the location or topography of the adjacent
parcel.
(d) Boulevard.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:557
[1] Median width.
[a] The median shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width.
[2] Median landscape plantings.
[a] The grass median shall be planted with shade trees a
minimum of 30 to 50 feet on center (depending on the
type of tree) in order to maintain a continuous canopy
along the length of the median.
[b] Ornamental trees shall be used to provide an
understory layer for the overhead canopy of major
shade trees.
[c] In addition, the ornamental trees shall be used to
define the entry points along the boulevard and
provide opportunities for color, variety of form and as
an accent or major focus.
[3] Pavement width. The pavement width shall be a minimum
of 11 feet for a single lane of travel.
[4] Design speed. Design speeds shall be no less than 30 miles
per hour.
[5] Parking lane. A ten-foot parking lane shall be provided
along the length of the boulevard.
[6] Sidewalks.
[a] Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the
boulevard.
[b] Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
[c] Ten-foot wide sidewalks are desirable.
[7] Planting strip. A minimum of seven feet shall be provided
between the curb and the sidewalk along the length of the
boulevard (except in instances where design dictates that
the sidewalk extends from the building setback line to the
curb).
[8] Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 30
to 50 feet on center (depending on the type of shade tree)
within the planting strip to provide a continuous canopy
along the length of the boulevard.
(e) Collector street.
[1] Pavement width. The minimum pavement width shall be 11
feet for a single travel lane.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:558
[2] Design speed. Design speed should range between 30 and
35 miles per hour.
[3] Parking lane. A ten-foot parking lane shall be provided
along the length of the collector street.
[4] Sidewalks.
[a] Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the
collector street.
[b] Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
[5] Planting strip.
[a] A minimum of seven feet shall be provided between
the curb and the sidewalk along the length of the
collector street.
[b] In the Town Center Core Area (TCCA) no planting
strip will be required if the sidewalk is extended to the
curbline and planters are provided.
[6] Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 30
feet on center (depending on the type of shade tree) within
the planting strip or within defined planters in the TCCA to
provide a continuous canopy along the collector street.
(f) Local street.
[1] Pavement width. Minimum pavement width shall be 10
feet for each single lane of travel.
[2] Design speed. Design speed should range between 20 and
25 miles per hour.
[3] Parking lane. A ten-foot parking lane shall be provided
along the length of the access drive.
[4] Sidewalks.
[a] Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the local
street.
[b] Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
[5] Planting strip. A planting strip shall be provided between
the curb and the sidewalk along the length of the local
street.
[6] Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 30
feet on center (depending on the type of shade tree) within
the planting strip to provide a continuous canopy along the
local street.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:559
(g) Access drive.
[1] Pavement width. Minimum pavement width shall be eight
feet for each single lane of travel.
[2] Design speed. Design speed should range between 15 and
25 miles per hour.
[3] Parking lane. A ten-foot parking lane shall be provided
along the length of the access drive on one side of the
access street.
[4] Sidewalks.
[a] Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the
access drive.
[b] Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
[5] Planting strip. A planting strip shall be provided between
the curb and the sidewalk along the length of the access
drive.
[6] Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 30
feet on center (depending on the type of shade tree) within
the planting strip to provide a continuous canopy along the
access drive.
(10) Streetlighting.
(a) Illumination levels shall provide for adequate safety, yet not
detract from or overly emphasize the site or building.
(b) Streetlights along collector commercial boulevards shall not
exceed 24 feet in height.
(c) Pedestrian lighting shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(d) Streetlights shall be located as directed by the Township.
(e) Lighting shall be in accordance with an approved photometric
plan and the level of limitations as required by Township
specifications.
(f) All lighting fixtures shall be as required for lighting fixtures as
defined in the standard details111 of the Township and
elsewhere in the Code.
K. Town Center Core Area design standards. The following design
standards shall apply specifically to the TCCA within the TC-PRD:
(1) Applicability. All other applicable standards and requirements as
set forth in this chapter and Chapter 78 shall apply to the TCCA
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:560
within the TC-PRD. Where there may be a conflict between said
ordinances and the TC-PRD, the TC-PRD standards shall control.
(a) Permitted uses.
[1] Uses within the Town Center Core Area shall include retail
shops, service and office uses.
[2] However, the maximum square footage of any individual
retail use shall be 5,000 square feet per use.
[3] Residential apartments and offices are encouraged to
locate above street-level retail shops.
(b) Location.
[1] The TCCA shall be located on a common green, traditional
town square or a plaza area designed to resemble the
mixed-use centers of small towns.
(c) Building orientation.
[1] The design character of the TCCA shall include multistore-
front structures with windows providing a clear view
of the retail activity interior to the building.
[2] The front yard setback shall be 0 and a minimum of 50% of
all principal structures in the TCCA shall be constructed at
the lot line.
(d) Off-street parking.
[1] Landscaping and screening.
[a] Parking shall be screened from the view of public
streets and access drives, using a buffer strip that
shall include trees, shrubs, groundcovers, or fencing.
[b] The planting buffer strip shall be a minimum six feet in
width and include one tree for every 200 square feet
of area.
[c] Screening shall be a maximum 3 1/2 feet and include:
[i] A continuous hedgerow; or
[ii] A decorative fence consisting of either a solid
decorative masonry or ornamental metal fencing
with brick piers, or combination. Wire fabric
fencing or similar materials are prohibited for use
as a decorative fence.
(e) On-street parking.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:561
[1] On-street parking shall be designed to provide convenient
access to store fronts and be available at the curbside
parallel to the flow of traffic.
[2] The number of parking spaces provided on-street shall be
subtracted from the number of off-street parking spaces
required for the use in which the on-street spaces serve.
[3] Decorative planters, unique directional signage, and
sitting areas shall be located on the landscaped islands
(created by protected on-street parking areas) at
intersections throughout the nonresidential areas of the
Town Center.
[4] The design of "protected on-street parking spaces" is
encouraged and shall include landscaped islands, which
project out from the curb; the island creates a protected
parking bay.
[5] Curbside parking shall not be located within 25 feet of an
intersection. This distance may be greater in order to
maintain a clear sight triangle as required in Chapter 78.
(f) Outdoor seating.
[1] Outdoor seating with tables shall be required when a food
concession use is anticipated.
[2] Outdoor seating areas shall be permitted to encroach upon
the public sidewalk, provided that a five-foot clear
pedestrian passage is maintained.
(g) Sidewalks.
[1] Along all public streets, a sidewalk shall be constructed.
The sidewalk shall include:
[a] A minimum of 15 feet in width beginning at the edge
of the curb toward the front of the structure.
[b] Pedestrian amenities along the street edge, generally
every 500 feet, and include street trees, decorative
planters, benches, landscaped areas, plazas, etc. Such
amenities shall be located within the sidewalk area to
create a pleasing pedestrian environment and to serve
as a linkage to the public green, plaza, etc., and other
design elements throughout the Town Center.
[2] Sidewalks shall be installed to connect to the lot line of
adjacent parcels.
[3] Public spaces shall be interconnected to sidewalks,
walkways, and parking.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-25
68:562
(h) Signage. Signage within the Town Center Core Area may be
unique to the surrounding area. Signs shall be provided in
accordance with § 84-121, with the following additions or
exceptions:
[1] Prohibited signs.
[a] Internally illuminated box signs shall be prohibited in
the Town Center Core Area.
[b] Plastic awnings that are illuminated or act as a sign
shall be prohibited.
[2] Permitted signs.
[a] Wall signs.
[i] Wall projecting signs shall be permitted, provided
that the lower edge of the sign is a minimum of 10
feet above grade, it does not extend more than six
feet from the building wall, and it does not extend
higher than the first floor or 15 feet, whichever is
less.
[ii] The maximum sign area would not exceed 10
square feet per sign face.
[b] Window signs.
[i] Window signs (which include posters, signs,
symbols, and other identification of or information
about the occupant, activity, or use of the
premises) may be permitted within the allowable
total sign area applicable to the building.
[ii] Window signs shall not exceed 10% of the total
glass area of the face of the building.
[iii] Window signs shall be limited to the ground floor
or first floor windows only.
[iv] Neon window signs may be permitted in cases
where they are custom designed to be compatible
with the architectural character and exterior of
the building.
[c] Sandwich board signs.
[i] Sandwich board signs which provide a menu
option for the particular use and which are
displayed only during normal business hours may
be permitted to be placed on the sidewalk
immediately in front of the use, provided that a
five-foot clear pedestrian passage is maintained.
§ 84-25 SEWERS § 84-25
68:563
§ 84-26. Planned residential development.
[ii] One sandwich board sign may be permitted per
building and shall not exceed 10 square feet in
total sign face area.
[iii] Sandwich board signs are permitted to encroach
upon the public sidewalk provided that a five-foot
clear sidewalk passage is maintained.
(i) Vehicular circulation.
[1] Design of the area shall include a boulevard approach way
with a focal point looking toward a civic use or structure
with a plaza, square, or public green.
L. Construction in phases.
(1) If the TC-PRD and/or TCCA are constructed in phases, each phase,
when combined with the preceding phases, shall conform to all of
the requirements of this article.
(2) It is further required that a schedule for the construction of areas
of greater density concentration than permitted on the entire tract
will be offset by site improvements (infrastructure, grading,
general landscaping, etc.) which, because of the size or cost, are in
proportion to the number of dwelling units to be constructed in
each stage.
(3) As an alternative to part or all of the site improvements required to
offset development densities in excess of the overall permitted
density, the Township may require the reservation of open space by
grant, easement, or covenant in favor of the Township in an amount
and location necessary to balance the excess development density
of each phase.
A. Purpose. This article regulates and controls planned residential
development activities within the Township of Pine when a developer
chooses the planned residential development option. This article
provides uniform development standards and application processes for
a planned residential development, including provisions establishing
conditions and standards for approval, setting forth procedures for
processing applications with public hearings, governing modifications
and maintenance and processing enforcement actions, pursuant to
Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10701 et seq., as amended, or as may be amended in the future.
B. Planned residential development permitted. A planned residential
development shall only be available for property within the R-1
Suburban Residential Zoning District, S-1 Special Zoning District, the
E-1 Estate Residential Zoning District, and the R-2 Community
Residence Zoning District.
§ 84-25 PINE CODE § 84-26
68:564
C. Permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in a planned
residential development, provided that their design, arrangement,
landscaping, relation to adjacent properties and uses, and construction
meet the requirements set forth in this chapter:
(1) In the E-1 Estate Residential District: Single-family detached
dwellings, recreation facilities, and accessory uses.
(2) In the S-1 Special Zoning District: Single-family detached
dwellings, recreation facilities, and accessory uses.
(3) In the R-1 Suburban Residential Zoning District: Single-family
detached dwellings, carriage homes, patio homes, recreation
facilities, and accessory uses. Carriage homes or patio homes may
only comprise 25% of the total number of dwellings in a planned
residential development in the R-1 Suburban Residential Zoning
District.
(4) In the R-2 Community Residence Zoning District: Single-family
detached dwellings, carriage homes, patio homes, recreation
facilities, and accessory uses. Carriage homes or patio homes may
only comprise 50% of the total number of dwellings in a planned
residential development in the R-2 Community Residence Zoning
District.
D. Permitted density and procedures for calculations thereof:
(1) The overall density of a planned residential development shall not
exceed the density achievable should the property be developed as
a standard subdivision.
(2) To calculate the permitted density, subtract the area of the right-ofway
for the road system and that area required for detention ponds
and access to detention ponds from the gross site area, and then
divide the remaining acreage by the minimum lot area requirement
for a standard subdivision. For the purpose of this calculation, the
area attributable for right-of-way, detention ponds, and access to
detention ponds shall be 15% of the gross site area.
(3) When a parcel proposed for development, pursuant to this article,
contains a minimum of 300 feet of frontage on, and provides the
proposed plan's main access from State Route 19, Babcock
Boulevard, Pearce Mill Road, State Route 910, and the "Red Belt"
(Bakerstown Road, Warrendale Road), then the density for each
zoning district comprising the entire parcel proposed for
development may be increased by 10%.
(4) No lot for a single-family detached dwelling within a planned
residential development shall contain less than 21,780 square feet.
§ 84-26 SEWERS § 84-26
68:565
(5) No lot for a single-family detached dwelling within a planned
residential development shall contain less than 90 feet of lot width
measured at the building setback line.
(6) In the event that a planned residential development includes
property in two or more zoning districts, the maximum number of
lots for the entire property comprising the planned residential
development shall not exceed the sum of the number of lots
permitted if the property was the subject of a standard subdivision
in each of the zoning districts.
E. Site requirements. The site for any development plan shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Ownership. The entire site for the development plan shall be owned
or completely controlled by the developer.
(2) Minimum size. The site for the development plan shall not be less
than 25 acres.
(3) Frontage and access. The site shall have a frontage abutting a
publicly dedicated street, and such frontage shall be a minimum of
300 feet. The proposed development plan shall provide for a
minimum of two vehicular entrances/exits from developments
which contain 50 or more residential units; provided, however, that
the Township's Board of Supervisors may, in appropriate
circumstances, waive, modify, or specify an alternative to the
aforementioned minimum vehicular entrances/exits. [Amended
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(4) Noncontiguous parcels. Two or more noncontiguous parcels of land
shall not be developed as a single planned residential development
or as separate phases of a single, multiphased planned residential
development unless the parcels are noncontiguous solely as the
result of being separated only by the width of a road upon which
each noncontiguous parcel has frontage as specified herein. The
minimum adjacent and common frontage of otherwise
noncontiguous parcels, separated only by a road as specified
above.
(5) Safety. The governing body shall determine that the site is of such
character so as to avoid danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or
other hazard. Land containing or providing hazards to life, health
or property, such as quarries, open ditches, land subject to flooding
or subsidence or land which is prone to landslides or underground
fires shall not be subdivided or developed until such hazards have
been eliminated or adequate safeguards are provided under the
development plan.
(6) Design standards and requirements. The governing body shall not
approve any application for planned residential development
except in compliance with the standards set forth in this article,
§ 84-26 PINE CODE § 84-26
68:566
and only if the land whereon buildings are to be constructed shall
be of such character that it can be used for building purposes
without danger to health, peril from flood or other hazard.
(7) Natural features. Existing natural features which would add value
to the planned residential development and the Township, such as
trees, woodlands, steep slopes, watercourses, wetlands, historic
spots and similar assets, shall be preserved as required by
standards for protection of such natural resources contained
elsewhere in this chapter. In addition:
(a) The planned residential development shall be subject to all of
the woodlands conservation and vegetation preservation
standards of this chapter.
(b) The planned residential development shall be subject to all of
the landscaping and buffer yard requirements of this chapter.
(c) The planned residential development shall be subject to all of
the steep slope control and restoration requirements of this
chapter.
(d) No cutting or filling is permissible within 50 feet of the edge of
any flowing stream or wetland except as may be expressly
permitted by action of the governing body and with the
approval and any necessary permits of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(8) Water. The developer shall present evidence to the governing body
that the planned residential development shall be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. Such
acceptable evidence may include a copy of a certificate of public
convenience from the Pennsylvania Utility Commission or an
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever
is appropriate.
(9) Common open space. Common open space shall be the integral
organizing principle of the planned residential development and
shall provide for contiguous, usable lands for woodland
preservation, steep slope preservation, wetland and watercourse
preservation, and recreation. Common open space shall also
comply with the provisions this chapter.
(10) Recreation. Provisions for recreation shall be an integral
component of the planned residential development and shall be
provided for by both easements for trails and active recreation
areas. Active recreation areas shall also comply with the standards
of this chapter.
§ 84-26 SEWERS § 84-26
68:567
(11) buffer yard. A buffer yard of a minimum of 80 feet in width and in
compliance with the standards for buffer yards set forth this
chapter, subject also to the following provisions:
(a) The perimeter buffer yard may be reduced to a minimum of 40
feet in width in those perimeter areas where fringe lots, as
herein defined, are provided for in the development plan.
(b) The buffer yard or use of a combination of buffer yard/fringe lot
design shall be required in all areas of the perimeter unless the
abutting land use is that of a higher density of dwelling units
per acre than the proposed planned residential development.
(c) The proposed lot sizes along the perimeter of a proposed
planned residential development which abuts an existing
planned residential development shall not be smaller than
those on the abutting perimeter of the existing planned
residential development.
(d) The perimeter buffer yard shall maintain existing vegetation
and ground surface conditions and/or provide plantings as
required in the standards for landscape planting outlined in
this chapter.
(12) Sidewalks. Sidewalks, constructed to Township specifications for
the same, shall be provided upon every lot and to service every lot.
Sidewalks shall also be provided in such other areas (such as along
common open space areas and road rights-of-way) to provide
pedestrian access and circulation and such service as the
Township's governing body deems appropriate. Financial security
for the construction and completion of all sidewalks shall be
provided by the developer to the Township as part of his financial
guaranty of construction of public infrastructure and amenities.
F. Light and air exposure.
(1) Minimum building setback from perimeter property lines. No
structure shall be located closer to any perimeter property line
than the required rear or side yard setback plus the required
perimeter buffer yard.
(2) Minimum building setback for single-family detached dwellings
from internal property lines shall be according to the following
standards:
Setback Internal Lots Fringe Lots
Front yard* 25 feet
minimum
Adjacent zoning district
requirement
Side yard 10 feet
minimum
Adjacent zoning district
requirement
§ 84-26 PINE CODE § 84-26
68:568
Setback Internal Lots Fringe Lots
Rear yard 40 feet
minimum
Adjacent zoning district
requirement
(3) Variable front setbacks are required for every three lots and shall
include no less than five nor more than a ten-foot variation from
adjacent lots.
(4) Building spacing. The requirements determining the spacing of
buildings shall be flexible so as to encourage imaginative site
design. The spaces between buildings shall be of sufficient size to
guarantee adequate light, air, and emergency access. Buildings
shall be separated by not less than 20 feet.
(5) Building groupings. Structures used for dwelling units shall be
oriented so as to ensure adequate light and air exposures for walls
containing main window exposures or main entrances. Each
structure shall be so arranged so as to avoid undue exposure to
concentrated loading or parking facilities.
G. Common open space requirements.
(1) Not less than 35% of the total site area of any planned residential
development shall be set aside for common open space. Common
open space shall be arranged to take maximum advantage of the
natural and physical characteristics of the site, to provide buffer
yard provisions for adjacent parcels and to place common open
space within easy access and view of a majority of the dwelling
units. Common open space shall also be located within the
proposed planned residential development so as to comply with the
following standards:
(a) All of the natural resource protection standards outlined in this
chapter.
(b) buffer yards, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Common open space land shall be located so as to serve all
residents of the development.
(d) Common open space land shall be accessible from a public
street or shall adjoin and become part of an existing open
space area that is accessible by a public street.
(e) Minimum frontage upon a public street shall be 50 feet and the
minimum width of the common open space lands shall be 40
feet.
(f) The common open space land shall be compact and contiguous.
(g) At least 15% of the common open space lands shall have an
existing slope of 15% or less.
§ 84-26 SEWERS § 84-26
68:569
(h) In proposed planned residential developments that abut the
Township's Greenway System, common open space shall be
located adjacent to such greenways and public access shall be
provided to such greenways by easements over such common
open space.
(i) Active recreation areas containing recreation facilities shall be
provided within the common open space as specified further in
this section.
(2) The calculation of required common open space shall specifically
not include areas containing streets, parking areas, rights-of-way,
detention ponds, or access to detention ponds. The common open
space shall be so dedicated or otherwise preserved and maintained
so as to always remain open and available for use by the occupants
of the planned residential development. The common open space,
including all improvements and recreation facilities, shall be
either:
(a) Dedicated for public use to a public body which agrees to
accept, operate and maintain the dedicated land and facilities,
but no public body is obligated by this chapter to accept such
dedication; or
(b) Deeded to an organization representing the property owners of
the development, which organization shall covenant to operate
and maintain the land and facilities for their originally
intended use. Such organization may not be dissolved nor
dispose of the common open space unless the maintenance of
the common open space is otherwise guaranteed to the
Township's satisfaction.
(3) Areas preserved as common open space shall also contain
easements for public pedestrian access as required by the trails
and linear park provisions set forth in this section.
(4) Land preserved for common open space (excepting active
recreation areas therein) shall be maintained in its existing, natural
character. Restrictive covenants acceptable to the Township and
specifically providing that such land shall not be cleared or logged,
except upon both the approval of the Township and strict
compliance with the Township's then-existing standards for the
same, shall be required to be recorded against such common open
space.
(5) Active recreation area shall meet the standards outlined in
§ 84-119.
(6) Common open space and recreation area maintenance.
(a) If the organization established to own and maintain the
common open space/recreation area or any successor
§ 84-26 PINE CODE § 84-26
68:570
organization fails to maintain such common open space/
recreation area in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Township may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
residents of the planned residential development setting forth
the maintenance deficiencies, requiring correction of
deficiencies within 30 days and stating the date and place of
a hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the
notice. At such hearing the Township may modify the terms
of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they shall be corrected. If the
deficiencies so set forth shall not be corrected within the
specified time limit, the Township, in order to preserve the
taxable values of the properties within the planned residential
development and to prevent the common open space/
recreation area from becoming a nuisance, may enter upon
and maintain the common open space for one year. This
maintenance shall not constitute a taking nor vest in the public
any rights to use the common open space/recreation area.
Before the expiration of the year, the governing body shall
set a public hearing where such organization or residents of
the planned residential development may show cause why
maintenance by the Township should not continue for another
year. If the governing body determines that such organization
is ready and able to maintain said common open space/
recreation area in reasonable condition, the Township shall
cease to maintain said common open space/recreation area at
the end of said year. If the governing body shall determine that
such organization is not ready to maintain said common open
space/recreation area in a reasonable condition, the Township
may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said common open
space/recreation area during the succeeding year and, subject
to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter.
(b) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space/recreation area and shall become a lien on
said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon
said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall
file with the county a notice of lien upon properties affected.
H. Construction in phases. When a planned residential development is
constructed in phases, each phase, when combined with preceding
phases, shall conform to all of the requirements of this article. It is
further required that programs for the construction of areas of greater
density concentration than permitted on the entire tract will be offset
by site improvements which, because of their size or cost, are in
proportion to the number of dwelling units to be constructed in each
phase. As an alternative to part or all of the site improvements required
§ 84-26 SEWERS § 84-26
68:571
to offset development densities in excess of the overall permitted
density, the Township may require the reservation of open space by
grant, easement, or covenant in favor of the Township in an amount and
location necessary to balance the excess development density of each
phase.
I. Application, public hearing, and approval/disapproval procedure. In
order to provide an expeditious method for processing the development
plan for a planned residential development and to avoid delay and
uncertainty which would arise if it were necessary to secure approval
by a multiplicity of local procedures, of a plat of subdivision as well as
approval of a change in zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the
property, it is hereby declared to be in the public interest that all
procedures with respect to the application, public hearing upon, and
the approval or disapproval of a development plan for a planned
residential development and the continuing administration,
modification, or enforcement thereof shall be by the Township's
governing body and shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter
78, Article VII; provided, however, that where such provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (specifically
Article VII thereof regulating planned residential developments) such
latter provisions shall control.
J. Compliance. Except where specifically exempted by this article or by
formal action of the governing body, a planned residential development
shall comply with all other standards and requirements of the Township
of Pine.
K. Completion guaranties. The governing body shall, as a condition to any
tentative or final approval, require that the applicant file a certificate of
completion of improvements, approved as to form by the Township
Solicitor, for all conditions imposed on a tentative or final approval. The
governing body shall also require any applicant to execute a developer's
agreement, approved as to form by the Township Solicitor, which shall
state all conditions and improvements, which the applicant shall
perform as part of a conditional approval. In either case, the governing
body shall require financial security for the improvements by the
applicant, in a form approved by the Township Solicitor and pursuant to
the provisions of Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10509, conditioned upon the completion of all
required improvements and fulfillment of all conditions of approval.
L. Fees and expenses. All filing fees under this article shall be fixed, from
time to time, by resolution of the governing body, based upon the actual
expense (or reasonably anticipated estimate) to the Township to
process and review any application. The applicant shall also reimburse
the Township, within 30 days of receipt of an itemized bill, as a
condition to any approval, for the actual expenses incurred by the
Township for comment, review and inspection by it's engineers and
other professional services (including but not limited to consultants'
fees and legal fees) incurred in connection with the processing of the
§ 84-26 PINE CODE § 84-26
68:572
§ 84-26.1. PIIOD Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay
District. [Added 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366]
application through final approval (and thereafter for administrative
and inspection process). The imposition, collection, and administration
of all such fees and expenses shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code pertaining
to the same.
A. Purpose. A Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD)
is hereby established to encourage the extension of public
infrastructure to areas currently unserved or underserved because of
the lack of existing public infrastructure or existing ineffective or
substandard public infrastructure, through the use of density
enhancement in certain zoning districts and, under certain
circumstances, in consideration of the extension of the public
infrastructure to areas currently unserved or ineffectively served, or by
upgrading existing substandard public infrastructure within the
Township. A PIIOD shall not be established and the density of a
property proposed for development shall not be enhanced where the
extension of the public infrastructure is required solely to serve the
parcel of land proposed for development, or the infrastructure
improvement is a required on-site improvement related to the
development of such parcel of land.
B. For the purposes of this section, "public infrastructure" may include the
following:
(1) Roadways and their necessary rights-of-way;
(2) Sanitary sewer lines and their necessary rights-of-way;
(3) Storm sewer lines and their necessary rights-of-way;
(4) Public water lines and their necessary rights-of-way.
C. Public infrastructure improvement standards. The establishment of a
Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD) may be
approved by action of the Board of Supervisors upon a determination
that the following conditions are present for the parcel of land proposed
for development and that a parcel or parcels of additional property
adjacent thereto will benefit from a public infrastructure improvement:
(1) The parcel of property proposed for development shall meet the
following criteria:
(a) The parcel, or a portion thereof, shall be located in either the
Estate Residential Zoning District (E-1) or in the Special
Zoning District (S-1).
(b) The parcel shall be a minimum of six contiguous acres in size.
§ 84-26 SEWERS § 84-26.1
68:573
(c) The Board of Supervisors determines that the public
infrastructure of a parcel or parcels of land adjacent thereto is
in need of, and will benefit from, the proposed infrastructure
installation or improvement; or the Township has been advised
by (or is under order from) an outside regulatory agency to
improve public infrastructure in the vicinity of the parcel
proposed for development.
(d) The parcel shall not be permitted to additionally utilize the
planned residential development option otherwise available
pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Adjacent parcel(s) of property shall meet the following criteria:
(a) A need is established that one or more components of its public
infrastructure is in need of installation, upgrade or
improvement, as determined by the Board of Supervisors; or
the Township has been advised by (or is under order from) an
outside regulatory agency to improve public infrastructure in
the vicinity of the parcel proposed for development.
(b) A desire of the residents of the adjacent parcel(s) for public
infrastructure improvement; provided, however, that while
such desire (or lack thereof) shall be solicited or considered,
the Board of Supervisors shall retain the discretion to find that
the health, safety and welfare of the Township shall be
ultimately determinative.
(3) Density calculation. The maximum allowable density of the parcel
proposed for development shall be calculated using the Density
Calculation Worksheet found at the end of this chapter. The
calculated number of adjacent properties that shall be served by a
public infrastructure improvement shall be the minimum number of
homes found to be served by an installation or improvement of the
public infrastructure.
(4) Effect on adjacent property's zoning classification and density. The
zoning classification and density of the adjacent properties
included as a pad of the Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay
District (PIIOD) shall remain unchanged, and its current zoning
criteria shall remain applicable.
(5) Uses. Permitted and conditional uses in a Public Infrastructure
Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD) shall be the same as those
for the base zoning district in which the PIIOD is located.
(6) Area and bulk regulations. The area and bulk regulations in a
Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD) shall
be the same as those specified for the R-1 Suburban Residential
Zoning District.
§ 84-26.1 PINE CODE § 84-26.1
68:574
(7) Should a Public Infrastructure Improvement Overlay District be
approved by the Board of Supervisors, the Township Solicitor shall
prepare a finding and approval document which, inter alia, details
the boundary of the PIIOD. This document shall be recorded in the
Department of Real Estate for Allegheny County and maintained in
the municipal offices of the Township of Pine.
(8) All otherwise applicable standards of the Code of the Township of
Pine, not expressly modified by a Public Infrastructure
Improvement Overlay District (PIIOD), shall remain applicable.
§ 84-26.1 SEWERS § 84-26.1
68:575

ARTICLE V
Regulations for Specified and Conditional Uses
§ 84-27. Purpose.
§ 84-28. Accessory uses/accessory structures. [Amended 11-16-2009
by Ord. No. 352]
Accessory uses or structures are permitted in any zoning district in
connection with any principal use lawfully existing within such district. No
accessory use or accessory structure shall be established or constructed
A. The purpose of this article is to regulate specific uses, including uses by
right, uses subject to land development review, and conditional uses,
because of the potential impacts to surrounding properties. These
restrictions are applied to mitigate impacts, including noise, off-site
parking, traffic, unsightliness, odors, dust, and fumes. The regulations
promote the public health, general safety, and neighborhood character
of the immediate neighborhood and the larger community.
B. The Board of Supervisors may, in approving a conditional use, waive
any of the requirements imposed by this article or add additional
reasonable conditions when it finds such action is deemed necessary by
reason of the unique physical conditions of the particular property or by
reason of the particular character of surrounding properties to
implement the purpose of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code or the general purposes of this chapter.
C. For uses by right, including uses that require land development review,
a variance from the Zoning Hearing Board shall be required to waive
any of the requirements imposed by this article. Prior to making a
determination, the Board of Supervisors and the Zoning Hearing Board
shall have a recommendation from staff addressing the following:
(1) The size and intensity of such use.
(2) The capacity of adjacent and feeder streets to handle peak traffic
loads and hazards created by the use as recommended by a traffic
consultant.
(3) Unusual topography of the location, the nature, location and height
of buildings, walls, stacks, fences, grades and landscaping on the
site.
(4) The extent, nature and arrangement of parking, entrances and
exits.
(5) Adequacy of fire and police protection.
(6) The availability of adequate sewer and water supply.
(7) All other standards prescribed by these regulations.
§ 84-27 SEWERS § 84-28
68:577
until the primary use or structure is constructed, unless evidence of
compliance of such use or structure shall have first been determined.
A. When a residential use is the principal use within any zoning district,
the following accessory uses or accessory structures are permitted:
(1) Arbor;
(2) Barn;
(3) Boathouse;
(4) Boat dock;
(5) Child's playhouse;
(6) Detached carport;
(7) Detached private residential garage;
(8) Freestanding deck (not attached to the principal structure);
(9) Gazebo;
(10) Greenhouse;
(11) Guesthouse, which does not include kitchen facilities; provided,
however, that such structures are used only for the housing or the
occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the principal
building and not as rental units or for permanent occupancy as
dwelling or rooming units for persons other than such guests;
(12) Living quarters for employees working on the premises of a singledwelling
unit may be housed within an accessory structure,
provided that all the requirements of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code are complied with;
(13) Picnic pavilion;
(14) Private swimming pool and/or bathhouse limited to use by the
occupants of the principal structure and their guests;
(15) Solar energy systems;
(16) Sports courts which are limited to use by the occupants of the
principal structure and their guests, provided that the illumination
of such courts meets the limitations found elsewhere in this
chapter.
(17) Springhouse/pump house;
(18) Storage, tool or utility shed;
(19) Structures for housing household pets; and
(20)Wind energy conversion systems.
§ 84-28 PINE CODE § 84-28
68:578
B. Quantity of accessory uses or accessory structures per principal use:
one each of any of the accessory uses or accessory structures,
Subsection A(1) through (20) above, may be permitted on a single lot
containing a residential use, except that one additional picnic pavilion
or storage, tool or utility shed may be located on a single lot for each
five acres of land within such single existing lot.
C. Required yards.
(1) Accessory structures shall not be erected and accessory uses may
not be conducted within accessory structures which have been
erected, altered, enlarged, or maintained in required front yards.
(2) Detached accessory structures may be erected within the required
side or rear yards, provided that such an accessory structure is not
located closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line or 10 feet to the side
lot line, except that accessory structures used for agricultural uses
shall conform to the requirements of § 84-30 of this chapter.
(3) Swimming pools or accessory pool structures thereto shall not be
located closer than 20 feet to any lot lines of the lot on which the
principal structure is located. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
366]
D. Not authorized as accessory uses and/or accessory structures.
(1) Adult-oriented establishments shall not be considered accessory
uses or uses permissible within accessory structures and shall be
allowed only as a conditional use, subject to the specific provisions
and requirements of § 84-29 of this chapter.
(2) Alcohol rehabilitation clinics shall not be considered accessory
uses or uses permissible within accessory structures and shall be
allowed only as a conditional use, subject to the specific provisions
and requirements of § 84-31 of this chapter.
(3) Communications facilities, communications towers,
telecommunications equipment buildings, pole-mounted/shared
use communications facilities and collocation/shared use
communications facilities shall not be considered accessory
structures or accessory uses and shall be allowed only as a
conditional use, subject to the specific provisions and requirements
of § 84-42 of this chapter.
(4) Kennels (outdoor or indoor) shall not be considered accessory
structures or accessory uses and shall be allowed only subject to
the specific applicable provisions and requirements regarding
kennels (outdoor or indoor) otherwise respectively set forth in this
chapter.
(5) Methadone treatment facilities shall not be considered accessory
structures or accessory uses and shall be allowed only as a
§ 84-28 SEWERS § 84-28
68:579
conditional use, subject to the specific provisions and requirements
of § 84-62 of this chapter.
(6) Mobile home parks shall not be considered accessory structures or
accessory uses and shall be allowed only as a conditional use,
subject to the specific provisions and requirements of § 84-64 of
this chapter.
(7) Outdoor advertising signs shall not be considered accessory uses or
accessory structures and shall be allowed only as a conditional use,
subject to the specific provisions and requirements of § 84-71 of
this chapter.
E. If an accessory structure or building is attached to the principal
structure, then it shall be considered part of the principal structure and
shall be subject to all requirements relating to the principal structure.
Detached accessory structures shall maintain a separation of at least 10
feet from the principal structure, and such detached accessory
structures shall not exceed the gross square footage footprint of the
principal structure.
F. Not considered an accessory use and/or accessory structure. The
following, when associated with a residential use, shall not be
considered an accessory use or accessory structure:
(1) Dish antenna of one meter or less in diameter;
(2) Fences, walls, and hedges six feet in height or less;
(3) Handicapped ramps, provided the ramp does not obstruct access to
otherwise required parking;
(4) Piers or the like used as entrance features or mailbox supports;
(5) No-impact home based business; however such are subject to the
additional requirements for specified conditional uses in § 84-67 of
this chapter; and
(6) Water features.
G. For nonresidential uses in the B-1, C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts, the
following accessory uses or structures are allowed with conditional use
approval:
(1) Detached garage;
(2) Decks, patios, terraces, and other outdoor areas used for sealing or
dining associated with a permitted nonresidential use, so long as
the deck, patio, terrace, or other outdoor area is no greater than
25%. of the area of the permitted indoor area (unless such area was
approved as a part of a Land Development approval);
(3) Dish antenna of two meters or greater in diameter;
§ 84-28 PINE CODE § 84-28
68:580
§ 84-29. Adult-oriented establishments.
An adult-oriented establishment may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors upon a finding that compliance with Chapter 90, the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following criteria, have been
established by the applicant.
(4) Parish houses when associated with a place of worship; and
(5) Temporary outdoor display of retail merchandise.
H. For nonresidential uses in the B-1, C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts, the
following are not considered accessory uses/structures, but are
required to comply with the requirements of the Code of the Township
of Pine:
(1) Vending machines; provided, however, that the vending machine(s)
shall not be located within any required setback area and, also,
shall not located within 150 feet of any residential zoning district
nor face any residential zoning district (or interfere with any
sidewalk or walkway area), and be limited to only one vending
machine for each product type per principal building or use;
(2) Dish antennas of two meters or less in diameter;
(3) Fences, walls, and hedges six feet in height or less;
(4) Fire escapes, but only when attached to that portion of the
structure bordering on the side or rear yard;
(5) Solar energy systems;
(6) Walk-up service windows facing any public right-of-way when
accessory to a permitted commercial use; and
(7) Wind energy conversion systems, subject to land development
review and approval.
A. Location.
(1) There shall only be one adult-oriented business permitted on a
single lot or parcel.
(2) Adult-oriented business shall be allowed in the C-1 District only.
(3) No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 100 feet
from any land or lot in the following Township of Pine zoning
districts: E-1, S-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 or from any parcel of land or lot
used principally as a residential use, whether situate in the
Township of Pine or otherwise.
(4) The use as an adult-oriented establishment shall not create an
enticement for minors because of its proximity to nearby uses
where minors may congregate.
§ 84-28 SEWERS § 84-29
68:581
(5) An adult-oriented establishment shall be located only in buildings
that have their main entrance facing upon Route 19 and such
entrance shall be the entrance used for the adult-oriented business.
B. Measuring separation requirements.
(1) The separation requirements in this subsection shall be measured
from the lot line of an adult-oriented business to the lot line of a
protected land use or other adult-oriented business listed.
(2) Where a multitenant facility such as a shopping center is involved,
measurement shall occur from the boundary of the leasehold
interest instead of the property line.
(3) The distance between any two adult-oriented establishments shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of each
such establishment.
(4) The distance between any adult-oriented establishment and the
protected land uses in this section shall be measured in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures from the closest point
on the exterior parcel line of each such establishment to the closest
point on the exterior parcel of the protected land use.
C. Separation requirement.
(1) An adult-oriented establishment shall not be permitted to locate
within 1,500 feet of any other adult-oriented establishment
whether such other adult-oriented establishment is situate in the
Township of Pine or otherwise.
(2) No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 600 feet of
any parcel of land or lot, situate in the Township of Pine or
otherwise, which contains any one or more of the following
specified protected land uses:
(a) Civic club;
(b) College;
(c) Day-care center;
(d) Drive-in theater;
(e) Entertainment facility;
(f) Indoor theater;
(g) Park;
(h) Place of worship;
(i) Public and semipublic uses;
§ 84-29 PINE CODE § 84-29
68:582
(j) Public or private school;
(k) Recreation facility;
(l) Trade school.
D. Hours of operation. An adult-oriented establishment may be open for
business Monday through Saturday from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
No adult-oriented establishment shall be open at any times on Sunday
or on a legal holiday as per the Act of May 31, 1893, P.L. 188, § 1, as
amended, 44 P.S. § 11.
E. Display of materials.
(1) No materials or merchandise of any kind offered for sale, rent,
lease or loan or for view upon the premises of an adult-oriented
establishment shall be exhibited or displayed outside of a building
or structure.
(2) Any building or structure used or occupied as an adult-oriented
establishment shall be windowless or have an opaque covering over
all windows or doors of any area in which materials, merchandise
or film is exhibited or displayed and no materials or merchandise of
any kind shall be visible from outside of the building or structure.
F. Signage.
(1) Each entrance of an adult-oriented establishment shall be posted
with a conspicuous written notice specifying that persons under the
age of 18 are not permitted to enter and warning all other persons
that they may be offended upon entry.
(2) An adult-oriented business shall have no more than one wall sign.
(3) The sign shall conform to the provisions of § 84-121, but shall
contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations of any manner and may contain only the following:
(a) The name of the establishment and/or one or more of the
following phrases:
[1] Adult bookstore;
[2] Adult movie theater;
[3] Adult encounter parlor;
[4] Adult cabaret;
[5] Adult lounge;
[6] Adult novelties;
[7] Adult entertainment;
§ 84-29 SEWERS § 84-29
68:583
§ 84-30. Agricultural uses.
Agricultural uses in the E-1, S-1, or any R District shall be subject to the
following requirements:
§ 84-31. Alcohol rehabilitation clinic.
An alcohol rehabilitation clinic may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant.
[8] Adult modeling studio.
(b) The wall sign for adult movie theaters may contain the
additional phrase "movie titles posted inside premises."
(c) Each letter forming a word on a wall sign shall be a solid color
and each such letter shall be the same print type, size, and
color. The background behind such letter on the display
surface of the wall sign shall be a uniform, solid color.
A. Lot area.
(1) Unless otherwise specified, agricultural uses include all standard
agricultural practices, provided that the lot area shall be not less
than five acres. Agricultural uses shall include farm buildings and
structures, greenhouses and roadside stands for the sale of
products raised on the lot.
(2) Horses, ponies, cattle, goats, and any grazing animal shall not be
kept, stabled or corralled on any lot less than five acres.
(3) Fowl shall not be permitted on any lot less than five acres.
(4) For commercial hog raising, the minimum lot area shall be not less
than 50 acres, and the hog-raising use shall not be conducted
closer than 500 feet to any adjacent lot line.
B. Side yard. Farm buildings and structures (other than dwellings),
greenhouses and accessory structures shall not be erected closer than
50 feet to any adjacent lot line nor closer than 100 feet to a street rightof-
way line.
A. Alcohol rehabilitation clinics shall have frontage on and direct access to
an arterial or connector road.
B. The site shall be served by public water and public sewer.
C. No alcohol rehabilitation clinic may be operated within 500 feet of a
residential zoning district.
D. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with § 84-111.
§ 84-29 PINE CODE § 84-31
68:584
§ 84-32. Animal day care.
Animal day care shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 84-33. Animal hospitals.
Animal hospitals may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant.
§ 84-34. Automotive dealerships, new and used.
Automotive dealerships, new and used, may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant:
E. All alcohol rehabilitation clinics shall be licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
A. All animal day care shall comply with the appropriate health
regulations prior to the issuance of any permit.
B. No outdoor area for the use of animals shall be permitted.
A. All animal hospitals shall comply with the appropriate health
regulations prior to the issuance of any permit.
B. No outdoor area for the use of animals shall be permitted.
A. The minimum site area shall be two acres.
B. No such use shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district
boundary line.
C. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be closer
than five feet to any property line, buffer yard or right-of-way line. No
vehicle shall be parked on adjacent property or in any public right-ofway,
and adequate spacing of vehicles and merchandise shall be
maintained to allow access around vehicles and merchandise.
D. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
E. All lots used for the outdoor display of automobiles shall have a
completely enclosed building on the same lot which has not less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area where all repairs, servicing, sales
and customer car washing shall be performed.
F. Storage.
§ 84-31 SEWERS § 84-34
68:585
§ 84-35. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
(1) Outdoor vehicle storage shall be surfaced with an asphalt or
portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to
dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a positive
stormwater drainage system.
(2) Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be
stored either inside a building or in an outdoor area, which is
screened by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
(3) All permanent storage of material, merchandise and equipment
shall be within the principal building, with the exception of refuse
and trash which shall be stored in closed containers and in an area
screened from view at all points on any public or private property
or street when viewed from ground level.
G. Landscaping.
(1) A buffer yard shall be provided along all boundary lines.
(2) Such buffer yard shall be in conformity with the standards for the
same set in § 84-111 of this chapter.
(3) The buffer yard shall be along abutting property to block any view
of repair operations and stored material and equipment from all
points on such property when viewed from ground level.
(4) Landscaping areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width along all
street frontage(s) and adjacent properties.
H. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
the parking of customer and employee vehicles and shall not be used
for the display of merchandise.
I. No strings of lights or flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia
shall be permitted on the lot, on any of the structures or poles or on
merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs as may be
otherwise allowed by this chapter.
J. Repairs.
(1) All repairs shall occur in an entirely enclosed building.
(2) No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not
have all of the mechanical and body components necessary for the
safe and lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 84-34 PINE CODE § 84-35
68:586
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant.
§ 84-36. Car washes.
Car washes shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. The owner/operator of shall live on premises of the bed-and-breakfast
establishment.
B. No alteration to either the exterior or the interior of any principal or
accessory structure shall be made which changes the character and
appearance of the residential premises.
C. No sign, other than one unlit address sign, not more than two square
feet in area, shall be permitted.
D. The bed-and-breakfast establishment shall obtain and maintain licenses
from the appropriate state and county agencies.
E. The maximum number of overnight guests shall not exceed two per
bedroom. In no case, shall more than a total of eight guests be
permitted in each bed-and-breakfast establishment.
F. Guest parking shall include one off-street parking space for each
bedroom as outlined in § 84-116. Off-street parking shall not be located
in any minimum required front yard or be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line and shall be screened by a six-foot compact
hedge or opaque fence.
G. Meals shall be served to overnight guests only.
H. No events, meetings or other activities for people who are not overnight
guests shall be permitted.
A. All machine washing and machine drying operations shall be conducted
within a building.
B. The building exit for automobiles that have completed the washing and
machine drying process shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the
nearest point of any street property line.
C. No washing, vacuuming, steam cleaning, waxing, polishing or machine
drying operation, and no building within which such operations are
conducted, shall be permitted within 100 feet of any residential district.
D. All lot lines abutting or adjacent to residential districts or uses shall be
screened by a solid masonry wall or fence not less than four feet or
more than six feet in height.
E. Front yards shall be landscaped subject to the requirements applying to
all districts in § 84-111.
§ 84-35 SEWERS § 84-36
68:587
§ 84-37. Carriage homes.
Carriage homes, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant.
§ 84-38. Cemeteries.
Cemeteries shall be subject to the following requirements.
F. All entrance and exit lanes and parking areas shall be surfaced with an
asphalt or portland cement binder pavement so as to provide a durable
and dustless surface, and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose
of all surface water accumulation.
G. Queuing lane(s) for each bay shall be provided subject to the
requirements applying to all districts in § 84-117.
H. All car washes shall connect to public sewers.
A. A carriage home development must be a minimum of five acres.
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
B. A carriage home development shall have a maximum density of no
greater than six such units per acre. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 352]
C. There shall be no more than four carriage home units in any structure.
D. Common open space.
(1) A minimum of 15% of the land area of the development site shall be
designated as common open space. The calculation of such
common open space shall specifically not include streets, parking,
rights-of-way, detention ponds, or access to detention ponds. Any
land lying within 15 feet of any building shall also not be
considered part of the required common open space.
(2) The common open space shall be developed and maintained subject
to the standards set forth in § 84-119 of this chapter and shall
contain the park and recreation facilities mandated therein.
E. Each carriage home unit shall have an attached garage of sufficient size
to accommodate two vehicles.
A. No gravesite shall placed where wetlands exist or are suspected.
B. No crematoriums shall be operated within 1,000 feet of a residential
dwelling.
C. If a gravesite causes the removal of a tree of significance, the cemetery
is responsible for mitigation as outlined in § 78-48 of the Township of
Pine Code.
§ 84-36 PINE CODE § 84-39
68:588
§ 84-39. Civic clubs.
Civic clubs, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-40. College.
A college, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-41. Commercial or public parking garage or lot.
A commercial or public garage or lot may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant:
A. The minimum site required shall be one acre.
B. Any outdoor recreation area adjoining a residential use or zoning
district shall be screened by a buffer yard, which shall be in conformity
with the provisions set forth in § 84-111 of this chapter.
C. Any outdoor storage of materials or equipment or other activity, which
is required to be done outdoors, such as composting, chipping or
recycling, shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a
six-foot opaque fence and by a buffer yard.
D. All other activities and operations shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
E. Ingress and egress shall be designed to maximize sight distance along
adjacent public streets.
A. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
B. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
minimize hazards and congestion and provide for adequate emergency
vehicle access.
C. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 84-111 of this chapter and along all property lines that adjoin
residential uses or districts.
D. Outdoor recreation facilities shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from any property line adjoining a single-family dwelling.
§ 84-39 SEWERS § 84-41
68:589
§ 84-42. Wireless communications facilities. [Amended 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
A. Commercial or public parking garage or lot shall be used exclusively for
parking of passenger vehicles.
B. Commercial or public parking garages or lots shall be equipped and
controlled to discourage illegal parking, vandalism, and other unlawful
or nuisance-creating activities. When so equipped and controlled, such
lots and garages may be open 24 hours a day.
C. No commercial repair work or services of any kind shall be conducted
in any commercial or public parking garages or lots.
D. No sign of any kind other than designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use shall be maintained on any commercial or public
parking garages or lots.
A. Purposes and findings of fact.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in the Township of Pine (also referred to
herein as the "Township"). While the Township recognizes the
importance of wireless communications facilities in providing highquality
communications service to its residents and businesses, the
Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public
safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
(2) By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
(a) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision for necessary services;
(b) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(c) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
nontower based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
(d) Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable Wi-
Fi and other wireless communications facilities;
§ 84-41 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:590
(e) Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing
towers;
(f) Ensure the structural integrity of commercial communications
antenna support structures through compliance with
applicable industry standards and regulations; and
(g) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's
residents.
B. General and specific requirements for nontower wireless
communications facilities.
(1) Standards for nontower WCF erected in the public rights-of-way
and outside the public rights-of-way. All applicants seeking to
construct, erect, or relocate a nontower WCF shall comply with the
following regulations, unless such construction is a co-location that
substantially changes the underlying support structure. A written
narrative that addresses how the applicant will meet each of the
regulations listed below shall be submitted with the conditional use
application, unless the proposed facility falls under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Co-location Act.
(2) Conditional use application. A conditional use application shall be
completed by any applicant desiring to place a nontower WCF in or
outside the public ROW onto a wireless support structure that does
not already hold a nontower WCF. The application shall be
submitted to the Township and shall demonstrate that the proposed
facility meets all of the following specifications:
(a) Co-location, location and siting.
[1] Co-location.
[a] Nontower WCF in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light
poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the
applicant shall locate its nontower WCF on existing
poles that do not already act as antenna support
structures.
[2] Location. Nontower WCF are permitted in all zones
subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed below
and subject to the prior written approval of the Township.
[3] Siting.
[a] Prohibited on certain structures. Nontower WCF shall
not be located on single-family detached residences,
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:591
single-family attached residences, or any residential
accessory structure.
[b] Historic buildings. No nontower WCF may be located
on a building or structure in an historic district that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers
of Historic Places, or is eligible to be so listed, or is
listed on the official historic structures and/or historic
districts list maintained by the Township, or has been
designated by the Township to be of historical
significance.
[4] Design regulations.
[a] Nontower WCF in the ROW. Nontower WCF
installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet
in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least
visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[i] Antennae and all support equipment shall be
treated to match the supporting structure.
Facilities and accompanying equipment shall be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which
they are mounted.
[ii] Equipment location. Nontower WCF and
accessory equipment shall be located so as not to
cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public
use of the ROW as determined by the Township.
[iii] Ground-mounted equipment and electrical meter
cabinets shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
[iv] Any proposed underground vault related to
commercial nontower WCF shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township.
[b] Nontower WCF outside the ROW. Nontower WCF shall
be co-located on existing structures, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:592
[i] The co-location of such nontower WCF does not
cause the underlying support structure to exceed
the maximum height permitted in the underlying
zoning district by more than 20 feet.
[ii] Nontower WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the
physical dimensions of the antenna and any
accompanying related equipment. Such
documentation shall be analyzed on an individual
basis.
[iii] Nontower WCF shall employ stealth technology
and be treated to match the supporting structure
in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by
the applicant shall be subject to the approval of
the Township.
[iv] If the applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building
shall comply with the minimum requirements for
the applicable zoning district. A security fence of
a minimum height of six feet shall surround any
separate communications building and the
proposed site and building shall comply with the
applicable standards contained in Chapter 78 of
the Code of the Township of Pine.
[c] Noncommercial usage exemption. Township citizens
utilizing satellite dishes and antennae for the purpose
of maintaining television, phone, and/or internet
connections at their respective residences shall be
exempt from the provisions of this § 84-42.
[5] Public safety communications. The applicant shall submit
proof that the proposed antenna will not interfere with
public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(3) Relocation or removal.
(a) Nontower WCF in the public rights-of-way. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Township, or such longer
period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of
an antenna in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position
of any antenna when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:593
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(b) Nontower WCF outside the ROW.
[1] The removal and replacement of nontower WCF and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the antenna is permitted, so long as such repair
or upgrade does not increase the overall size of the
support structure or number of nontower WCF.
[2] Any material modification to a nontower WCF shall require
a prior amendment to the original permit authorization.
(4) Financial security. Prior to receipt of any permit or approval for the
construction or placement of a nontower WCF, the applicant shall
provide to the Township financial security sufficient to guarantee
the removal of the proposed antenna. Said financial security shall
remain in place until the antenna is removed.
(5) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the nontower WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations
of the terms and conditions of this § 84-42. The applicant and/or
owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(6) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
nontower WCF, its underlying support structure, as well as any
related equipment, in order to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this § 84-42 and any other provisions found within the
Code of the Township of Pine, or applicable law. The Township and/
or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon
which a communications antenna is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(7) Aviation safety. Nontower WCF shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:594
(8) Maintenance. All nontower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair. Such maintenance shall be
performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to promote
the safety and security of the Township's residents. All
maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(9) Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, and National Electrical Code. Nontower WCF shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair
by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in
the Township.
(10)Wind. Any nontower WCF shall be designed to withstand the
effects of wind according to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-E
Code, as amended).
(11)Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other nontower WCF, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(12) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a
nontower WCF, as well as related costs. In the case that a colocation
falls under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act, the permit fees shall not exceed $1,000.
(13) Abandonment and removal. In the event that use of a commercial
communications antenna is discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and
the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
nontower WCF or shall be removed as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused nontower WCF and accessory
facilities shall be removed within two months of the cessation
of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:595
(b) If the antenna is not removed within two months of the
cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Township, the antenna and any related
equipment may be removed by the Township and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the antenna.
(14) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all commercial nontower WCF in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(15) Insurance. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
commercial communications antenna shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the commercial communications antenna.
Such coverages shall be continuously maintained during the period
that such commercial communications antenna is in place and the
certificate of insurance shall provide that the Township shall be
given written notification at least 30 days in advance of the
expiration or cancellation of such coverages.
(16) Indemnification. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the nontower
WCF. Each person or entity that owns or operates a commercial
communications antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Township in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a
nontower WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
(17) Co-locations and modifications that fall within the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.
(a) Section 84-42B(1) through (8) shall not apply to facilities which
are governed by the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:596
Collocation Act. To the extent permitted by law, the remaining
provisions in § 84-42B(9) through (16) shall apply to colocation
applicants desiring to place new nontower WCF on
existing wireless communications facilities, as well as those
applicants desiring to modify existing facilities. Any applicant
proposing the co-location or modification of a nontower WCF
shall submit a building permit application to the Township.
(b) Timing. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application
for a commercial communications antenna is filed with the
Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing of
any information that may be required to complete such
application. Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete
application, the Township shall make its final decision on
whether to approve the application and shall advise the
applicant in writing of such decision. If additional information
was requested by the Township to complete an application, the
time required by the applicant to provide the information shall
not be counted toward the Township's ninety-day review
period.
C. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(1) Regulations applicable to all tower-based wireless communications
facilities.
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Township.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the WCF applicant shall mail written notice in
advance thereof (via certified U.S. mail/return receipt
requested) to all owners of every property within 500 feet of
the proposed facility. The WCF applicant shall provide proof of
the notification to the Township.
(c) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and at a
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:597
height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF
applicant's wireless communications system. No WCF
applicant shall have the right under these regulations to erect
a tower to the maximum height specified in this section unless
it proves the necessity for such height. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole for the towerbased
WCF is the minimum height necessary for the service
area.
[1] Prior to the Township's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of towerbased
WCF, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF applicant
for such conditional use approval to prove to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Township's Board of
Supervisors that the WCF applicant cannot adequately
extend or infill its communications system by the use of
equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other
similar equipment installed on existing structures, such as
utility poles or their appurtenances and other available tall
structures. The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate
that the proposed tower-based WCF must be located
where it is proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's
service area and that no other viable alternative location
exists.
[2] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the
power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and
any relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant
in determining the need for the proposed site and
installation.
[3] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[4] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all applicable standards in this
section.
[5] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Township that the owner of the
property has granted an easement for the proposed WCF
and that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:598
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the Township a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure. This certification shall be provided during the
conditional hearings or at a minimum be made as a condition
attached to any approval given such that the certification be
provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
(e) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based
WCF shall employ stealth technology which may include the
tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by
the Township, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based
WCF and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the
existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the
greatest extent possible. The Township's Board of Supervisors
shall consider whether its decision upon the subject
application will promote the harmonious and orderly
development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site
to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and land development design and construction
principles, practices and techniques.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall not be approved unless the Township's Board of
Supervisors finds that the wireless communications equipment
planned for the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or
building. The Township's Board of Supervisors may deny an
application to construct a new tower-based WCF if the WCF
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
commercial communications antenna(s) on an existing
structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers
within 1/4 mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission
to install an antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers
and was denied for one of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:599
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant
proposing the modification of an existing tower-based WCF,
which increases the overall height of such WCF, shall first
obtain a permit from the Township. Nonroutine modifications
shall be prohibited without a permit.
(h) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists
with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or non-existence of a gap in wireless coverage shall
be a factor in the Township's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCFs.
(i) Additional nontower WCF. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the
Township with a written commitment that it will allow other
service providers to co-locate nontower WCF on tower-based
WCFs where technically and economically feasible. The owner
of a tower-based WCF shall not install any additional nontower
WCF without obtaining the prior written approval of the
Township.
(j) Wind. All tower-based WCF shall be designed to withstand the
effects of wind according to the standard designed by the
American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry
Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association
(ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-E, as amended).
(k) Site plan. A site plan shall be required for all tower-based
WCFs, showing all existing and proposed structures and
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:600
improvements, including but not limited to antenna and
related support structures, building, fencing, buffering and
ingress and egress.
(l) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. The maximum total height of a
tower-based WCF which is not located in the public ROW, shall
not exceed 150 feet, as measured vertically from the ground
level to the highest point on the structure, including nontower
WCF and subsequent alterations. Should the WCF applicant
prove that another provider of wireless communications
services has agreed to co-locate nontower WCF on the WCF
applicant's tower-based WCF and requires a greater tower
height to provide satisfactory service for wireless
communications than is required by the WCF applicant, the
total Height of such tower-based WCF shall not exceed 150
feet, unless the WCF applicant secures a waiver from the
Township's Board of Supervisors which may be given at the
Board's sole reasonable discretion.
(m) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square
feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad
not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving
and transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(s) space on the tower-based wireless communications
facility.
(n) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(o) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(p) Radio frequency emissions. Tower-based WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:601
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(q) Historic buildings or districts. Tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that
is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the
official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the Township.
(r) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other
signage permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the
FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
(s) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The WCF
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental
authorities and to the Township.
(t) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Code of the Township of Pine, except in
emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator,
where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only.
(u) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
(v) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(w) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township,
the Township shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:602
for the approval of such tower-based WCF and the Township
shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(x) Non-conforming uses. Non-conforming tower-based WCFs
which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason
or cause may be repaired and restored at their former location,
but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of
this section.
(y) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[1] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension
is approved by the Township.
[2] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Township, the
WCF and accessory facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
[3] Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including
nontower WCF, shall be removed within six months of the
time of cessation of operations. The Township must
approve all replacements of portions of a tower-based
WCF previously removed.
(z) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as associated
inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
(aa) FCC license. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(bb) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Township reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any tower-based WCF for
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:603
numerous factors, including but are not limited to, visual
impact, design, and safety standards.
(cc) Insurance. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide
the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the
Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each towerbased
WCF. All such coverages shall be continuously
maintained during the period that such tower-based WCF is in
place and the certificate of insurance shall provide that the
Township shall be given written notification at least 30 days in
advance of the expiration or cancellation of such coverages.
(dd) Indemnification. Each person or entity that owns or operates a
tower-based WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person or entity that
owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions
or proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(ee) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based
WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(ff) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township and thereafter
maintain financial security sufficient to guarantee the removal
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:604
of the tower-based WCF. Said financial security shall remain in
place until the tower-based WCF is removed.
(2) Regulations applicable to tower-based wireless communications
facilities located outside the public rights-of-way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Tower-based WCF shall not be located in an area in which
utilities are primarily located underground and shall not
be located within 75 feet of any area in which utilities are
primarily underground.
[2] Tower-based WCFs greater than 40 feet in height are
permitted outside the public rights-of-way in the following
zoning districts by conditional use:
[a] C-1 Community Service Center District.
[b] C-2 Planned Transition District.
[c] B-1 Rural Business District.
[3] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as
a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot is a
minimum of 6,000 square feet. The lot shall meet the
minimum lot area of the district in which it is located. The
minimum distance between the base of a tower-based
WCF and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way
line shall equal 40% of the proposed WCF structure height
or the minimum required setbacks for the district,
whichever is greater.
[4] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a
vacant parcel in combination with another use, except
residential, subject to the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable district, and need not be
affiliated with the WCF.
[b] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with
the requirements for the applicable district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the tower-based
WCF and guy wires, the equipment building, security
fence, and buffer planting if the proposed WCF is
greater than 40 feet in height.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall equal
40% of the proposed WCF structure height or the
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:605
minimum required set-backs for the district,
whichever is greater. Where the site on which a towerbased
WCF is proposed to be located is contiguous
to an educational use, child day-care facility or
residential use, the minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any such adjoining
uses shall equal 110% of the proposed height of the
tower-based WCF unless it is demonstrated to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that in the event
of failure the WCF is designed to collapse upon itself
within a setback area less than the required minimum
setback without endangering such adjoining uses and
their occupants.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
[2] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval
of the Township.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's nontower WCF
and comparable nontower WCF for future users.
[4] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the
Township complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as
amended, to document and verify the design specifications
of the foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for
guy wires, if used.
(d) Fence/screen.
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:606
[1] A security fence having a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet shall completely surround
any tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height, as
well as guy wires, or any building housing WCF
equipment.
[2] Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a
newly constructed tower-based WCF as possible and shall
be completed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
78 of the Code of the Township of Pine. The Township may
permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography,
walls, decorative fences or other features instead of
landscaping, if, in the determination of the Township's
Board of Supervisors, they achieve the same degree of
screening. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
[2] All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into
the environment in which they are situated and shall meet
the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(f) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking
shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to tower-based WCF. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours
to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present documentation
to the Township that the property owner has granted an
easement for the proposed facility.
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces provided.
(h) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and any other provisions found within the Code of
the Township of Pine or state or federal law. The Township and/
or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property
upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:607
(3) Regulations applicable to tower-based wireless communications
facilities located in the public rights-of-way.
(a) Location and development standards.
[1] Such tower-based WCFs shall not be located in
underground utility areas and shall not be located within
the front facade area of any structure.
[2] Tower-based WCFs 40 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted by conditional use within the public rights-ofway
along the following corridors and roadways,
regardless of the underlying zoning district, provided that
they are not situated within 150 feet of an area in which
utilities are underground:
[a] Franklin Road;
[b] Warrendale Road;
[c] Route 76;
[d] Brown Road;
[e] Route 910;
[f] Pearce Mill Road;
[g] Perry Highway;
[h] McKinney Road; and
[i] Babcock Boulevard.
(b) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(c) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 24 inches of the face of the
curb.
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-42
68:608
[2] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(d) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
[2] Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall be consistent
in height with any existing tower-based WCFs located
within 150 feet and in all cases shall not exceed 40 feet in
height.
[3] To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township, and shall not
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to
more than 40 feet.
[4] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's nontower WCF
and comparable nontower WCF for future users.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
§ 84-42 SEWERS § 84-42
68:609
§ 84-43. Day-care centers.
Day-care centers may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(f) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to application and
permit fees and associated costs as described in this § 84-42
and elsewhere within the Code of the Township of Pine, every
tower-based WCF in the ROW is subject to the Township's right
to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and
occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall
be directly related to the Township's actual ROW management
costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities
by the Township. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall
pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township
for the Township's costs incurred in connection with the
activities described above.
D. Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any
other action pursuant to this § 84-42, does not waive, reduce, lessen or
impair the lawful police powers vested in the Township under
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
A. No permanently installed play equipment shall be located in the
required front yards.
B. Day-care centers shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
existing adult-oriented business.
C. Every application for a day-care center shall set forth:
(1) Each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of
the center.
(2) A copy of an application or other request to each such agency for
such approval and the status of each such application.
§ 84-42 PINE CODE § 84-43
68:610
§ 84-44. Drive-in theaters.
Drive-in theaters shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 84-45. Drive-throughs.
Drive-throughs, when used as a part of a permitted or conditional land use,
shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 84-46. Entertainment facilities.
Entertainment facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
(3) Any facts known to the applicant which may result in the denial or
delay of any required approval which has not been obtained as of
the time of the filing of the application.
D. Day-care centers shall only be located within structures that are fully
equipped with sprinklers and meet or exceed all Building and Fire Code
requirements.
A. The minimum site required shall be five acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
street or collector street.
C. The site shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any existing dwelling.
D. The volume and direction of outdoor speakers shall be designed and
installed to comply with the limits set forth in this chapter.
E. Adequate area shall be provided on the site for cars to queue at the
admission booths without obstructing the flow of traffic on public
streets.
A. Drive-throughs shall be prohibited in the front yard and shall not be
located to prevent direct pedestrian access from the public right-of-way
to the principal building.
B. When adjacent to residential uses, drive-throughs, including both the
facility and queuing lanes, shall be screened from the adjacent
residential properties.
C. In the TVO district, drive-through establishments, as principal uses,
shall meet the front yard setback requirements.
A. Entertainment facilities shall not include adult-oriented establishments.
B. Indoor entertainment facilities shall only be located within structures
that are fully equipped with sprinklers and meet or exceed all Building
and Fire Code requirements.
§ 84-43 SEWERS § 84-47
68:611
§ 84-47. Essential facilities.
Essential facilities, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-48. Farm markets.
A farm market shall be subject to the following requirements.
§ 84-49. Freestanding self-storage units.
Freestanding self-storage units may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant:
§ 84-50. Fringe lots.
All fringe lots in planned residential developments shall comply with one of
the following options:
A. An electrical power substation, gas regulator building or other essential
facilities building is necessary to service the district for which the
conditional use is being requested.
B. The buildings will be designed within an enclosed building or screened,
cyclone fence so that no dangerous wires or other sources of power are
exposed.
A. A parking area shall be provided as outlined in § 84-116.
B. Products sold at a farm market must be grown on site.
A. Freestanding self-storage units shall be in structures no greater than 14
feet in height.
B. Maximum lot size of a freestanding self-storage development shall be
two acres.
C. Developments containing groupings of freestanding self-storage units
shall be screened on all sides of the development.
D. Parking areas or open storage areas associated with a freestanding selfstorage
unit complex shall be completely enclosed by a fence in
accordance with § 84-106.
A. Any fringe lot within a proposed planned residential development shall
be at least 75% of the size of any lot or lots outside the proposed
planned residential development abutting a common boundary line with
the proposed lot.
§ 84-47 PINE CODE § 84-50
68:612
§ 84-51. Forestry.
Forestry and logging in the Township shall be subject to the following
requirements:
B. Any fringe lot within a proposed planned residential development that
is less than 75% of the size of any lot or lots outside the proposed
planned residential development abutting a common boundary line with
the proposed lot, shall then provide a minimum eighty-foot buffer yard
parallel to the property line until the property line changes a bearing or
course.
A. The objective of this section is to regulate the logging and timberharvesting
operations (a permitted use in all zoning districts) within the
Township of Pine to:
(1) Preserve the community development objectives set forth in this
chapter;
(2) Preserve environmental and economic benefits associated with
proper forest management;
(3) Promote proper forest stewardship;
(4) Protect the rights of adjoining property owners; minimize the
potential for adverse environmental impacts associated with any
logging or timber harvesting operation; and
(5) Avoid unreasonable and unnecessary restrictions on the right of
property owners to log or harvest timber (which activity is a
permitted use in all zoning districts).
B. Permit required, notification, insurance and surety.
(1) When a property owner wishes to conduct or permit to be
conducted a logging or timber-harvesting operation on his
property, such owner shall obtain a logging permit from the
Township of Pine. The fee schedule for logging and timber
harvesting permits shall be as indicated in the current Township
Fee Schedule.112
(2) Logging and timber harvesting permit shall not be required, and
this section shall not apply to:
(a) Work performed on clearing subdivision roads and rights-ofway
approved by the Board of Supervisors of the Township.
(b) Individual lots affected by the logging operation of less than
one acre in size, provided that the entire logging or timberharvesting
operation does not exceed a total of one acre.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 84-50 SEWERS § 84-51
68:613
(3) The Township of Pine shall be notified in writing before any logging
or timber-harvesting operation begins so that the Township may
determine if other Township permits or approvals are required for
the particular operation. Should a logging and timber harvesting
permit be required for the particular operation, the Township shall
be notified at the following times:
(a) Five business days prior to starting the operation.
(b) Three business days prior to terminating the operation.
(4) Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall show proof that
the logging operator has general liability insurance in an amount
no less than $1,000,000, automobile liability insurance in an
amount no less than $500,000, and property damage liability
insurance in an amount no less than $100,000, all in favor of the
Township and the property owner.
(5) Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall show proof that
the logging operator has worker's compensation insurance.
(6) To insure compliance by the applicant with the requirements set
forth in this article, a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or
other security acceptable to the Township shall be submitted; the
amount of such security shall be no less than $1,000. The
Township, only after the affirmative recommendation of or site
inspection reports filed by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall
release said security upon the completion the logging or timberharvesting
operation.
C. Submission requirements for permit application. The logging and
timber harvesting application shall be filed with the Township and shall
contain the following:
(1) A narrative containing the following information:
(a) Purpose of the proposed operation.
(b) Total land area involved in the proposed logging operation.
(c) Total number of trees selected for harvesting.
(d) Reforestation narrative outlining the revegetation of the
landing area, skid trails, and harvest area.
(e) A chart indicating the quantity of trees, the ranges (DBH) and
species of the trees selected for harvesting.
(f) Stormwater control measures to be utilized.
(g) Stream crossings and wetland protection measurers to be
utilized.
§ 84-51 PINE CODE § 84-51
68:614
(h) A statement confirming that each tree to be removed has been
designated by the Consulting or State Forester, with paint or
other distinctive means, at two points so as to be readily visible
by the logger. One point shall be low enough on the tree so as
to be visible on the stump after the tree is removed.
(i) A statement certifying the written notification to each adjacent
property owner of the proposed logging or timber-harvesting
operation and provide them with a copy of the application for
the logging or timber-harvesting permit. A copy of such
notification letter shall be included in the applicant's
submission.
(2) A legibly drawn site plan containing the following information and
drawn to the following specifications:
(a) Be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
(b) Be drawn on a sheet size not to exceed 30 inches by 40 inches.
A copy of the site plan shall also be provided in digital format
(.TIF format on CD-ROM).
(c) Be prepared in accordance with standard architectural and
engineering practices.
(d) Be sealed by engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) of record.
(e) The name(s) and address(es) of the landowner and adjacent
property owners.
(f) Contain a vicinity map, which shows the property(s) proposed
for timber harvesting as shown on a current Township map.
The vicinity map shall identify all adjacent properties and
property owners surrounding the proposed logging operation.
(g) The boundary of the site to be logged as indicated by a heavy
line with length of course in feet.
(h) The location and names of streets and roads adjacent to the
proposed logging operation.
(i) Utility rights-of-way and/or easements.
(j) The existing watercourses, floodplains, woodlands, and
wetlands.
(k) The required fifty-foot buffer along any logging area, landing
site, public road, adjacent property, streams, wetlands, and
floodplains.
(l) Marked and numerically identified all tree locations within one
meter of accuracy.
§ 84-51 SEWERS § 84-51
68:615
(m) Topography of the property, including all slopes of 25% or
greater and slide-prone soil areas.
(n) Earth disturbance locations, including skid trails and landing
areas.
(3) A narrative, including a copy of all commonwealth permits,
indicating that the logging operator shall address and comply with
the requirements of all applicable commonwealth laws and
regulations, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations, 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.);
(b) Stream crossings and wetland protection regulations issued
pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1
et seq.); and
(c) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1
et seq.).
D. Logging operation practices and regulations.
(1) On any logging or timber harvesting operation, at least 30% of the
forest cover (canopy) shall be preserved and such shall be well
distributed over the entire site. The preserved canopy shall be
composed of trees of a higher value species.
(2) No logging operation or removal of products shall take place
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or any time on
Sundays or legal holidays.
(3) As directed by the Township, a soils engineer registered to practice
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall monitor all forest
activities occurring on or affecting landslide prone soils or steep
slopes.
(4) Any logging operation in existence at the time of the enactment of
this article may continue without interruption, provided that
application is made within 30 days of said enactment for a logging
permit under the provisions of this article and that such permit is
granted.
(5) The maximum term of any permit issued pursuant to this article
shall be for four months. However, since the logging operation may
be adversely affected or delayed by unusual circumstances of
weather or other occurrences, one additional four-month
extension, after payment of a renewal fee equal to the initial permit
fee, may be granted by the Township. Any additional extensions
shall require application to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Pine.
§ 84-51 PINE CODE § 84-51
68:616
(6) Trees selected for harvesting shall be marked at two distinctive
locations thereon. The higher of the two marks shall be provided
around the entire circumference of the tree. The lower mark must
be visible on the stump after the tree is removed.
(7) A fifty-foot buffer zone, within which no logging or timberharvesting
shall occur, shall be required between the boundary of
any logging area or landing area and any public road or the
boundary of any adjoining property.
(8) No logging operation shall be permitted on slopes greater than
25%.
(9) No logging or timber harvesting operation shall be permitted
within a floodway or floodplain.
(10) Trees falling on adjacent properties as a result of a logging or
timber harvesting operation shall immediately be returned to the
landowner's property, who shall be responsible for any damage,
cost, or restoration to the affected adjacent property.
(11) The Township of Pine shall have authority to order the suspension
of any logging or timber harvesting operation if, in the Township's
opinion, conditions created by the spring thaw, adverse weather, or
any other cause makes soil erosion likely.
(12) Felling or skidding on or across any public road or right-of-way is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Township of
Pine or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever
is responsible for maintenance of such public road or right-of-way.
(13)Waste material shall be buried or removed to a point out of sight of
any public road or adjacent property. No tops or slash shall be left
within 50 feet of any public road, adjacent property, or private
roadway providing access to adjoining residential property.
(14)No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the logging or timber harvesting operation
without the written consent of the owner thereof.
(15) The Township of Pine may require that, prior to completion of the
logging or timber harvesting operation, a written report be filed
with it by the Consulting or State Forester indicating what
measures should be taken in order to properly restore the property.
(16) All litter resulting from a logging or timber-harvesting operation
shall be removed from the site before the operator vacates it.
(17) No tops or slash shall be left in a floodway or floodplain.
(18) Upon completion of the logging or timber harvesting operation, all
disturbed areas, including, but not limited to, the landing area(s),
and skid trails shall be revegetated pursuant to the erosion and
§ 84-51 SEWERS § 84-51
68:617
sedimentation control plans and the stormwater management
plans as approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's
Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Road maintenance, protection and bonding.
(1) The Township of Pine shall have the authority to suspend any
logging or timber harvesting operation should the Township
determine that conditions of the logging or timber harvesting
operation will cause or make likely damage to a Townshipmaintained
roadway.
(2) The permittee, logging operator, or a designated representative
shall provide an additional bond or other security, in an amount and
manner acceptable to the Township Engineer and Township
Solicitor, whenever a Township-maintained roadway is utilized to
access the logging or timber harvesting operation.
(3) The repair of roads, bridges and culverts damaged as a result of a
logging or timber harvesting operation shall be repaired to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(4) The permittee, logging operator, or a designated representative
shall not create a new or utilize an existing access onto a statemaintained
roadway without first showing proof that the access is
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of
Transportation.
(5) The permittee, logging operator, or a designated representative
shall not create a new or utilize an existing access onto a Townshipmaintained
roadway without first obtaining permission from the
Township for utilizing said access.
(6) Any disturbance along a Township-maintained roadway to create a
new or improve upon an existing access shall be reconstructed
back into its original condition as it was prior to the
commencement of the logging or timber harvesting operation.
F. Waivers and enforcement.
(1) The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine shall have the
right to waive any requirements or this article, except the
requirement to notify adjacent property owners. The Board of
Supervisors shall also have the right to add any additional
conditions, including additional bonding or other security for the
actual restoration of damaged roads, deemed necessary to protect
the health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the Township of
Pine.
(2) The Township's Zoning Officer (or equivalent otherwise titled
Township official), or his/her designee, shall be the enforcement
officer for this article.
§ 84-51 PINE CODE § 84-51
68:618
§ 84-52. Garden apartments in structures 6,000 square feet or less.
Garden apartments in structure 6,000 square feet or less may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
(3) The Township's Zoning Officer (or equivalent otherwise titled
Township official), or his/her designee, may enter the site of any
logging or timber harvesting operation before, during, or after
active logging to:
(a) Review the logging plan or any other required documents for
compliance with this article; and
(b) Inspect the operation for compliance with the logging plan and
other on-site requirements of these regulations.
G. Violations, penalties and remedies.
(1) Enforcement remedies.
(a) Upon finding that a timber harvesting operation is in violation
of any provision of the article, the Township of Pine shall issue
the logging operator and the landowner a written notice of
violation, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
regarding enforcement notices, describing each violation and
specifying a date by which corrective action must be taken.
(b) The Township of Pine may order the immediate suspension of
any logging or timber-harvesting operation and may institute
any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate
the violation of this article (as permitted by 53 P.S. § 10617)
upon finding that (1) corrective action has not been taken by
the date specified in a notice of violation; (2) the operation is
proceeding without a logging plan; or (3) the operation is
causing an immediate environmental risk.
(c) Suspension orders shall be in writing, shall be issued to the
logging operator and the landowner, and shall remain in effect
until the logging operation is brought into compliance with this
article or other applicable statutes or regulations.
(2) Penalties.
(a) Any logging operator or landowner who violates any provision
of this section; refuses to allow a Township enforcement officer
access to a harvest site pursuant to this section; or who fails to
comply with a notice of violation or suspension order issued
pursuant to this section is guilty of a summary offense and
upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, for each separate offense.
(b) Each day of continued violation of any provision of this section
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 84-51 SEWERS § 84-52
68:619
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant.
§ 84-53. Garden apartments (new developments).
Garden apartments (new developments) may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant:
A. Infill garden apartments shall be consistent in size, architecture, and
character with neighboring structures.
B. No garden apartment shall have a height greater than three habitable
stories or 45 feet.
C. A visual structural break in facade shall be provided between every
garden apartment dwelling unit to eliminate long flat walls.
D. Garages shall not front on arterial or collector roads.
E. Off-street parking areas.
(1) Parking spaces shall be provided for a minimum of two vehicles per
dwelling unit.
(2) At least one parking space per unit shall be enclosed within the
principal building or an accessory building.
F. Balconies, if provided, shall not extend into any required yard and shall
not extend more than eight feet from the face of any principal building.
G. Chimneys, spires, tanks, or similar architectural projections may
exceed the prescribed height by not more than 25%.
A. The minimum gross land area of the development site shall be 10 acres.
B. All new garden apartment developments shall have a minimum of two
vehicular entrances if over 50 units are proposed.
C. The maximum density (dwelling units per acre) shall be as follows:
(1) For garden apartments: eight units per gross acre.
D. Building height.
(1) No garden apartment shall have a height greater than three
habitable stories or 45 feet.
(2) Principal buildings having dwelling units above the second story
shall be provided with elevators.
E. Facades.
(1) Alternating groups of three facades may have identical setbacks.
§ 84-52 PINE CODE § 84-53
68:620
(2) No building shall have a length or a width greater than 300 feet.
(3) A visual structural break in facade shall be provided between every
garden apartment dwelling unit to eliminate long flat walls.
(4) The requirements determining the spacing of buildings shall be
flexible so as to encourage imaginative site design. The spaces
between buildings shall be of sufficient size to guarantee adequate
light, air, and emergency access. However, the minimum space
permitted between any two buildings shall be 20 feet.
(5) Garages shall not front on arterial or collector roads.
F. Common open space.
(1) A minimum of 15% of the land area of the development site shall be
designated as common open space. The calculation of such
common open space shall specifically not include streets, parking,
rights-of-way, detention ponds, or access to detention ponds. Any
land lying within 15 feet of any building shall also not be
considered part of the required common open space.
(2) The common open space shall conform to the provisions of § 84-119
of this chapter and shall contain the park and recreation facilities
mandated therein.
G. Off-street parking areas.
(1) Parking spaces shall be provided for a minimum of two vehicles per
dwelling unit.
(2) A minimum of 40% of such required parking shall be provided in
enclosed structures.
H. Streetlights.
(1) Streetlights shall be required to be provided along all streets and
access drives within the development and in all off-street parking
areas in accordance with § 84-116.
(2) Such streetlights shall not exceed 15 feet in height and the lighting
levels shall not exceed the levels prescribed in § 84-112.
(3) The maximum wattage permitted using metal halide as a source
shall be 150 watts.
I. Balconies, if provided, shall not extend into any required yard and shall
not extend more than eight feet from the face of any principal building.
J. Chimneys, spires, tanks, or similar architectural projections may
exceed the prescribed height by not more than 25%.
K. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 84-111 of this chapter along any residential use or district.
§ 84-53 SEWERS § 84-54
68:621
§ 84-54. Group care facility.
Group care facilities may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
§ 84-55. Heliport.
Heliports may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by the
applicant:
A. The minimum area and bulk regulations for a group care facility shall
be the same as those required for all uses in the district in which the
facility is located.
B. A group care facility shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access
to an arterial or collector road.
C. No group care facility shall be established within 1,000 feet of another
group care facility.
D. Adequate provisions shall be made for access for emergency medical
and fire vehicles.
E. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the
sponsoring agency.
F. Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided on
the lot for the residents consistent with their need, and the area shall be
secured by a fence with a self-latching gate.
G. Where applicable, certification or licensing by the sponsoring agency
shall be a prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, and a
copy of an annual report with evidence of continuing certification shall
be submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of each year.
A. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector, Zoning Officer and any other official of the Township of Pine
charged with the enforcement of the Township of Pine ordinances.
B. In determining whether or not to grant permits for applications filed
under this section, the Township Planning Commission will determine
whether or not the proposed location is properly zoned for heliports.
Heliports shall only be permitted within the following zoning districts:
(1) C-1 Community Service Center.
C. Takeoff and landing.
(1) It shall be unlawful to take off or land a helicopter anywhere within
the Township of Pine except at a site for which an approval or
§ 84-54 PINE CODE § 84-55
68:622
permit has been issued by the Township and which site is in
compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances,
except for such landings or takeoffs in connection with law
enforcement purposes, medical transportation emergencies or
other emergencies.
(2) All such landings or takeoffs in connection with law enforcement
purposes, medical transportation emergencies or other
emergencies shall be permitted only in strict conformity with the
provisions for such landings or takeoffs set forth herein.
(3) All such landings and takeoffs by helicopters in connection with law
enforcement purposes, medical transportation emergencies or
other emergencies shall occur only at Pine-Richland Middle/High
School: latitude: 40:35.9; longitude: 80:02.2; or Township of Pine
Community Park: latitude: 40:36.1; longitude: 80:03.2, which two
locations shall serve as the Township's only predesignated
emergency landing zones.
(4) If extreme conditions exist which require an exception to the
prohibition of landings and takeoffs at locations other than such
predesignated emergency landing zones, an exception can be made
with the concurrence of any on-scene representatives (official in
charge) of the Police Department serving the Township of Pine, the
Wexford Volunteer Fire Company, the McCandless-Franklin Park
Ambulance Authority, or the Township's Emergency Management
Coordinator.
(5) All landings and takeoffs made in connection with law enforcement
purposes, medical transportation emergencies, or other
emergencies, whether made at the Township's predesignated
emergency landing zones or elsewhere, shall only be made subject
to the following conditions:
(a) Prior to any landings or takeoffs, the operator of the helicopter
shall contact the 911 Dispatch Center and shall request the
dispatch of emergency services personnel to the landing/
takeoff site, as per the standard operating procedures
established by the above-referenced emergency services
agencies for helicopter landings/takeoffs. The 911 Dispatch
Center shall assign an incident number to and shall record the
time of all transmissions in connection with the landing/
takeoff. Prior to any landing/takeoff, the operator of the
helicopter shall make radio contact with an official in charge
from one of the above-referenced emergency services agencies
and shall coordinate and receive clearance for such landing/
takeoff. Such clearance shall then be communicated to the 911
Dispatch Center by the official in charge.
(b) No landings/takeoffs shall take place without prior
acknowledgement and ground coordination by at least one of
§ 84-55 SEWERS § 84-55
68:623
the aforementioned officials in charge at the site of the
landing/takeoff.
(c) Following any such landing/takeoff, when so requested by the
official in charge, the operator of any helicopter involved
therein shall file a written incident report providing details of
the events surrounding the landing/takeoff and shall include a
description of the emergency conditions which necessitated
such landing/takeoff. Such written incident report shall be filed
with each of the aforementioned agencies within eight hours of
each such landing/takeoff and may be sent via facsimile
communication.
(d) Should such landing/takeoff subsequently be determined by
the Township of Pine to have not been a legitimate emergency,
or to have not been made in strict conformity with all
procedures set forth herein, then, in the sole discretion of the
Township of Pine, all costs and expenses associated with the
involvement and use of personnel and equipment of the Police
Department serving the Township of Pine, the Wexford
Volunteer Fire Company, the McCandless-Franklin Park
Ambulance Authority, or the Township of Pine (including but
not limited to its Emergency Management Coordinator) shall
be itemized by such respective agencies, shall be assessed
against the operator of the helicopter involved, and shall be
submitted to and required to be paid in full by such operator.
The provisions of this subsection relating to assessment and
payment of costs and expenses shall not be the exclusive
remedy of the Township of Pine and shall be in addition to any
other appropriate action or remedy, civil or criminal,
applicable to such event or conduct associated therewith.
D. Application and issuance of permits.
(1) Prior to establishing or operating a heliport within the Township of
Pine, any such operator must first apply for and receive a permit
from the Township of Pine.
(2) Applications for permits to operate a heliport shall be filed with the
Manager of the Township, who shall refer the application to the
Township Planning Commission for review and recommendation
prior to approval of the governing body.
(a) In connection with its review of the application, the Township
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application.
(b) Public notice, as defined herein, of such hearing shall be given.
(c) In addition, notice shall also be given in any other manner
deemed appropriate by the Township Planning Commission.
§ 84-55 PINE CODE § 84-55
68:624
(d) The costs of such public notice shall be paid by the applicant.
(e) The governing body may also hold a public hearing, pursuant
to public notice (given and paid for by the applicant as
previously described in this subsection), in connection with its
review of the application.
(3) Applications for a permit to operate a heliport must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(a) The type and characteristics of helicopters to be used and
proposed frequency of operation.
(b) A land development plan must be submitted and drawn to a
scale of no more than one inch equaling 200 feet and must
show the terrain elevation for at least 800 feet in all directions
from the center limits of the landing of the proposed heliport.
Such plan must also designate any obstructions, listing their
height in feet, within the eight-hundred-foot radius and must
designate the approach-departure path corridors.
(c) The land development plan shall also show the relationship of
the heliport to the lot lines, streets and zoning lines; the
location of all buildings or all areas to be used for passenger or
cargo operations, maintenance or overhaul facilities, fueling,
storage and hanger or tie-down facilities. All off-street parking,
access drives, landscaped areas and traffic patterns shall also
be shown.
(d) Any such other information as may be deemed required by the
Township Manager or Township Planning Commission.
(e) The location must have been inspected and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as having
complied with the dictates of the Aviation Code, as codified at
74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq. The site and operations are in full
compliance with the airport rating and licensing regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Title 67,
471.6, Heliport Rating.
(f) All safety and fire-protection facilities must have been installed
in accordance with applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances, with consideration having been given to any
recommendations made by Township officials having
qualifications concerning such matters.
E. Any permit issued under this section shall be revoked if any of the
following occur:
(1) The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Bureau of Aviation
revokes the license or refuses to relicense the location after one of
its periodic inspections.
§ 84-55 SEWERS § 84-55
68:625
§ 84-56. Hospitals.
Hospitals, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-57. Indoor theaters.
§ 84-58. Kennels. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 348]
(2) The Federal Aviation Administration withdraws or revokes its
approval or clearances for the location.
(3) The Township has notified the operator and permittee of the
location in writing that the site is no longer in compliance with the
conditions of approval or applicable laws or ordinances of the
Township of Pine.
F. When the approval or permit to operate the heliport has been revoked,
the owner, lessee and/or applicant shall immediately close the location
to all helicopter traffic and operation by publishing such notices and
warnings as necessary to accomplish such purpose.
A. The minimum site area required for a hospital shall be five acres.
B. All hospitals shall be licensed by the commonwealth.
C. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
D. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
E. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
F. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the Volunteer Fire
Company for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
G. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 84-111 of this chapter.
H. A private use helipad, if proposed as part of the hospital, shall meet the
standards of § 84-55 of this chapter.
I. The site shall be served by a collector road or arterial road.
A. Adequate parking shall be provided in accordance with § 84-116.
B. Indoor theaters shall only be located within structures that are fully
equipped with sprinklers and meet or exceed all Building and Fire Code
requirements.
C. Indoor theaters shall not include adult-oriented establishments.
§ 84-55 PINE CODE § 84-58
68:626
A. Kennels (excluding indoor kennels, as such are defined in Article II,
§ 84-10 hereof, which indoor kennels shall be regulated by Subsection B
of this section) shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall
existing structures be occupied until final land development plan
review has been completed and permits have been issued by all
government agencies involved.
(2) No residential use may be established on any lot used as a kennel.
(3) Shelters for the housing of animals shall not be located closer than
100 feet to any lot line.
(4) Outdoor areas utilized by or for animals shall not be located closer
than a minimum of 100 feet to any lot line.
(5) A bufferyard shall be required to be installed and maintained along
all property boundary lines; such bufferyards shall meet all
standards for a major separation bufferyard, as such are set forth in
Article IV, § 84-111 of this chapter.
(6) Licensure by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ongoing
compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Allegheny County Health Department [including but not limited to
those relating to maximum capacity, minimum space per animal,
enclosure (cage) specifications, and noise and odor control
requirements].
(7) Appropriate provisions for the proper disposal of animal waste
shall be demonstrated and maintained. Under no circumstances
shall animal waste be placed into the public sewer system; best
management practices shall be employed to provide for the
removal and disposal of animal waste.
(8) The Township shall be permitted to conduct periodic inspections of
the kennel's site to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or any additional, specific conditions of land development
approval.
B. Indoor kennels shall be the subject to the following requirements:
(1) Location.
(a) Indoor kennels shall only be allowed (and only as a conditional
use) within those areas located in the C-1 Community Service
Center District which are not part of the Traditional Village
Overlay District (TVO), or not part of an approved Town Center
Planned Residential Development (TC-PRD).
(b) Indoor kennels may be allowed in existing or newly
constructed buildings, used either exclusively for an indoor
§ 84-58 SEWERS § 84-58
68:627
kennel or as a part of a multitenant building whose thenestablished
tenant(s) (at the time of the establishment of the
indoor kennel) may include the following uses:
[1] Animal day care;
[2] Animal hospital;
[3] Commercial or public parking garage;
[4] Essential facility;
[5] Vacant tenant space;
[6] Veterinary service;
[7] Warehouse.
(c) Indoor kennels shall not be allowed in multitenant buildings
whose then-established tenants (at the time of the
establishment of the indoor kennel) include, but are not limited
to, the following uses:
[1] Day-care center;
[2] Hospital;
[3] Life care community;
[4] Medical clinic;
[5] Nursing home;
[6] Offices;
[7] Places of worship;
[8] Public and semipublic uses;
[9] Residential use;
[10] Restaurants;
[11] Retail sales and services;
[12] Any other use(s) deemed to be incompatible with that of an
indoor kennel, as such is determined by the Township's
Board of Supervisors.
(2) No site preparation, construction, or occupancy shall occur until
any required permits have been issued for such activities by all
governmental agencies involved.
(3) No outdoor area(s) shall be permitted for the use of animals, and all
shelters for animals shall be completely indoors.
§ 84-58 PINE CODE § 84-58
68:628
§ 84-59. Life care community.
Life care communities, where permitted as a conditional use, may be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding
that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
(4) The portion of the building or structure used to house animals
(including any such portions which are located below grade level)
shall be equipped with code-approved, nontoxic noise-dampening
material (which may include acoustic tile) to minimize noise impact
upon adjacent uses or properties.
(5) Licensure by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ongoing
compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the
Allegheny County Health Department [including but not limited to
those relating to maximum capacity, minimum space per animal,
enclosure (cage) specifications, and noise and odor control
requirements].
(6) Appropriate provisions for the proper disposal of animal waste
shall be demonstrated and maintained. Under no circumstances
shall animal waste be placed into the public sewer system; best
management practices shall be employed to provide for the
removal and disposal of animal waste.
(7) The Township shall be permitted to conduct periodic inspections of
the indoor kennel's site to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or any additional, specific conditions of use approval.
A. Life care communities may be located on property which consists of one
or more lots and contains a minimum of five acres. If more than one lot
or parcel is used, they must be contiguous.
B. Building design and location shall permit ready accessibility by
emergency vehicles.
C. Single-family dwellings, detached and attached, multifamily and garden
apartments may be proposed in a life care community, provided that the
gross site density shall not exceed 10 units per acre.
D. Ancillary uses, such as banks, deli, medical offices, may be authorized
as part of any life care community which proposes 100 or more dwelling
units, provided that they are primarily for use by the residents, are
located within a residential building and do not constitute more than
15% of the total floor area devoted to residential use on the site.
E. The life care community may include congregate dining facilities, a
library, social hall, exercise room, indoor swimming pool, arts and crafts
room and similar accessory uses for the residents either within a
residential building or in an accessory structure.
§ 84-58 SEWERS § 84-59
68:629
§ 84-60. Light manufacturing, research and testing.
Light manufacturing, research and testing in structures 6,000 square feet
or less, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-61. Medical clinic.
F. If a nursing home is proposed as part of the life care community, the
proposed use shall be subject to the standards and criteria of § 84-69 of
this chapter.
G. All mechanical equipment shall be screened from the view of adjoining
properties in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
H. Off-street parking requirements may be reduced upon satisfactory
demonstration by the applicant that fewer than the number of parking
spaces required by § 84-116 will be required for the proposed
community.
A. No curb cuts or driveways that provide access to or from a residential
street shall be used or established.
B. No curb cuts or driveways shall be located within 150 feet of any
residential district boundary line.
C. No trucks, tractors or trailers shall be maneuvered, parked, fueled,
stored, loaded or unloaded within 100 feet of any residential district.
D. No vehicles or equipment accessory thereto shall operate engines or
motors for refrigeration or other purposes between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day unless parked more than 150 feet
from any residential district.
E. The applicant shall submit an analysis of the traffic impact of the
proposed development that addresses the following:
(1) Projections of required parking;
(2) On-site-generated and off-site traffic to be expected on streets in
the vicinity upon completion of the proposed development;
(3) Recommendations for techniques or improvements to deal with any
projected traffic congestion or conflicts.
A. A medical clinic shall not include an alcohol rehabilitation clinic or a
methadone treatment facility.
B. The minimum site area required for a medical clinic shall be one acre.
C. All medical clinics shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 84-59 PINE CODE § 84-61
68:630
§ 84-62. Methadone treatment facility.
A methadone treatment facility may be authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have
been established by the applicant:
D. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
E. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
F. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
G. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the Volunteer Fire
Company for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
H. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 84-111 of this chapter.
A. A methadone treatment facility shall have frontage on and direct access
to State Route 19.
B. For any building (or portion there of) which is proposed to contain a
methadone treatment facility, the lot upon which such building (or
portion thereof) sits shall not be located closer than 500 feet (or the
then current Pennsylvania statutory-provided distance, which ever is
greater) to a lot utilized for an existing school, public playground,
public park, residential housing area, residential lot, single-family
dwelling, child care facility, church, meeting house or other actual place
of regularly scheduled religious worship established prior to the
proposed methadone treatment.
C. Not withstanding Subsection B above, a methadone treatment facility
may be established and operated closer than 500 feet (or the then
current Pennsylvania statutory-provided distance, which ever is
greater) to a lot utilized for an existing school, public playground,
public park, residential housing area, residential lot, single-family
dwelling, child care facility, church, meeting house or other actual place
of regularly scheduled religious worship established prior to the
proposed methadone treatment, if, by majority vote, the governing body
approves a use for said facility at such location. At least 14 days prior to
any such vote by the governing body, one or more public hearings
regarding the proposed methadone treatment facility location shall be
held within the municipality pursuant to public notice. All owners of
real property located within 500 feet of the proposed location shall be
provided written notice of said public hearing(s) at least 30 days prior
to said public hearing(s) occurring.
D. All buildings proposed to contain a methadone treatment facility shall
fully comply with the requirements of the then current edition of the
International Building Code (IBC), as adopted by the Township of Pine.
§ 84-61 SEWERS § 84-62
68:631
§ 84-63. Mixed use.
When any use within a mixed-use development is permitted as a conditional
use, the use may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by the
applicant:
E. In addition to the otherwise required number of parking spaces
specified by § 84-116 of this chapter for the usage of the building
proposed for a methadone treatment facility, additional parking shall be
required specifically for the methadone treatment facility at a rate of
one additional parking space for each 200 feet of area devoted to the
methadone treatment facility.
F. Each building or portion thereof proposed for use as a methadone
treatment facility shall have a separate and distinct entrance utilized
solely for direct entrance into the methadone treatment facility. Such
separate and distinct entrance shall face State Route 19. Access to the
methadone treatment facility shall not be permitted via a shared
building entrance or from a shared interior corridor within the building
in which it is located.
G. Signage for the methadone treatment facility shall fully comply with
§ 84-121, which establishes sign regulations for the State Route 19
Corridor.
A. Except where specifically authorized under provisions of this chapter,
mixed uses are prohibited.
B. Mixed uses in the B-1 Zoning District shall be limited to structure 6,000
square feet or less, and a residential density of four units/acre.
C. Portions of buildings designated for commercial purposes shall not be
used for dwelling purposes.
D. Portions of buildings designated for dwelling purposes shall not be used
for commercial purposes.
E. Dwelling units in any R District shall not be converted or altered to
allow other uses.
F. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of a portion of the
building or structure as living quarters for caretakers or attendants of
places of worship or institutions where such uses are authorized in any
zoning district.
G. Mixed-uses in the C-1 Zoning District shall not exceed a residential
density of six units/acre.
§ 84-62 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:632
§ 84-64. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any
mobile home park within the limits of the Township of Pine unless he
holds a valid permit issued by the Allegheny County Health Department
in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or
extension proposed and also a permit issued by the Township of Pine
hereunder.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, lease, rent, occupy, or have
occupied any mobile home that has not been inspected and approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Industrialized and Mobile Housing. All units that have been inspected
and approved shall bear the insignia of the Department of Community
Affairs.
C. Applications.
(1) All applications for permits shall be made by the owner of the
mobile home park or his authorized representative in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Allegheny County Health
Department.
(2) An application shall be filed with the Township Planning
Commission, using a form furnished by said Commission, for a
permit to operate a mobile home park in the Township.
(a) Upon receipt of such application, the Planning Commission
shall inspect the applicant's plans and proposed park to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Following approval by the Allegheny County Health
Department, the Planning Commission shall report its findings
and recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for a final
decision.
(c) If the Board of Supervisors approves the mobile home park, the
applicant shall be issued a mobile home park permit, which
shall be valid until January 31 of the next year.
(d) Renewal permits for a like period shall be issued by the
Township Zoning Officer upon furnishing proof by the
applicant that his park continues to meet the standards
prescribed by the Allegheny County Health Department and
this chapter.
(e) When the application is refused, the decision shall specify
grounds for refusal by citing provisions relied upon.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:633
D. Mobile home park registration.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park
within the limits of the Township unless a certificate of registration
is issued annually by the Allegheny County Health Department in
the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. Proof of
such registration shall be furnished the Township Zoning Officer by
no later than February 1 of each year.
(2) Every person holding a certificate shall file notice, in writing, with
the Allegheny County Health Department and the Township Zoning
Officer within 10 days after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of all or part of his interest in or control of any
mobile home park. If the certificate of registration is transferred by
the Allegheny County Health Department, proof of such transfer
shall be furnished the Township Zoning Officer forthwith.
(3) Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is
determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation
of any provision of this chapter, the Township Zoning Officer shall
give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the certificate was
issued, advising him that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice,
but not to exceed 30 days, the license to operate in the Township
shall be suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home
park shall be inspected, and, if such conditions or practices have
not been corrected and the licensee has not requested a hearing,
the Township Zoning Officer shall suspend the license and give
notice, in writing, of such suspension to the person to whom the
certificate is issued.
E. Mobile home inspections.
(1) A representative of the Township shall inspect a mobile home park
at reasonable intervals, but not to exceed once every 90 days, and
at reasonable times to determine compliance with this chapter.
Following each inspection by the Township representative, a report
of findings shall be made at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The Township Inspector shall also inspect each new mobile home
unit immediately after installation to ensure compliance with all
applicable regulations. Certificates of occupancy for each mobile
home unit shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit and shall be issued by the Zoning Officer within 10
days after the installation of such unit shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A record of all
certificates shall be maintained by the Township Supervisors, and
copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person who has a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the unit affected. No mobile
home shall be occupied without such a permit.
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:634
(3) The Township Zoning Officer is hereby designated as the person to
make such inspections. Another or additional inspectors may also
be authorized to make inspections or additional inspections at the
discretion of the Township Supervisors.
(4) The Township Zoning Officer may, in his discretion, give notice for
violations of this chapter and issue notice thereof, without express
authority from the Township Supervisors in each instance.
F. Area and location standards.
(1) A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at least 10
contiguous acres of land.
(2) The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the
following minimum requirements:
(a) The location shall be free from adverse influence from swamps,
marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
(b) The location shall not be subject to flooding.
(c) The location shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance,
such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter,
radiation, heat, odor or glare.
(d) The location shall be in an area appropriately zoned for such
use.
(3) All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park
property line or public street right-of-way, which is not in the
mobile home park.
(4) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual
mobile home, including accessory structures attached thereto, and
adjoining pavement of a park street or common parking area or
other common areas and structures.
(5) The perimeter of a mobile home park shall be bordered on all sides
by a planted strip of at least 15 feet width or of such greater width
which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine, may be necessary for the
adequate protection of adjoining premises and highways. The plant
material shall have initially a height and compactness of not less
than 50% of the ultimately desired height and compactness, which
shall be determined in each case separately by the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors on the basis of site location,
adjacent land areas, topography and other appropriate
considerations. The park management is responsible for
maintaining this planted strip is such a way as to achieve the
purpose of providing a screening between the mobile home park
and adjacent properties.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:635
(6) Erection and placement of mobile homes.
(a) Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from
other buildings and structures by at least 30 feet on all sides.
(b) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be
erected around the entire base of each mobile home. Such
enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay
and deterioration of the structure and shall be installed at the
same time that the mobile home unit is installed.
(c) Every mobile home lot shall be clearly defined on the ground
by permanent markers. There shall be posted and maintained
in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to
the number of each lot as shown on the plot plan.
(d) Each mobile home shall be installed upon an adequate, frostfree
foundation for placement and tie-down to secure the
structure against uplift, sliding, rotation, and overturning. The
foundation shall not heave, shift, or settle under weight due to
frost action, inadequate drainage, or other forces. The
foundation shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs, such
as cast-in-place concrete dead men, eyelets embedded in the
foundation or runways, screw anchors, arrowhead anchors or
other devices securing the stability of the mobile home.
Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner
of the foundation.
G. Site drawings.
(1) The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner and
in such a way as to protect adjacent property.
(2) Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water
capable of breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be
eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall
not be deposited upon the ground surface in any park of a mobile
home park.
H. Soil and ground cover.
(1) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and emanation of dust during dry weather. All unpaved areas
within the mobile home park shall be landscaped subject to the
approvals of the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors of
the Township. Planting areas and landscaping shall conform to
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:636
reasonably minimum standards as required by the Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors. Lot areas not covered
by building, sidewalks or paving shall be seeded with grass or other
appropriate ground cover material compatible with the landscape
and natural amenities for the district.
(2) Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which
is poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects, or other pests
harmful to man.
I. Nonresidential use of park.
(1) No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well
being of park residents and for the management and maintenance
of the park. Provision for such nonresidential uses shall be
indicated on the plan submitted with the permit application.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting
the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home lot and
connected to utilities, but the sale of a mobile home lot to an
individual by the mobile home park owner is prohibited.
J. Streets and walkways.
(1) Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access shall be
provided from abutting public streets or roads.
(2) All streets and walks, whether public or private, shall conform to
the requirements of the Township Subdivision of Land
Ordinance,113 except that the right-of-way may be 40 feet in width.
(3) No public street access from individual lots shall be permitted. All
vehicular accessways from mobile home lots, parking areas and
any on-site facilities serving the mobile home park shall intersect
with interior street systems within the mobile home park.
(4) All parks shall provide safe, convenient all-season pedestrian
walkways of three feet minimum width, which are durable and
convenient to maintain, from the entrance of each mobile home
entrance to the parking area of that lot and to the street.
K. Off-street parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided by a paved area of 20 feet by 20
feet in front of each mobile home foundation, paved with four-inchthick
asphalt plant mix or equivalent.
(2) No parking shall be permitted on the park street right-of-way.
L. Construction of lots.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:637
(1) Mobile home lots within the park shall each have a minimum gross
area of 5,000 square feet, and each lot shall have a maximum of one
mobile home thereon.
(2) Each mobile home lot shall be improved to provide an adequate
foundation for the placement of the mobile home and in such
position as to allow a minimum of 25 feet between the mobile home
and the right-of-way of the park street, which serves the lot.
M. Recreation areas.
(1) A recreational area, or areas, with suitable facilities shall be
maintained within the park for the use of all park residents.
(2) At least 5% of the gross area of the park shall be developed for
recreational purposes. Such areas shall be used exclusively for
playground purposes and be located as to be free of traffic and
other hazards.
(3) Playground areas shall be centrally located in relation to their
service area.
N. Regulations for mobile home units.
(1) Each mobile home shall provide a flush toilet, bathtub or shower
and lavatory which shall be contained in a separate private room
within the mobile home unit.
(2) No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any
mobile home as an addition to such home, nor shall any accessory
structure be permitted on any lot or in any mobile home park,
except those accessory structures required and approved by these
regulations. The prohibition herein against any addition or
accessory to a mobile home shall not apply to a canopy or awning
designed for use with a mobile home.
O. Water supply.
(1) An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided for mobile
homes, service buildings, and other accessory facilities as required
by this chapter. Where a public water supply system of satisfactory
quantity, quality, and pressure is available, connection shall be
made thereto, and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a
satisfactory public water supply system is not available, the
development of a private water supply system shall be approved by
the Department of Environmental Resources and the Allegheny
County Health Department or other authorities having jurisdiction.
(2) An approved water supply shall be the source of the water in each
mobile home park and the supply, pressure and distribution system
shall be sufficient to sustain and operate the facilities and
equipment of the Township's fire protection system.
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:638
(3) Water supply shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection and the Allegheny County
Health Department.
P. Water storage facilities.
(1) All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and
constructed of impervious material.
(2) Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively
screened.
(3) Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to
prevent the entrance of contaminated material.
(4) Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air
gap.
Q. Water distribution system.
(1) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
(2) The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the
hazards of backflow or back-siphonage.
(3) The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a
pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square inch, under normal
operating conditions, at service buildings and other locations
requiring potable water supply.
R. Individual water riser pipes and connections.
(1) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring
the shortest possible water connection and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(2) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 1/2
inch and shall terminate at least four inches above the ground
surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves, and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of the ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
(4) A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water
riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste
valves are prohibited unless their type of manufacturer and their
method of installation are approved.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:639
S. Sewerage system.
(1) An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all
parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes,
service buildings, and other accessory facilities.
(2) Such system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the Department of Environmental Protection and
all other state, county and local health regulations.
T. Individual sewer connections.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a three-inchdiameter
sewer riser pipe. The sewer rise pipe shall be so located
on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain
outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(2) The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not
less than three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be
at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
(3) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent, and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
(4) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend
at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
U. Sewer lines.
(1) All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of at least three feet in
depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and
shall be separated from the park water supply system.
(2) All sewer lines shall be constructed of materials installed in a
manner that is in accordance with the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Allegheny County Health
Department and shall have watertight joints.
V. Electrical system.
(1) Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances and shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the local electric
power company's specifications, as well as applicable state and
local codes regulating such systems.
(2) Power lines shall be located underground.
(3) All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18
inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and
specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall be
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:640
located not less than one-foot radial distance from water, sewer,
gas, or communications lines.
(4) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment. The
minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 100
amperes.
(5) All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and
all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved
grounding conductor run with branch circuit conductors of other
approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile
homes or other equipment.
W. Streetlighting. All mobile home parks shall be furnished with lighting
units so spaced and equipped with luminaires placed at such mounting
heights as will provide adequate levels of illumination for the safe
movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night, which shall not be less
than an average 0.4 footcandle on each street.
X. Telephone system. A telephone distribution system shall also be
installed with connection to each mobile home lot, in accordance with
telephone company regulations.
Y. Service buildings. The requirements of this section shall apply to
service buildings, recreational buildings and other community service
facilities when constructed, such as:
(1) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
(2) Laundry facilities; and
(3) Indoor recreation areas.
Z. Structural requirements.
(1) All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from
damage by reason of ordinary uses, decay, corrosion, termites, and
other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent
entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
(2) All buildings shall have:
(a) Sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male
and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions in lavatories
and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moistureresistant
material.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:641
(b) At least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors.
The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each
required room shall be not less than 10% of the floor area.
(c) At least one window, which can be easily opened, or a
mechanical device that will adequately ventilate the room.
(d) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped
with self-closing doors.
AA. Service buildings. All service buildings and other park service facilities
and grounds shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition free from
any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public
or constitute a nuisance or a fire hazard.
BB. Storage, collection and disposal. It shall be the responsibility of the
operator of the park to contract for the collection of refuse. The
storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so conducted as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accidents or fire hazards or air pollution and shall
comply with the Allegheny County Health Department and all local
regulations governing mobile home parks.
CC. Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be
maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation.
Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and
rodents shall conform to the requirements of the Allegheny County
Health Department regulations governing mobile home parks.
DD. Fuel supply.
(1) Natural gas piping systems, when installed in mobile home parks,
shall be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering
practices and the standards and regulations of the gas company.
(2) Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The
outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the cutlet is not in use.
(3) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes,
service buildings or other structures, when installed, shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction, including the National Fire Protection
Association and the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., National Fire Prevention Code/1987, or as
amended. These rules and regulations shall also include the
following:
(a) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:642
(b) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home
and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
(c) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes
shall be well supported and protected against mechanical
injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall
not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in
mobile homes.
(d) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 US gallons' gross
capacity shall be securely, but not necessarily permanently,
fastened to prevent accidental overturning.
(e) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home,
or any other structure unless such installations are specially
approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
(4) Installation of fuel oil supply system.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction, including the National Fire
Protection Association.
(b) All piping from outside fuel-storage tanks or cylinders to
mobile homes shall be securely, but not necessarily
permanently, fastened in place.
(c) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(5) Storage tanks.
(a) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and
shall not be less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(b) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be
protected against physical damage.
EE. Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the
fire prevention authority shall be kept in public service buildings under
park control, and a sufficient number shall be maintained throughout
the park in readily accessible and well-marked positions. All fire
extinguishers shall be maintained in good working condition.
FF. Fire protection. The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and
subsequent editions issued thereafter.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:643
GG. Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) The water supply source shall include a four-and-one-half-inch
foot valve, two two-and-one-half-inch hose ports, and one
pumper port. The water supply source shall be connected to a
minimum six-inch lateral equipped with gate valves. The main
shall also be a minimum of six inches.
(b) Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall
deliver at least 500 gallons of water per minute with a residual
pressure of 20 pounds per square inch at the highest point in
the park.
(c) Fire hydrants shall be located within 600 feet of every mobile
home, service building or other structure in the park and shall
be installed in accordance with the Township's specifications.
HH. Litter. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and
other flammable materials.
II. Management responsibilities.
(1) The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and
equipment in good repair and in a clean, safe, and sanitary
condition.
(2) The park management shall supervise the placement of each
mobile home on its mobile home lot, which includes securing its
stability and installing all utility connections and shall notify the
Township Zoning Officer immediately after the installation of each
new mobile home unit.
(3) The park management shall give the health officer free access to all
mobile home lots, service buildings and other community service
facilities for the purpose of inspection.
(4) The management shall maintain a register for the past two years
containing the names of all park occupants, along with the date of
arrival and departure. Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park. The management shall
notify the appropriate officer, in accordance with state and local
taxation laws, of the arrival and departure of each mobile home or
residential occupants thereof.
(5) No lot in any mobile home park shall be rented for a period of less
than 90 days.
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-64
68:644
(6) The owner of the mobile home park shall be responsible and shall
provide for all maintenance of grounds, including individual lots
and common open spaces, structures and roadways and pedestrian
ways within the park.
JJ. Removal of mobile homes. No mobile home in a mobile home park shall
be removed from the Township without first obtaining a permit from the
Township Tax Collector and the Township Wage Tax Collector. The
former permit shall be issued upon payment of a fee as set by the
current Township of Pine fee schedule114 and real estate taxes assessed
against the home and unpaid at time the permit is requested, and the
latter shall be free of charge upon payment of wage taxes due and
unpaid at time the permit is requested.
KK. Notice of violations. Whenever the Township Zoning Officer determines
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person to whom the permit or certificate was issued, as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance in accordance
with the requirements of Section 616.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code;115
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy
thereof has been served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this commonwealth; and
(4) Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof,
and with the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
LL. Hearing procedures.
(1) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or
of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Zoning Hearing
Board, provided that such person shall file in the office of the
municipal authority, an application requesting such hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof within 10
days after the notice was served.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10616.1.
§ 84-64 SEWERS § 84-64
68:645
§ 84-65. Mortuary.
Mortuaries may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by the
applicant:
§ 84-66. Motels and hotels.
Motels and hotels shall be subject to the following requirements:
(2) The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice and the suspension.
(3) Upon receipt of such application, the Board shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the applicant written notice
thereof.
(4) At such hearing, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice should be modified or
withdrawn.
(5) The hearing shall be commenced not later than 60 days after the
day on which the application was filed, provided that, upon receipt
of a written request from the applicant, the Board may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such sixty-day
period when, in its judgment, the applicant has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement.
(6) A record of all proceedings shall be made, and a fee shall be
charged the applicant to cover costs as permitted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. The minimum site area shall be one acre.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
street or collector street.
C. Adequate area shall be provided on the site for vehicles to form a line
and queue on the property.
D. Entrances, exits, and waiting lanes shall be adequately indicated by
pavement markings.
A. No motel and hotel shall have a lot area less than 50,000 square feet or
a lot area per sleeping unit of less than 1,000 square feet.
B. Front, side and rear yards of a motel and hotel shall be permanently
landscaped and maintained in good condition.
C. Each motel or hotel sleeping unit shall have a minimum floor area of
400 square feet.
§ 84-64 PINE CODE § 84-67
68:646
§ 84-67. No-impact home-based business.
A no-impact home-based businesses may be authorized by the Zoning
Officer where permitted as a use secondary to a dwelling unit upon a finding
that compliance with the following specific criteria have been established
by the applicant. Where a no-impact home based business is permitted as
a conditional use, it may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
A. No more than 15% or 350 square feet of the floor area of the dwelling
units, whichever is less, shall be devoted to the no-impact home-based
business.
B. No more than one person, other than residents of the dwelling or
members of the immediate family, shall be employed.
C. No stock-in-trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises.
D. A no-impact home-based business shall not be conducted in any
accessory structure.
E. There shall be no outdoor storage of commercial vehicles, equipment,
or materials used in the no-impact home-based business.
F. Not more than one vehicle used in commerce shall be permitted in
connection with any no-impact home-based business and any such
vehicle shall be stored in an enclosed garage at all times.
G. The conduct of any no-impact home-based building, including but not
limited to the storage of goods or equipment, shall not reduce or render
unusable the garage required for parking for the dwelling unit.
H. Parking required for a no-impact home-based business shall be
provided off the street and on the lot other than in a required front yard.
I. No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment, which produces noise,
electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, or other
nuisance outside the residential or accessory structure, shall be used.
J. No no-impact home-based business shall be permitted which is noxious,
offensive or hazardous by reason of hours of operation, vehicular traffic,
generation or emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, refuse,
radiation or other objectionable emissions.
K. No signage shall be allowed in the E-1, S-1, R-1, R-2, or R-3 Districts. In
all other districts one unlighted sign, not over one square foot in area,
attached flat against the dwelling and displaying only the occupant's
name and occupation, shall be permitted to advertise the presence or
conduct of the no-impact home-based business.
§ 84-67 SEWERS § 84-67
68:647
§ 84-67.1. Nightclub. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
A nightclub may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding of compliance with this chapter (including § 84-137
thereof), as well as compliance with the following specific criteria have all
been established by the applicant:
L. Instruction for no more than three attendees shall be allowed.
M. Any building or lot where more than two domesticated animals are
housed, groomed, bred, boarded or trained in exchange for a fee or
other compensation shall not be considered a no-impact home-based
business.
A. Location.
(1) There shall be only one nightclub permitted on a single lot or
parcel.
(2) A nightclub shall be allowed in the C-1 District only.
(3) A nightclub shall not be located within 100 feet from any land or lot
in the following Township of Pine Zoning Districts: E-1, S-1, R-1,
R-2, R-3, or from any parcel of land or lot used principally as a
residential use, whether situate in the Township of Pine or
otherwise.
(4) A nightclub shall not create an enticement for minors because of its
proximity to nearby uses where minors may congregate, including
but not limited to schools, churches, or libraries.
(5) A nightclub shall be located principally within an enclosed building
that has its main entrance facing upon State Route 19 and such
entrance shall be the primary entrance used for the nightclub use.
Outdoor areas used by a nightclub may only comprise an area equal
to 10% of the indoor area used by the nightclub, and such outdoor
area may only be used for dining purposes.
(6) Nightclubs shall not utilize outdoor speakers or generate noise in
excess of the limits otherwise permitted by this chapter.
B. Measuring separation requirements.
(1) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured from the lot
line of the lot used by the nightclub to the lot line of any residential
district.
(2) Where a nightclub is located within a multitenant facility, such as a
shopping center, measurement shall occur from the boundary of
the leasehold interest, instead of the property line.
§ 84-67 PINE CODE § 84-67.1
68:648
§ 84-68. Nursery.
Nurseries may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by the
applicant:
§ 84-69. Nursing home.
Nursing homes shall be subject to the following requirements:
(3) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
point on each parcel.
C. Hours of operation. A nightclub may be open for business no longer
than on Mondays through Thursdays from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight; on Fridays and Saturdays from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (the
following day); and on Sundays from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.. Such
hours of operation may be further limited or restricted (as an additional
condition) upon a finding that such is reasonable and necessary due to
the proximity of the nightclub to adjacent uses.
D. A proposed night club must demonstrate specific compliance with the
regulations concerning fire protection; lighting; noise limitations;
odors; off-street parking; and off-street loading, all as required by
Article VI (Requirements Applying to All Districts) of this chapter.
A. In the case of a nursery, this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit
display of flowers or plants outside of an enclosed building, provided
such display is within the lot lines no closer than 10 feet.
A. The minimum site area required for a nursing home shall be one acre.
B. All nursing homes shall be licensed by the commonwealth.
C. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
D. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
E. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
F. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the Volunteer Fire
Company for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
G. Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds but no more
than 200 beds.
H. A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 84-111 of this chapter.
§ 84-67.1 SEWERS § 84-70
68:649
§ 84-70. Offices.
Offices in structures 6,000 square feet or less, where permitted as a
conditional use, may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
§ 84-71. Outdoor advertising signs.
Outdoor advertising signs may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as
a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established
by the applicant:
A. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
B. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
minimize hazards and congestion.
C. A buffer yard shall be provided along all property lines adjoining
residential uses or zoning classifications in accordance with the
requirements of § 84-111 of this chapter.
A. The submission by the applicant of a land development application,
which shall contain the information, maps, plans and narrative and
graphic materials set forth in Chapter 78, Article IV, § 78-20D of the
Code of the Township of Pine.
B. All lots upon which outdoor advertising signs are to be located must
conform to the area requirements of the C-1 Zoning District, be located
entirely within that zoning district and, in addition, have frontage on
State Route 19 between the Township's northern boundary and the Pine
Meadow Drive/Swinderman Road intersection with Route 19 only.
C. The leased portion of any lot upon which the outdoor advertising is to
be located shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet in area.
D. All outdoor advertising signs shall contain only one face for the display
of lettered, written, printed, pictorial, or sculpted matter on only one
side of its structure, and such face shall be oriented to be viewed from
only one direction of travel from the nearest adjacent roadway (cross
roadway viewing shall not be permitted).
E. The display area upon the face of an outdoor advertising sign shall be a
maximum of 300 square feet (12 feet by 25 feet), and all portions of any
display shall fit within such area with no extensions beyond the edge of
the outdoor advertising sign's framework.
F. All utility lines serving the outdoor advertising sign, or those extended
to provide such service, must be installed completely underground.
Such requirement may be waived if the outdoor advertising sign is
§ 84-70 PINE CODE § 84-71
68:650
powered by nontraditional alternative energy sources (for example
solar power).
G. All outdoor advertising signs shall be set back from the below described
items as follows:
(1) From a roadway intersection: 300 feet.
(2) From any other outdoor advertising sign (whether such is located
in the Township of Pine or otherwise) on the same side of the
roadway: 1,200 feet.
(3) From any other outdoor advertising sign (whether such is located
in the Township of Pine or otherwise) on the opposite side of the
roadway: 600 feet.
H. The maximum height of outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 20
feet, as measured from the grade of the roadway from which the
advertising message is principally visible, and the bottom edge of the
outdoor advertising sign shall be no more than eight feet above the
elevation of the adjacent roadway, which height shall be sufficient to
prevent unauthorized access upon the outdoor advertising sign.
I. A buffer yard shall be required between outdoor advertising signs and
any adjacent lot(s). Such buffer yard shall be a minimum of 40 feet and
shall conform to the standards for a major separation buffer yard set
forth in § 84-111B of this chapter.
J. The land area utilized for an outdoor advertising sign shall not be
otherwise required to support another underlying use upon such lot,
including, but not limited to, buffer yard, parking area or setback
necessary to any preexisting use upon such lot.
K. All displays on the face of outdoor advertising signs shall be stationary,
and no animated, sequential, flashing, moving, or oscillating signs or
displays shall be permitted.
L. Except as otherwise specifically provided within this section,
illumination of outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the
requirements of § 84-121.
M. Illumination of the display shall be designed so that it shall be focused
on the face of the display itself so as to prevent glare upon the
surrounding area. All sources of illumination shall be external and
equipped with shields to prevent spillage of light off the display.
N. Except as otherwise may be specified herein, all development of
outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the following of the land
development standards contained in § 84-23 (Town Center Design
Overlay District) of this chapter, specifically those pertaining to
greenways, § 84-23D(5), sidewalks, § 84-23D(7), and streetlighting,
§ 84-23D(9). In the immediate vicinity of the outdoor advertising sign,
plantings within the greenway shall be limited to shrubbery, ground
§ 84-71 SEWERS § 84-71
68:651
§ 84-72. Outdoor seating.
Outdoor seating, associated with a principal use, shall be subject to the
following requirements:
cover and understory trees so as to not block the display of its visual
image from the adjacent roadway.
O. All income derived from the outdoor advertising sign by its owner and
the owner of the land upon which it is located shall be subject to earned
income/net profit tax in accordance with Chapter A145 of the Code of
the Township of Pine, Act 511 of 1965, Pennsylvania's Local Tax
Enabling Act, (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.) and otherwise applicable law.
P. All outdoor advertising signs (including any and all supporting
structures thereof) shall be dismantled and removed from the premises
upon which they are located within 180 days of there cessation of use.
Q. All outdoor advertising signs shall be constructed to all applicable
structural standards for such devises, and all applications for the
conditional use approval shall verify compliance with such standards as
documented and sealed by a registered engineer.
R. All outdoor advertising signs shall be maintained by their owner in a
state of repair so that they are as safe and as functional as when
originally installed.
S. No outdoor advertising sign shall be constructed or erected until an
applicant thereof has made an application for same (which shall include
a copy of a written lease for use of the land if the applicant is not the
owner thereof) and paid the applicable fee thereof (as set by separate
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Supervisors) and received a
permit thereof from the Township of Pine.
T. Outdoor advertising shall be required to obtain any necessary permit
from and to conform, in all respects, to any regulation thereof
promulgated by an agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
including, but not limited to its Department of Transportation.
U. When changeable light emitting diode (LED) lighting is utilized to
create the sign face, such lighting shall automatically adjust the LED
light levels of the sign face to account for the ambient lighting so as not
to create significant glare or a measurable footcandle level of 0.5 or
greater, as such level is measured at the road right-of-way line. [Added
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
A. Outdoor seating abutting a restaurant is allowed in any commercial
district.
B. The restaurant shall meet all applicable requirements of the Township,
county, and state.
§ 84-71 PINE CODE § 84-72
68:652
§ 84-73. Park and ride facilities.
Park and ride facilities may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as
a conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established
by the applicant:
§ 84-74. Patio homes.
Patio homes, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized by
the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria have been established by the applicant:
C. Along any sidewalk where parallel parking of motor vehicles is
permitted, an additional four feet of unobstructed space adjacent to the
curb is required to allow for discharging passengers.
A. Park and ride facilities shall be used exclusively for parking of
passenger vehicles.
B. Bicycle parking shall be included for a minimum of two bicycles.
C. Park and ride facilities shall be equipped and controlled to discourage
illegal parking, vandalism and other unlawful or nuisance-creating
activities. When so equipped and controlled, such lots and garages may
be open 24 hours a day.
D. No sign of any kind other than conditions of use shall be maintained on
any park and ride facility.
E. All park and ride facilities shall include litter receptacles, benches, and
shelters to accommodate the number of vehicles proposed in the
facility.
F. Park and ride facilities shall be designed in accordance with § 84-116,
Off-street parking.
G. Park and ride facilities shall be subject to the payment of transportation
impact fees based on the vehicle trips generated in the p.m. peak hour.
H. A traffic report must be submitted as part of an application for any park
and ride facility.
A. A patio home development must have a minimum of five acres.
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
B. A patio home development shall have a maximum density of six units
per acre. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
C. Individual patio homes shall not be attached to another patio home by a
common wall.
D. Common open space requirements:
§ 84-72 SEWERS § 84-74
68:653
§ 84-75. Place of worship.
Places of worship, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-76. Public and semipublic uses.
Public and semipublic uses, where permitted as a conditional use, may
be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a
finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
(1) A minimum of 15% of the land area of the development site shall be
designated as common open space. The calculation of such
common open space shall specifically not include streets, parking,
right-of-way, detention ponds, or access to detention ponds. Any
land lying within 15 feet of any building shall not be considered
part of the required open space.
(2) The common open space shall be developed and maintained subject
to the standards set forth in § 84-119 of this chapter and shall
contain the park and recreational facilities mandated therein.
E. Each patio home shall have an attached garage of sufficient size to
accommodate two vehicles. Such garages shall not have their garage
doors facing the street.
F. Individual lots designed for a patio home development may contain less
than the required acreage and lot frontage normally required in the
zoning district. However, such lot size shall not contain less than 6,500
square feet, and such lot frontage shall not contain less than 50 feet of
frontage.
G. Individual lots designed for a patio home development may contain
reduced yard setbacks from the normally required yards of the zoning
district. However, such yard requirements shall not be less than 25 feet
for front yards, five feet for side yards, and 25 feet for rear yards.
A. Parking shall be fully screened, as outlined in § 84-116 and located at
least 50 feet from any residential district.
B. Shared parking with surrounding uses is encouraged for all places of
worship.
C. Signs shall conform to the requirements of § 84-121.
A. The minimum site required shall be one acre.
B. Any outdoor recreation area adjoining a residential use or zoning
district shall be screened by a buffer yard, which shall be in conformity
with the provisions set forth in § 84-111 of this chapter.
§ 84-74 PINE CODE § 84-76
68:654
§ 84-77. Recreation facilities.
Recreation facilities, where permitted as a conditional use, may be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding
that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-78. Recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles shall be subject to the following requirements:
C. Any outdoor storage of materials or equipment or other activity, which
is required to be done outdoors, such as composting, chipping or
recycling, shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a
six-foot opaque fence and by a buffer yard.
D. All other activities and operations shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
E. Buildings which house public safety or maintenance vehicles shall be
located on the site so that vehicles and equipment can be maneuvered
without interrupting traffic flow or blocking public streets.
F. Ingress and egress shall be designed to maximize sight distance along
adjacent public streets.
A. Such recreational facility will be a benefit or convenience to the
neighboring residents of the Township.
B. Such recreational facility will not cause any potentially detrimental
effect on surrounding property values.
C. Such recreational facility will not cause any potential disruption or
nuisance of or to adjacent lots or residences.
D. Any proposed recreational facility will not cause any detrimental effect
to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the Township
residents.
E. Any proposed recreational facility will not interfere or be inconsistent
with the residential character of the E-1, S-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts.
A. No recreational vehicle shall be erected, used, or maintained for living
or residential purposes in the Township.
B. Unoccupied recreational vehicles not in use shall be parked or stored in
a garage or rear yard. When parked in the rear yard, the recreational
vehicle must be fully screened from adjacent residential properties.
C. Recreational vehicles shall not be stored or parked on a public street or
in the front or side yard of a dwelling unit.
§ 84-76 SEWERS § 84-79
68:655
§ 84-79. Restaurants without drive-throughs.
Restaurants without drive-throughs, where permitted as a conditional use,
may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a
finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-80. Restaurants with drive-through.
Restaurants with drive-throughs shall be subject to the following
requirements:
§ 84-81. Retail sales and services.
Retail sales and service shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. The restaurant use shall not cause any potential disruption or nuisance
to surrounding uses or have a detrimental effect on surrounding
property values.
B. There shall be no disruption to the surrounding business neighborhood.
C. The main structure, which contains the restaurant, shall have all
approvals required by the Township.
A. Any establishment that includes a drive-through facility shall provide a
minimum of five queuing spaces in tandem with a minimum total length
of 100 feet in direct line with each window or stall for vehicles to wait in
line.
B. The queuing spaces shall be located so as to not interfere with the use
of any parking spaces or the free flow of traffic on the site and shall be
adequately striped and indicated with directional signs.
A. All sales, displays and storage shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except as may be permitted by special permission
from the Board of Supervisors.
B. Ingress, egress, and traffic circulation on the site shall be designed to
minimize hazards and congestion.
C. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
D. buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 84-111 of this chapter.
E. Retail sales and services with drive-through.
(1) Any establishment, which includes a drive-in facility, shall provide a
minimum of five queuing spaces in tandem with a minimum total
length of 100 feet in direct line with each window or stall for
vehicles to wait in line.
§ 84-79 PINE CODE § 84-81
68:656
§ 84-82. Single-family dwellings, attached infill, attached new
developments.
Single-family dwellings, where permitted as a single-family, attached infill
or single family, attached new development, and where permitted as a
conditional use, may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
(2) The queuing spaces shall be located so as to not interfere with the
use of any parking spaces or the free flow of traffic on the site and
shall be adequately striped and indicated with directional signs.
A. All new subdivisions with single-family dwellings shall have a minimum
two entrances if over 50 units are proposed.
B. Single-family dwellings in commercial districts.
(1) Single-family dwellings in the B-1 and C-2 Districts shall be subject
to the minimum lot area, lot width and yard requirements of the R-1
District.
(2) Single-family dwellings shall be constructed on existing lots of
record, and no further subdivision of B-1 classified property to
accommodate new construction of single-family dwellings shall be
permitted.
C. Parking requirements of § 84-116 shall be met for the dwelling.
D. Floor area requirements. The floor area requirements for singledwelling
units are as follows:
Number of
Stories
Minimum Ground
Floor Living Area
(excluding garage and
porch floor area)
Minimum Floor Living
Area Per Dwelling
(excluding garage and
porch floor area)
Less than 2 1,200 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft.
2 or more 900 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft.
E. Additional requirements for single-family dwelling, attached (new
developments).
(1) The minimum gross land area of the development site shall be 10
acres for attached single-family dwelling.
(2) The maximum density (dwelling units per acre) shall be four units
per acre (excluding roadways).
(3) Building height.
§ 84-81 SEWERS § 84-82
68:657
(a) No attached single-family dwelling buildings shall have a
height greater than three habitable stories or 35 feet.
(b) Chimneys, spires, tanks, or similar architectural projections
may exceed the prescribed height by not more than 25%.
(4) A buffer yard, in accordance with the provisions of § 84-111 in this
chapter, shall be provided along any zoning district line or
residential use to provide proper separation for abutting
residential property.
(5) Facades.
(a) No building shall have a length or a width greater than 300
feet.
(b) Single-family attached dwellings shall have no more than three
consecutive dwellings with identical facades with identical
front yard setbacks.
(c) Alternating groups of three facades may have identical
setbacks.
(d) A visual structural break either in roofline or front facade shall
be provided between every attached single-family dwelling.
(e) The requirements determining the spacing of buildings shall
be flexible so as to encourage imaginative site design. The
spaces between buildings shall be of sufficient size to
guarantee adequate light, air, and emergency access. However,
the minimum space permitted between any two buildings shall
be 20 feet.
(6) Common open space.
(a) A minimum of 15% of the land area of the development site
shall be designated as common open space. The calculation of
such common open space shall specifically not include streets,
parking, rights-of-way, detention ponds, or access to detention
ponds. Any land lying within 15 feet of any building shall also
not be considered part of the required common open space.
(b) The common open space shall be developed and maintained
subject to the standards set forth in § 84-119 of this chapter
and shall contain the park and recreation facilities mandated
therein.
(7) Off-street parking areas.
(a) Parking spaces shall be provided for a minimum of two vehicles
per dwelling unit.
(b) A minimum of 40% of such required parking shall be provided
in enclosed structures.
§ 84-82 PINE CODE § 84-82
68:658
§ 84-83. Swimming pools, private and public.
Swimming pools, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
(8) Streetlights.
(a) Streetlights shall be required to be provided along all streets
and access drives within the development and in all off-street
parking.
(b) The light intensity at any lot line shall not exceed 0.5
footcandles. Where light is reflected in a street area, the
intensity measurement shall be made on the right-of-way line
across the street from where the light emanates and shall not
exceed 0.5 footcandles at such point of measurement.
(c) The maximum wattage permitted using metal halide as a
source shall be 150 watts.
(9) Balconies or decks, if provided, shall not extend into any required
yard and shall not extend more than eight feet from the face of any
principal building.
(10) Chimneys, spires, tanks, or similar architectural projections may
exceed the prescribed height by not more than 25%.
(11) A buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§ 84-111 of this chapter along any residential use or district.
F. Additional requirements for single-family dwellings, attached (infill).
(1) Infill single-family dwellings shall be consistent in size,
architecture, and character with neighboring structures.
A. Private swimming pools.
(1) A private swimming pool shall be any artificially contained or manmade
body of water used primarily for swimming and not located
within a completely enclosed building and containing or normally
capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than
1 1/2 feet.
(2) No such swimming pool shall be allowed in any district except as an
accessory use, subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
(a) The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the
noncommercial use and enjoyment of the occupants and guests
of the lot on which it is located.
§ 84-82 SEWERS § 84-83
68:659
§ 84-84. Temporary uses.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, temporary uses are
permitted subject to the standards hereinafter established.
(b) It shall not be located, including accessory pool structures
adjacent thereto, closer than 20 feet to any lot lines of the lot
on which the principal structure is located. [Amended
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366]
(c) Unless the wall of the pool is at least four feet above the
ground at all points, it shall be enclosed with a four-foot-high
fence or have a fence on top of the pool deck so that the
combined height is at least four feet. The fence gate shall be
locked, and any access ladders shall be removed or rendered
inoperative when the pool is unattended.
B. Community or club swimming pools, public.
(1) A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed
by an association of property owners or by a private club for the use
and enjoyment by members of the association or the club and their
families and guests.
(2) Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the
following additional conditions and requirements:
(a) The pool and any accessory structures thereto, and any
lounging areas used by the bathers, shall not be closer than
100 feet to any adjacent lot line.
(b) The pool, any accessory structure and any lounging area shall
be enclosed with a fence six feet in height, and this fence shall
be locked at all times when the pool is unattended.
C. Owners of any pool in existence, or in the process of construction, as of
the effective date of this chapter shall, within 90 days after the effective
date of this chapter, comply with the fencing requirements aforesaid.
A. Approval. Temporary uses may be permitted when approved by the
Board of Supervisors on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size,
parking provisions and traffic access and the absence of any undue
adverse impact on surrounding properties in the district.
B. Parking. Before approving any temporary use, the Board of Supervisors
shall make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking
spaces which shall be reasonably required for the particular use, its
intensity, and the availability of other parking facilities in the area, and
shall approve such temporary use only if such reasonably requested offstreet
parking is provided.
C. Hours or days of operation. No temporary use shall be operated during
any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
§ 84-83 PINE CODE § 84-84
68:660
the Board of Supervisors on the basis of the nature of the temporary use
and the surrounding existing uses on adjoining and adjacent properties.
D. County and state approval/permits. No temporary use shall be operated
without all of the required county and state approvals and permits.
E. Specific uses.
(1) Carnival, circus, festivals or outdoor shows.
(a) A carnival, circus, festival, or outdoor show may be permitted
in any district on property owned by any not-for-profit group or
organization.
(b) Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three days.
(c) Such use shall be limited to two events/year for each group or
organization.
(d) Police security, crowd control, and traffic control shall be
provided for the duration of the use.
(e) The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(f) Such use need not comply with the front yard requirements of
this chapter except that structures or equipment that might
block the view of operators of motor vehicles on the public
streets shall not be located within 30 feet of the intersection of
the curblines of any two streets.
(g) Such use need not comply with the maximum height
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Contractors' offices, equipment sheds and construction staging
areas.
(a) Contractors' offices, equipment sheds and construction staging
areas containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations may
be permitted in any district when accessory to a construction
project.
(b) Temporary storage shall be allowed as an accessory use to the
contractor's office or equipment shed.
(c) Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration
of such construction project.
(3) Indoor and outdoor art/craft shows, exhibits and sales.
(a) Indoor and outdoor art and craft shows, exhibits and sales may
be permitted in any commercial district, or in any public park
in a residential district subject to prior approval of the
Township.
§ 84-84 SEWERS § 84-84
68:661
§ 84-85. Trade schools.
Trade schools, where permitted as a conditional use, may be authorized
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following
specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
(b) The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(c) Police security, crowd control, and traffic control shall be
provided for the duration of the use.
(d) Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed five days.
(e) Such use shall be limited to two events/year for each applicant.
(4) Real estate offices.
(a) Real estate offices containing no sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit may
be permitted in any district when accessory to a new housing
development.
(b) Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or
leasing of dwelling units in such principal new housing
development not to exceed one year.
(5) Seasonal sales. Seasonal sales, including, but not limited to,
Christmas tree sales, may be permitted in any commercial district
subject to the otherwise applicable provisions of this chapter and
the following specific requirements.
(a) Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed 45 days.
(b) Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard and
setback requirements of this chapter, except that no tree shall
be displayed within 30 feet of the intersection of the curblines
of any two streets.
(6) Other temporary uses.
(a) Other temporary uses shall not exceed a period of three days.
(b) Uses identified in specific districts in this chapter as
conditional or as limited uses shall be limited to no more than
24 hours, no more than two times per year in that district.
A. Any outdoor storage of materials or equipment or other activity, which
is required to be done outdoors, such as composting, chipping, or
recycling, shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a
six-foot opaque fence and by a buffer yard.
§ 84-84 PINE CODE § 84-85
68:662
§ 84-86. Vehicle repair stations.
Vehicle repair stations, where permitted as a conditional use, may be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding
that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
§ 84-87. Vehicle sales.
Vehicle sales may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
B. All other activities and operations shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
C. The minimum site required shall be one acre.
D. Ingress and egress shall be designed to maximize sight distance along
adjacent public streets.
A. No such use shall be established on a property located within 50 feet of
any residential district boundary line.
B. All vehicles located on the premises and awaiting repairs shall be
subject to an active work order and shall be stored in an enclosed
principal building.
C. All repairs shall be performed within an enclosed principal building on
the premises.
D. All permanent storage shall be within the principal building, with the
exception of refuse and trash which shall be stored in closed containers
and in an area screened from view at all points on any public or private
property or street when viewed from ground level.
E. No petroleum products or hazardous wastes shall be buried or disposed
of on the premises.
F. Any used tires kept on the premises shall be covered, screened and
removed from the premises at regular intervals and shall not exceed 20
in number at any time.
G. Sufficient screening shall be provided along all lot lines abutting or
adjacent to residentially zoned or developed property to block any view
of repair operations and stored material and equipment from all points
on such residential property when viewed from ground level.
H. Landscaping shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width along all street
frontage(s).
I. Any business engaged in a towing service shall remove from the lot any
vehicles within 24 hours, unless they are stored in a building or subject
to an active work order.
§ 84-85 SEWERS § 84-87
68:663
as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by the
applicant:
A. The minimum site area shall be two acres.
B. No such use shall be located within 50 feet of any residential district
boundary line.
C. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be closer
than five feet from any property line, buffer yard or right-of-way line. No
vehicle shall be parked on adjacent property or in any public right-ofway
and adequate spacing of vehicles and merchandise shall be
maintained to allow access around vehicles and merchandise.
D. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
E. All lots used for the outdoor display of automobiles shall have a
completely enclosed building on the same lot which has not less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area where all repairs, servicing, sales
and customer car washing shall be performed.
F. Storage.
(1) Outdoor vehicle storage shall be surfaced with an asphalt or
portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to
dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a positive
stormwater drainage system.
(2) Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be
stored either inside a building or in an outdoor area, which is
screened by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
(3) All permanent storage of material, merchandise and equipment
shall be within the principal building, with the exception of refuse
and trash which shall be stored in closed containers and in an area
screened from view at all points on any public or private property
or street when viewed from ground level.
G. Landscaping.
(1) A buffer yard shall be provided along all boundary lines.
(2) Such buffer yard shall be in conformity with the standards for the
same set in § 84-111 of this chapter.
(3) The buffer yard shall be along abutting property to block any view
of repair operations and stored material and equipment from all
points on such property when viewed from ground level.
(4) Landscaping areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width along all
street frontage(s) and adjacent properties.
§ 84-87 PINE CODE § 84-87
68:664
§ 84-88. Vehicle service stations.
Vehicle service stations, where permitted as a conditional use, may be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use upon a finding
that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the
following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
H. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
the parking of customer and employee vehicles and shall not be used
for the display of merchandise.
I. No strings of lights or flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia
shall be permitted on the lot, on any of the structures or poles or on
merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs as may be
otherwise allowed by this chapter.
J. Repairs.
(1) Repair of vehicles shall not be permitted on a vehicle sales lot.
(2) No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale, which does not
have all of the mechanical and body components necessary for the
safe and lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. No open-air, outdoor storage of materials, merchandise, and equipment
shall be permitted.
B. Location of gasoline pumps and fuel.
(1) Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 40 feet from the center
line of the right-of-way of any street.
(2) All fuel, oil, or similar substances shall be stored at least 25 feet
from any property line.
C. All vehicle parts, dismantled vehicles, and similar materials shall be
stored within a completely enclosed building. All minor repair work,
vehicle washing and lubricating shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
D. A minimum fifteen-foot buffer shall be maintained between the use and
all adjoining properties. Screening shall be provided along all lot lines
abutting adjacent property to block any view of vehicle service station
operations and stored material and equipment from all points on such
property when viewed from ground level.
E. In addition to the sign restrictions outlined in § 84-121, when
calculating signage square footage for vehicle service stations, all
signage shall be included.
§ 84-87 SEWERS § 84-88
68:665
§ 84-89. Warehouse.
A warehouse may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
F. There shall be no more than one motor vehicle per employee and
employer plus three customer vehicles per repair bay, parked outside
an enclosed building at any time.
G. Queuing lanes shall be subject to the requirements applying to all
districts in § 84-117.
H. Landscaping.
(1) Buffer yards shall be provided as required by and in conformity
with the standards for the same set in § 84-111 of this chapter.
(2) Landscaping shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width along all street
frontage(s).
I. Refuse and trash shall be stored outdoors only if placed in closed
containers located in an area screened from view at all points on any
public or private property or street when viewed from ground level.
A. No curb cuts or driveways that provide access to or from a residential
street shall be used or established.
B. No curb cuts or driveways shall be located within 150 feet of any
residential district boundary line.
C. No trucks, tractors or trailers shall be maneuvered, parked, fueled,
stored, loaded or unloaded within 100 feet of any residential district.
D. No vehicles or equipment accessory thereto shall operate engines or
motors for refrigeration or other purposes between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day unless parked more than 150 feet
from any residential district.
E. The applicant shall submit an analysis of the traffic impact of the
proposed development that addresses the following:
(1) Projections of required parking;
(2) On-site-generated and off-site traffic to be expected on streets in
the vicinity upon completion of the proposed development;
(3) Recommendations for techniques or improvements to deal with any
projected traffic congestion or conflicts.
§ 84-88 PINE CODE § 84-90
68:666
§ 84-90. Warehouse sales.
Warehouse sales may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
§ 84-91. Veterinary services.
Veterinary services shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 84-92. Wind conversion systems.
Wind conversion systems shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 84-93. Other uses not listed.
Other uses not listed may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as the following specific criteria, have been established by
the applicant:
A. In addition to the requirements for a warehouse in § 84-89, warehouse
sales operations must provide parking for customers in accordance
with § 84-116.
A. All kennels and other facilities for the housing, boarding and keeping of
animals upon the premises shall be located within an entirely enclosed
building or structure.
B. Noise and odors shall comply with the limits set forth in this chapter.
C. No outdoor area for the use of animals shall be permitted.
A. In any district, wind conversion systems are allowed as an accessory
use only to the principle structure.
B. A windmill may exceed the maximum height requirements of this
chapter provided that if the windmill would have a setback from lot
lines of less than its total height, the applicant shall provide a written
certification from a professional engineer stating that the construction
of the windmill will not create a hazard to neighboring properties or
traffic as a result of severe weather conditions and any reasonably
expected corrosion over time.
C. All wind conversion systems shall be subject to the noise limitations of
this chapter.
D. No wind conversion system may be installed without first securing a
construction permit from the Township.
A. Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses or conditional uses in the zoning district shall be
§ 84-90 SEWERS § 84-93
68:667
allowed, provided that the governing body determines that the impact
of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent streets and
properties is equal to or less than any use specifically listed in the
zoning district. In making such determination, the governing body shall
consider the following characteristics of the proposed use:
(1) The number of employees.
(2) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to the
proposed use.
(3) The type of products, materials, equipment, and/or processes
involved in the proposed use.
(4) The magnitude of walk-in trade.
(5) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of Articles
V and VI of this chapter.
B. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
C. The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express standards
and criteria specified in Article V for the most nearly comparable
conditional use listed in the zoning district in which it is proposed.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the statement of community
development objectives of this chapter.
§ 84-93 PINE CODE § 84-93
68:668
ARTICLE VI
Requirements Applying to All Districts
§ 84-94. Purpose.
The requirements applying to all districts regulate activities, uses,
structures, conditions and treatments that may be present on a property
whether or not a principal building or use is present. These requirements
contribute to and promote the health, safety, comforts, conveniences, and/or
necessities of the property's occupants, the immediate neighborhood and/or
the entire Pine community.
A. Minimum requirements. In addition to other requirements outlined in
this chapter, all permitted uses, permitted uses subject to land
development review, and conditional uses and structures thereon, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements. All uses and
structures shall:
(1) Be carried on only in buildings and structures in such a manner so
as not to create a fire hazard.
(2) Comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code most
recent standards.
(3) Be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except where
specifically exempt in this chapter or as expressly permitted by
action from the governing body.
(4) Adhere to the design standards and requirements for all districts
specified in this chapter as they relate to, but not limited to,
building and site design, noise limitations, vibration, odors,
erosion, water pollution, steep slope controls, restoration of sites
after clearing and construction, vegetation preservation and buffer
yards and landscape plan.
(5) Be accessible to disabled persons in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act; and
(6) Maintain adequate parking and provide for disabled persons in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(7) Maintain buffer yards and landscaping as required in this chapter.
(8) Maintain the lighting standards as required in this chapter.
(9) Maintain and limit signs as required in this chapter.
(10)No building shall contain any provision for incineration of garbage
or rubbish by any method whatsoever.
B. Design purpose. The following regulations are established to, through
the review and regulation of design characteristics, preserve and
promote the unique character of the Township of Pine. Buildings,
§ 84-94 SEWERS § 84-94
68:669
structures, sites, signs, and public spaces in the Township of Pine shall
be designed to:
(1) Retain, reflect, and enhance the dominant aesthetic or visual
qualities of the neighborhood.
(2) Appropriately relate proposed development to existing designs,
styles, building forms, and land uses.
(3) Encourage and promote the sensitive and contextual design
through the use of design elements, details, styles and
architectural features as well as other amenities, materials or
treatments that may be appropriate to further the design
standards.
(4) Encourage a pedestrian-oriented and human-scaled right-of-way,
public realm, and streetscape and promote safe pedestrian
movement, access, and circulation.
(5) Define access from streets, sidewalks, and public rights-of-way, and
specify a minimum of two vehicular entrances/exits from
developments which contain 50 or more residential units; provided,
however, that the Township's Board of Supervisors may, in
appropriate circumstances, waive, modify, or specify an alternative
to the aforementioned minimum vehicular entrances/exits.
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(6) Protect, respect and expand the design of green space, landscaping
and open space within the neighborhood and encourage
development that enhances this character with landscape design
details such as trees, lawns, plantings, fountains, and malls.
(7) Encourage and promote direct visual access to views and vistas
within Pine.
C. Determination of compliance with requirements.
(1) During the review of an application for zoning approval, the
applicant shall be required to submit data and evidence
documenting that the proposed activity, facility, or use will comply
with the provisions of this section.
(2) In reviewing such documentation, the Township may seek the
assistance of any public agency having jurisdiction or interest in
the particular issues, and the Township may seek advice from a
qualified technical expert.
(3) All costs of the expert's review and report shall be paid by the
applicant.
D. Continuing enforcement.
§ 84-94 PINE CODE § 84-94
68:670
§ 84-95. Air-conditioning systems/mechanical equipment.
§ 84-96. Building context and compatibility.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of
these requirements and, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, may employ qualified technical experts to assist in the
determination of a violation.
(2) Costs of the services of such experts shall be paid by the owner or
operator of the facility accused of the violation if the facility or use
is found to be in violation.
(a) If the facility or use is found to be in compliance with this
article, said costs shall be borne by the Township.
(b) If the facility or use is found to be in violation, the owner or
operator shall be given written notice of violation in
accordance with § 84-150 of this chapter and a reasonable
length of time to correct the violation. Failure to correct the
violation shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter and shall result in the revocation of the occupancy
permit for the facility or use.
A. In all districts, air-conditioning units shall be at least 15 feet from any
lot line.
B. All building mechanical systems such as air-conditioning units, exhaust
systems, satellite dishes, fire escapes, elevator housings, and other
similar elements shall be integrated into the overall design and
character of the building.
C. Screening.
(1) Mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from public streets,
paths, private streets, and abutting lots.
(2) Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from
public streets and abutting lots to a height sufficient to screen the
equipment. When solid screening is used, the materials shall be
compatible with the building materials.
(3) All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from
view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way,
measured from a point five feet above grade.
(4) Roof screens, when used, shall be coordinated with the building to
maintain a unified appearance.
A. Nonresidential. New nonresidential development shall be constructed
to be generally compatible with buildings on the same block frontage
within 500 feet. This provision shall be satisfied by constructing the
subject structure so that at least three of the following features are
§ 84-94 SEWERS § 84-96
68:671
§ 84-97. Building elevations.
similar to the majority of other structures within 500 feet on the block
frontage on both sides of the street:
(1) Building height;
(2) Roof style/overhang;
(3) Building massing;
(4) Window coverage;
(5) Exterior building material; or
(6) Pattern of window and door openings.
B. Residential. New infill attached single-family dwellings shall be
constructed to be generally compatible with other existing dwelling
units on the same block frontage. This provision shall be satisfied by
constructing the subject dwelling unit so that at least three of the
following features are similar to the majority of other dwelling units
within 200 feet on the block frontage (both sides of the street):
(1) Roof style/overhang (e.g., gable, mansard, hip, A-frame);
(2) Garage orientation and access (e.g., attached/front-loaded,
attached sideloaded, detached/alley-loaded);
(3) Building massing (e.g., ranch with two-story attached garage; twostory
with attached garage; bungalow);
(4) Floor area: The floor area of the proposed dwelling units shall be no
less than 80% of the average floor area of other dwellings;
(5) Front porches (existence of);
(6) Exterior building material;
(7) Pattern of window and door openings (e.g., central door and four
windows; offset door and three windows).
A. Any facade facing a sidewalk, public right-of-way or public street shall
have an active building elevation. Active building elevations shall
include windows, building entrances and other architectural features
that enhance the pedestrian scale and experience of the building
facade.
B. New construction shall respect existing building widths by providing a
division of the facade into distinguishable building increments.
C. All structures shall: [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352116]
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D, Structures with building
elements above 35 feet in height, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 84-96 PINE CODE § 84-97
68:672
§ 84-98. Building exterior facade.
§ 84-99. Building loading and refuse areas, nonresidential.
(1) Incorporate fascias, canopies, arcades, building setbacks or other
design features, so as to break up large wall surfaces on the streetfacing
elevations.
(2) Include wall surfaces visually divided by such features described in
Subsection C(1) above.
A. All buildings; residential and nonresidential.
(1) Every portion of any exposed exterior wall of every principal
structure shall be composed of brick, stone, glass, metal, marble,
wood siding, or imitation siding.
(2) The governing body may approve alternative materials if, and only
if, such material is determined to be equal or superior in quality
and aesthetic character compared to approved materials.
(3) An addition to an existing structure, which is nonconforming with
respect to this section, may be constructed in conformance with the
materials of original construction of the existing portion of the
structure with approval by the Zoning Officer.
(4) Walls.
(a) All sides of the building shall have active building elevations.
(b) Walls shall incorporate surface treatments such as recesses,
projections, finish materials, awnings and other architectural
articulation shall be required along 100% of the horizontal
length of any wall.
B. Additional requirements for residential buildings. Building facades
shall include:
(1) A visual structural break either in roofline or front facade shall be
provided between every attached single-family dwelling unit.
(2) A visual structural break in facade shall be provided between
garden apartment dwelling units to eliminate long flat walls.
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(3) The requirements determining the spacing of buildings shall be
flexible so as to encourage imaginative site design. The spaces
between buildings shall be of sufficient size to guarantee adequate
light, air, and emergency access and shall comply with minimum
building separation requirements of the duly adopted Fire Code of
the Township of Pine. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 84-97 SEWERS § 84-99
68:673
§ 84-100. Building materials.
A. Loading docks, trash collection, and similar facilities shall be
incorporated into the overall design of buildings and the site and
include landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these
functions are contained and out of view from adjacent properties and
public streets.
B. Loading dock facilities may include a solid masonry wall that is
compatible with the building materials and shall be at least six feet in
height.
C. Refuse areas and similar facilities shall be completely enclosed within a
masonry wall or fence that is compatible with the building materials
and shall be at least six feet high, on three sides maintaining a onehundred-
percent visual blockage on all three sides and a self-closing
gate on the fourth side.
D. Refuse areas shall have hardened, stabilized surfaces constructed to
prevent accumulation of stormwater runoff.
A. Excluding windows, no more than three principal exterior building
materials shall be used on any one side of a building.
B. All exterior building walls and structures shall be constructed with
durable materials such as masonry, natural or decorative stone, brick,
finishing wood, or glass.
C. Colors.
(1) Colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone
colors.
(2) No more than three principle colors shall be used on any one
facade.
D. Building materials shall not include:
(1) Split-face blocks greater than four inch by 16 inch;
(2) Untextured and unpatterned tilt-up concrete panels;
(3) Prefabricated rolled steel wall panels;
(4) Standard eight-inch-by-sixteen-inch concrete masonry units
(CMU).
E. In addition to the materials listed in § 84-100B, building materials may
also include:
(1) Split-face masonry units, four-inch-by-sixteen-inch or smaller;
(2) Prefabricated architecturally designed concrete masonry panel;
(3) Stucco, as an accent material;
§ 84-99 PINE CODE § 84-100
68:674
§ 84-101. Building orientation, nonresidential.
§ 84-102. Building roofs, nonresidential.
Roofs must have at least one of the following features.
§ 84-103. Commercial buildings in residential districts.
Design standards for commercial and mixed-use buildings shall follow the
design standards for nonresidential uses.
§ 84-104. Dumpsters and refuse collection areas.
(4) Comparable materials may be approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. All main entrances of buildings shall front onto the public street and
have direct access to a public sidewalk.
B. If the design or use dictates, a main entrance may also face the parking
lot if adequate pedestrian circulation is included in the overall site
design.
A. Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment;
B. Overhanging eaves;
C. Sloped roofs.
A. Dumpsters. Dumpsters must be completely screened from view from
any residential district or public street or walkway with screening that
is at least as tall as the dumpster. This provision shall apply to all
dumpsters, including those used for the collection and storage of
recyclable materials, whether public or private.
B. Refuse collection areas in all residential districts.
(1) All refuse storage shall be located in the side or rear of the
buildings and not visible from the public right-of-way.
(2) Deposited refuse shall not be visible from outside the refuse
enclosure.
C. Refuse collection areas in all commercial districts.
(1) All refuse collection areas shall be located in the side or rear of the
buildings.
(2) Deposited refuse shall not be visible from outside the refuse
enclosure.
(3) All refuse collection areas shall be effectively designed to contain
all refuse generated on site and deposited between collections.
§ 84-100 SEWERS § 84-104
68:675
§ 84-105. Electrical disturbances.
No activity shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting public
safety, radio or other equipment or cause harm to wildlife or vegetation in
the vicinity.
§ 84-106. Fences, boundary fences and walls.
The following requirements for fencing and walls apply to all districts in
Pine:
(4) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide the storage from public view. All screening shall be maintained
in such manner as to present a neat and orderly appearance at all
times.
(5) Refuse collection areas shall be so located upon the lot as to
provide clear and convenient access to refuse collection vehicles.
(6) No trash or garbage shall be stored in any unenclosed exterior
property area of any multifamily dwelling in any zoning district.
A. No fence or wall exceeding six feet in height shall be erected, replaced,
or altered unless an application has been made, and a permit issued by,
the Zoning Officer.
B. Fences may be permitted on lots with no principal use subject to the
requirements of this section.
C. Fence location.
(1) Unless otherwise stated, no fence exceeding four feet in height
shall be allowed within the otherwise applicable front yard setback
area of the zoning district in which the fence is located.
(2) Fences and all supporting structures must be entirely on the
property of the party erecting the fence and shall not encroach
upon a public right-of-way.
D. Fence heights.
(1) The height of all fences or walls shall be measured from the
finished grade to the top of the fence.
(2) Unless otherwise stated, no fence or wall shall exceed six feet in
height.
(3) A fence of no more than 10 feet in height shall be allowed to
enclose a private or public tennis court, basketball, or sports courts
provided that the fence is not more than 60% solid.
(4) A fence enclosing a private swimming pool shall be allowed,
provided that the fence is not more than 60% solid.
§ 84-104 PINE CODE § 84-106
68:676
§ 84-107. Fire protection.
Fire prevention and fire-fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of
Fire Underwriters shall be readily available when any activity involving the
handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is carried on. Such
handling and storage shall be subject to the requirements of the Township
Fire Code.
§ 84-108. Junk vehicles.
Junk vehicles must be stored within a completely enclosed building.
§ 84-109. Junkyards.
Junkyards are prohibited in the Township of Pine.
§ 84-110. Hazardous materials and disturbances.
(5) Unless otherwise stated, fences or walls in nonresidential districts
abutting residential districts shall not exceed six feet in height.
(6) A fence no more than 10 feet shall be allowed to enclose a school,
playground or park provided that the fence is not more than 60%
solid.
(7) A fence height may be increased to eight feet in height when the
installation of the fence is intended to restrict deer from a property.
However, the top two feet of any such fence shall be no more than
60% solid.
E. Fence design.
(1) All fences shall be so installed so that the finished side shall face
outward; all bracing shall be on the inside of the fence.
(2) Where walls and fences are desired, they shall be of a material
compatible with the building materials utilized on the principal
structure.
(3) All fences and walls shall be maintained and, when necessary,
repaired, removed or replaced.
F. Street intersections. No fence shall be installed that obstructs sight
distance at street intersections or interferes with the required clear
sight triangle.
A. No activities in the Township of Pine shall emit radioactivity at any
point.
B. No activities in the Township of Pine shall emit radio or electrical
disturbance adversely affecting the operation of equipment belonging
to someone other than the creator of the disturbance.
§ 84-106 SEWERS § 84-110
68:677
§ 84-111. Landscaping, buffers and screening.
C. No hazardous materials shall be discharged at any point into any public
or private sewerage system, watercourse or the ground.
D. No liquid or solid materials shall be discharged in such a way as to
contaminate or otherwise cause the emission of hazardous materials in
violation of the laws of the County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. For purposes of this section, the landscaped area shall include the area
required or permitted, under this section, to be devoted to landscaping
and environmental improvement, which may include existing and new
vegetation, berms, lighting, street furnishings and ornamental features
which are integrated with the vegetation.
B. The following minimum standards shall be observed for all development
or redevelopment subject to this section. The Board of Supervisors may
waive these requirements if the overall objectives of the ordinance are
met and the general character of the area and community goals are
protected.
(1) Total landscaped area.
(a) Residential.
[1] All residential lots less than 100 feet in width shall be
landscaped with at least three trees with a minimum of
2 1/2 inch caliper DBH for every dwelling unit on such lot.
[a] Two of such trees shall be located in the front yard to
satisfy the canopy/street tree requirement.
[b] Preserving existing trees that are of equivalent size
and number to those required hereunder shall satisfy
this requirement.
[2] Residential lots in excess of 100 feet in width shall be
landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. Cluster subdivisions, townhomes, or multifamily
developments shall be landscaped in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the landscape and buffer yard
guidelines contained in this chapter.
[3] Minimum lot percentage; single-family attached,
multifamily and garden apartments: 15%.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] For all nonresidential developments, one tree with a
minimum of 2 1/2 inch caliper DBH shall be planted for
every 1,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof of
structures to be erected.
§ 84-110 PINE CODE § 84-111
68:678
[2] Preserving existing trees that are of equivalent size and
number to those required hereunder shall satisfy this
requirement.
[3] Minimum lot percentage, nonresidential uses: 15%.
(2) Buffer yards. The purpose of this section is to screen and minimize
the potential impact of new development adjacent to existing
developments or to future developments.
(a) In addition to standard setbacks and the planting requirements
outlined in § 84-111B(1), additional landscaped areas, or buffer
yards, shall be used to establish a greater separation where
dissimilar land uses are located adjacent to each other. Careful
site planning can minimize the need for constructed buffer
yards by the preservation of natural topographic features,
preservation of vegetation and sensitive location of site
improvements and land uses.
(b) Standards. The type and extent of plantings or screening
required for buffer yards shall be proportionally related to the
degree of incompatibility or difference in use of the adjacent
land uses, as defined below:
[1] Minor separation shall be required between similar land
developments or compatible land uses. Minimum buffer
yard in such instance shall be 10 feet.
[2] Moderate separation shall be required between singlefamily
residential that is adjacent to more dense, smaller
lot single-family, multifamily housing or rural business
centers. Minimum buffer yard in such instance shall be 20
feet.
[3] Substantial separation shall be required between singlefamily
residential or multifamily housing that is adjacent to
commercial areas, schools, institutional, cultural facilities
or active recreation areas. Minimum buffer yard in such
instance shall be 30 feet.
[4] Major separation shall be required between single-family
residential that is adjacent to planned residential
developments, regional commercial areas, hotels, motels
and office parks. Minimum buffer yard in such instance
shall be 40 feet.
(c) Buffer yard types.
[1] Buffer plantings or screens shall not be planted so as to
encroach upon the street right-of-way.
§ 84-111 SEWERS § 84-111
68:679
[2] Buffer screens shall contain one of the following plant
materials options per every 100 linear feet for a ten-footwide
minor separation buffer yard:
[a] Option one: five large trees, 2 1/2 inches minimum
caliper DBH or larger, or seven medium trees, 1 1/2
inches minimum caliper DBH.
[b] Option Two: 10 small trees, 1 1/2 inches minimum
caliper DBH.
[c] Option Three: 50 shrubs, minimum 30 inches in height
and spread at the time of planting.
[d] Option Four: 10 evergreen trees, minimum five feet in
height at the time of planting.
[e] Alternate buffer yard planting options may be
proposed so long as a mix of the above options and
required quantities of plant materials are provided.
[3] As buffer yard widths increase, the plant materials
required shall be increased by the following multiples:
[a] Moderate Separation: times 1.25;
[b] Substantial Separation: times 1.50; and
[c] Major Separation: times 1.75.
(d) Deciduous plant materials shall comprise no more than 50% of
the required buffer yard plantings.
(e) A minimum of 50% of the buffer yard surface area shall be
planted with new plantings or existing vegetation preserved on
the site.
(3) General landscape requirements.
(a) All landscaped areas shall be permanently landscaped and
maintained in good condition.
(b) All areas of a site, not occupied by buildings or paving, shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs, ground covers, grasses and
other plantings of the type(s) specified as recommended plant
materials.
(c) All landscaped areas must be within an excavated area and not
placed in containers on top of a hard surface.
(d) Unless otherwise provided, a landscaped area shall have a
minimum width of six feet excluding curbs, retaining walls, or
similar enclosing structures.
(e) Landscaped areas may include mulched planting beds.
§ 84-111 PINE CODE § 84-111
68:680
(f) Landscaping materials shall be contained so as not to spill or
intrude into the public right-of-way.
(g) All areas not utilized for structures, driveways, planting strips
or parking shall be seeded, sodded or landscaped within 30
days of construction completion.
(4) Plant material specifications.
(a) All trees shall be planted and maintained to grow upright and
plumb and the tree pit mulched.
(b) Planting shall be in accordance with the recommended
practice of American Society of Nurserymen. Plants shall be
maintained and guaranteed for one planting season.
(c) The use of synthetic vegetation (turf, plastic plants, etc.) shall
not be allowed for any required landscaping.
(d) Tree and plant species provided must meet the landscaping
and screening standards of this section.
(e) The applicant shall show that the removal of any trees or
natural vegetation is necessary for the imminent and orderly
development of the property, unless such removal is part of a
forestry operation as regulated by § 84-51.
(f) When a combination of trees and shrubs are proposed, one tree
may be substituted by three shrubs.
(g) Trees.
[1] The minimum size for a tree shall be 1 1/2 inch caliper
DBH.
[2] Canopy/street trees shall be provided along the entire
length and on both sides of all streets within the
subdivision or land development.
[3] Canopy/street trees shall be spaced a maximum of 50 feet
on center for large trees, 35 feet on center for medium
trees and 20 feet on center for small trees, providing a
minimum of two such trees per lot for lots with frontages
of 100 feet or less and a minimum of three such trees per
lot for lots with frontages greater than 100 feet. Trees
shall be planted within the right-of-way or within a band of
25 feet parallel to the right-of-way line.
[4] Canopy/street trees shall be spaced as above on each side
of all common internal streets where there are no private
lot frontages.
[5] Canopy/street trees plantings can be in uniform rows or in
clusters or groupings.
§ 84-111 SEWERS § 84-111
68:681
[6] Canopy/street trees shall be classified as follows:
[a] Large trees: ultimate height exceeding 40 feet and
shall have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inch or larger
caliper DBH at planting.
[b] Medium trees: ultimate height exceeding 25 feet and
shall have a minimum two inch caliper DBH at
planting.
[c] Small trees: ultimate height not to exceed 25 feet and
shall have a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 to two inches
DBH at the time of planting.
[7] Existing mature trees or woodlands of high quality which
remain undisturbed adjacent to the street right-of-way
may be used in place of or in conjunction with the
requirements of this subsection.
(h) Shrubs.
[1] The minimum size for a shrub shall be 24 inches in height
at the time of planting.
[2] The number of shrubs shall be determined by requiring
one shrub for every 15 feet of perimeter of the lot.
(i) Ground covers.
[1] Ground covers planted to satisfy the standards of this
section shall have a minimum container size of one gallon.
[2] Turf areas shall be planted with species suitable as
permanent lawns in the region. Turf areas shall be sodded
or seeded. Turf on impermeable surfaces shall be
prohibited. Additional maintenance shall be provided until
coverage is complete.
[3] Other ground covers suitable for the soil and climate
conditions of the area may be approved within required
landscape areas.
[4] Mulch shall be installed and maintained at a minimum
depth of three inches on all planted areas except where
ground cover plants are fully established.
(5) Recommended plant list and sizes.
(a) The following list specifies plant types that are required for use
in landscaping plans proposed for in the Township of Pine:
§ 84-111 PINE CODE § 84-111
68:682
Scientific Name Common Name
Deciduous Trees
Acer x freemanii Freeman Maple Varieties
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer sacharum Sugar Maple
Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye
Asimina triloba Pawpaw
Betula nigra River Birch
Betula populifolia Gray Birch
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud
Cornus mas Corneliancherry
Crataegus species Hawthorn
Fagus grandifolia American Beech
Fraxinus americana White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash
Gleditsia triancanthos
inermis
Thornless Honey Locust
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree (male
preferred)
Larix laricina Eastern Larch
Liquidambar styraciflua American Sweetgum
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Platinus occidentalis American Planetree
Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree
Malus species Crabapple (disease resistant
varieties)
Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum
Ostrya virginiana American Hophornbeam
Populus grandidentata Bigtooth Aspen
Populus tremuloides Quaking Aspen
Prunus serotina Black Cherry
Prunus virginiana Chokecherry
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear
Quercus species Oak
§ 84-111 SEWERS § 84-111
68:683
Scientific Name Common Name
Deciduous Trees
Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust
Sassafras albidium Sassafras
Sorbus decora Showy Mountainash
Taxodium distichum Baldcypress
Tilia americana American Linden
Ulmus americana
hybrids
American Elm Hybrids
Scientific Name Common Name
Evergreen Trees
Abies concolor White Fir
Abies fraseri Fraser Fir
Picea glauca White Spruce
Picea pungens Colorado Spruce
Pinus resinosa Red Pine
Pinus rigida Pitch Pine
Pinus strobus White Pine
Pseudotsuga taxifolia Douglas fir
Tsuga canadensis Canadian Hemlock
(b) In addition to the foregoing tree and plant list, the Township
may consider suggested plantings by the owner or developer.
(6) Landscaping plan guidelines and requirements.
(a) General guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used in
developing all landscaping plans:
[1] The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect.
[2] Plants selected shall be suited to the climate and region as
well as the geologic and topographic conditions of the site.
Protection and preservation of native plant materials and
natural areas are encouraged.
[3] Water intensive ornamental plant materials shall not
exceed 10% of the total landscaped area.
[4] To the greatest extent possible, decorative water features
shall use recirculating water.
§ 84-111 PINE CODE § 84-111
68:684
[5] When providing for privacy and screening for adjacent
land uses, visual, noise and air quality factors shall be
considered.
[6] All plant materials located in snow storage areas shall be
selected to withstand the conditions associated with these
areas. Additionally, all parking lot landscaping shall be salt
tolerant.
(b) Landscape plan contents. Landscaping plans shall be drawn to
scale, including dimensions and distances, and shall clearly
delineate:
[1] Plant materials, including trees, shrubs, ground cover,
turf, and other vegetation, shall be shown clearly on the
plan. In addition, plants shall be labeled by botanical
name, common name, caliper, or container size, spacing,
and quantities in each group.
[2] Property lines and street names.
[3] Streets, driveways, walkways, and other paved area.
[4] Pools, ponds, water features, lighting fixtures, fences, and
retaining walls.
[5] Existing and proposed buildings and structures, including
elevation, if applicable.
[6] Natural features, including, but not limited to, rock
outcroppings, existing plant materials that will be
preserved.
[7] Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation details
and all other applicable planting and installation details.
[8] Calculation of the total landscaped area.
[9] Designation of recreation areas, if applicable.
(c) Design and construction.
[1] Specify in cut areas to be treated as lawn that rock shall be
covered with 12 inches minimum of suitable subsoil below
topsoil.
[2] Specify that depth of topsoil be a minimum of four inches
and desirable minimum six inches. The maximum shall be
12 inches, placed in a uniform depth to prevent uneven
settlement.
[3] Specify that topsoil shall not be stripped, placed, or
worked while frozen or wet.
§ 84-111 SEWERS § 84-111
68:685
[4] Specify and/or detail that finished grade of topsoil shall be
1/2 inch to 3/4 inch below top of walks and curbs to
provide positive drainage off walks.
(d) Maintenance plan.
[1] A landscape maintenance plan must accompany every land
development plan.
[2] All required planting shall be permanently maintained in
good condition, and, when necessary, replaced with new
plant material to ensure continued compliance with these
standards.
[3] For the purpose of enforcement, the property owner shall
be responsible for maintenance.
[4] Maintenance shall include watering, weeding, and
pruning.
(7) Protected areas during grading and construction.
(a) During grading and construction, a protected area extending
outward to the drip line of each tree shall be provided within
which paving, grading, or the storage of dirt, building
materials, debris, or any other materials or any other
equipment shall not be allowed.
(b) Each protected area shall be enclosed by a barrier constructed
in a manner required and approved by the Zoning Officer.
[1] The required barriers shall be constructed by the property
owner and approved by the Zoning Officer prior to
issuance of a building permit.
[2] Protective barriers shall be maintained until issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
[3] The Zoning Officer may reduce the protected area if they
determine a larger area is not necessary to the survival
and health of the tree.
[4] Failure to maintain barriers may result in revocation of the
building permit.
(c) Permanent soil stabilization to prevent soil loss and protect
water quality shall be required and include:
[1] Permanent soil stabilization treatments include
establishment of lawn cover or ground cover, mulch or
retaining wall as appropriate to the slope and use.
[2] Permanent restoration or stabilization of swales, drainage
channels, stream, canal, riverbanks, and shoreline
§ 84-111 PINE CODE § 84-111
68:686
§ 84-112. Lighting.
disturbed by construction shall be required. Soil retention
treatments include use of stone, geotextile, and/or
vegetative cover.
[3] Determination of the structural stability and/or required
stabilization of existing or proposed slopes steeper than
50%, rock cuts or river gorge shall be required.
(8) Landscaping as screening — residential and nonresidential uses.
(a) Landscape strip.
[1] In all commercial zoning districts, a landscape strip shall
be provided at the property line adjacent to all public
rights-of-way.
[2] The landscape strip shall not include paved areas, except
for trails or pedestrian sidewalks, and shall:
[a] Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, provide for
a minimum ten-foot-wide landscape area.
[b] Provide for one large shade tree and 15 shrubs per
every 30 linear feet of frontage.
(b) Screening shall be required for any nonresidential use where it
abuts an area zoned or used residentially on the ground floor.
(c) All parking shall be screened from adjacent properties and the
street as outlined in § 84-116, Off-street parking.
(d) Unless a perimeter landscaped open space, a minimum of 10
feet in depth, is provided, a durable and well-maintained solid
wall, fence or other screening device, not less than four feet
nor more than six feet in height, shall be provided along every
lot line shared in common by a parking lot and a lot devoted to
any residential use.
(9) Alternative landscaping plan. The applicant may submit an
alternative landscaping plan that includes an alternate way of
meeting the landscaping requirements that may include masonry
or stone street walls, more mature plant materials, hedges, public
art or other similar amenities to improve the aesthetics of the site.
Such alternative landscaping plan shall require a land development
review as outlined in Chapter 78. The alternative landscaping plan
shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect.
A. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of a strong,
dazzling light or glare that is visible from any point along a lot line.
§ 84-111 SEWERS § 84-112
68:687
B. All lighting or illumination, including electric or otherwise, indoors or
outdoors, shall be located, directed and of an intensity that does not:
(1) Create a hazardous condition or cause damage to the person or
property of others.
(2) Interfere with or restrict the lawful use and enjoyment by others of
property in the Township.
C. Any illumination or lighting, which is located, directed or of an intensity
that causes a hazardous condition or causes danger to the person or
property of others or interferes with or restricts the lawful use and
enjoyment of property by others is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
D. All light fixtures shall be concealed source fixtures except for
pedestrian-oriented accent lights.
E. Feature lighting, such as uplighting of trees or other plant material,
seasonal lighting, etc., shall be so arranged to reflect away from any
residential structure.
F. All illuminations constructed, installed, changed or remodeled shall
include cutoff lighting, so that the candlepower does not exceed 2 1/2%
of the total lamp lumens at an angle of 90° above horizontal and the
candlepower does not exceed 10% of the total lamp lumens at an angle
of 80° above horizontal. These requirements apply to any lateral angle
around the light.
G. The light intensity at any lot line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles.
Where light is reflected in a street area, the intensity measurement
shall be made on the right-of-way line across the street from where the
light emanates and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at such point of
measurement.
H. Pedestrian lighting.
(1) Pedestrian lighting fixtures, in accordance with the specifications
for the same found in the standard details adopted by the
Township,117 shall be located along all streets within the Town
Center Design Overlay District (TCDO), and along all streets within
the Traditional Village Overlay District (TVO).
(2) Pedestrian lighting fixtures, in accordance with the specifications
for the same found in the standard details adopted by the
Township, shall also be required to light pedestrian areas, plazas,
walkways, steps and changes of grade so that these areas are
suitably lighted for public safety.
(3) Pedestrian lighting fixture spacing shall be approximately every
160 feet on each side of the street within the Town Center Design
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-112 PINE CODE § 84-112
68:688
§ 84-113. Noise limitations.
Overlay District (TCDO) and approximately every 130 feet on each
side of the street within the Traditional Village Overlay District
(TVO). Lighting fixtures should be staggered approximately onehalf
the distance from the lighting fixture on the opposite side of
the street. Details of proposed lighting fixtures and supports and
the locations thereof shall be submitted as required by this chapter.
I. Security lighting.
(1) Security lighting fixtures may be permitted, when such security
lighting is in addition to the otherwise required lighting, however
such security lighting shall not project above the facade or roofline
of any building and are to be shielded so the light source is not
visible from any adjacent property line.
(2) Lighting shields shall be painted to match the surface to which they
are attached.
(3) Security lighting fixtures shall not be substituted for parking lot or
walkway lighting fixtures and are restricted to lighting only loading
and storage locations or other similar areas requiring security
lighting.
J. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Parking lot lighting shall be in accordance with the same found in
the standard details adopted by the Township118 and shall be
contained within the parking area boundary. No light spillover shall
occur outside the parking area in excess of the light levels
prescribed elsewhere in this chapter; the light source shall not be
visible from any street.
(2) Exterior wall-mounted floodlights or "wall-pack" lighting fixtures
shall be prohibited.
(3) Soft lighting of building faces is encouraged. Building lighting shall
be indirect in character. Indirect wall lighting or "wall-washing"
overhead down lighting or interior illumination that spills outside is
encouraged. Architectural lighting articulates the particular
building design and provides required functional lighting for safety
and clarity of pedestrian movement.
K. Overhead wiring is prohibited.
A. Points of measurement to determine compliance with any of the
performance standards shall be the property line nearest the source
that is the subject of measurement unless otherwise specified.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Standard Details.
§ 84-112 SEWERS § 84-113
68:689
B. Except as provided in this subsection below, no person shall cause,
suffer, allow or permit sound from the premises of any permitted use
that, when measured at any point on the property line of any property
located within or abutting any residential use, is in excess of any of the
following:
(1) From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.:
(a) Continuous or frequently repeating airborne sound which has a
sound level in excess of 66 dB; or
(b) Continuous or frequently repeating airborne sound which has
an octave band sound pressure level in decibels which exceeds
the values listed in the accompanying table in one or more
octave bands; or
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 96
63 82
125 74
250 67
500 63
1,000 60
2,000 57
4,000 55
8,000 53
(c) Impulsive sound in air that has a peak sound pressure level in
excess of 80 dB.
(2) From 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.:
(a) Continuous or frequently repeating airborne sound which has a
sound level in excess of 45 dB; or
(b) Continuous or frequently repeating airborne sound which has
an octave band sound pressure level in decibels which exceeds
the values listed in the accompanying table in one or more
octave bands; or
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
31.5 86
63 71
§ 84-113 PINE CODE § 84-113
68:690
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
125 61
250 53
500 48
1,000 45
2,000 42
4,000 40
8,000 38
(c) Impulsive sound in air that has a peak sound pressure level in
excess of 80 dB.
(3) In addition, if the sound level at any point on the property line of an
existing use exceeds such standards and the existing use is
modified, changed, altered, enlarged or extended in a lawful
manner in accordance with this chapter, then the sound level at any
point on the property line of such modified, changed, altered,
enlarged or extended use may continue to exceed the sound
standards set forth above, but only up to the sound level in
existence immediately prior to such modification, change,
alteration, enlargement or expansion.
C. Outdoor paging systems and speakers shall be prohibited in the
Township of Pine.
D. Noise resulting from alarms, sirens, emergency work, normal lawn and
landscaping care, traffic and agricultural use shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section. Noise resulting from temporary
construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section, except that such
activity that occurs on Sundays shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
E. No noise from recordings, loudspeakers, or public-address systems
shall be allowed which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
adjacent residential properties.
F. Exclusions, permitted variations and variances to noise limitations.
(1) The governing body is empowered to hold public hearings and to
grant variances from the terms of this section of this chapter. A
variance shall be granted only if the applicant can establish that:
(a) The source of the sound violation cannot be controlled so as to
be brought into conformance with this chapter by any
reasonable method.
§ 84-113 SEWERS § 84-113
68:691
(b) The property in question cannot be used without the source of
noise violation or that the source of noise violation is necessary
to prevent a taking of the property without compensation.
[1] All reasonable steps have been taken to reduce the noise
violation to the lowest level possible.
(2) The governing body shall have the power to grant a variance for a
limited period of time, not more than two years, to ensure that the
applicant will avail himself of any technical advances in sound
control which may develop in the future.
(3) The governing body shall have the power to grant a reasonable
extension of time for compliance with this chapter if, after a public
hearing, the applicant can establish that he will comply with this
chapter but that he cannot do so within the time limit established
by this chapter.
(4) All enforcement and appeal provisions governing this Zoning
Chapter as a whole shall be applicable to these noise performance
standards.
G. Vibration.
(1) No use in any permissible business zone may generate any groundtransmitted
vibration that is perceptible to the human sense of
touch measured at the outside boundary of the immediate space
occupied by the enterprise generating the vibration if the
enterprise is one of several located on a lot or the lot line if the
enterprise is one of several located on a lot or the lot if the
enterprise generating the vibration is the only enterprise located
on the lot.
(2) No use may generate any ground-transmitted vibration in excess of
the limits set for this in subsection. Vibration shall be measured at
any adjacent lot line or residential zoning line as indicated in the
table set forth in subsection.
(3) The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a threecomponent
measuring system capable of simultaneous
measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular
directions.
(4) The vibration maximums set forth in this subsection are stated in
terms of particle velocity, which may be measured directly with
suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement
and frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be
used:
PV =6.28 F x D
Where:
PV =Particle velocity (inches per second)
§ 84-113 PINE CODE § 84-113
68:692
§ 84-114. Odors.
F =Vibration frequency (cycles per second)
D =Single amplitude replacement of the vibrations
(inches)
The three velocities shall be the vector sum of the three
components recorded.
(5) Table of maximum ground-transmitted vibration.
Particle Velocity
(inches per second)
Zone Adjacent Lot Line Residential Zone
Commercial districts 0.10 0.02
Industrial districts 0.15 0.02
Residential districts 0.02 0.02
(6) The values stated above may be multiplied by two for impact
vibrations, i.e., discrete vibration pulsations not exceeding one
second in duration and having a pause of at least one second
between pulses.
(7) Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that
occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subsection.
A. For purposes of this subsection, the "odor threshold" is defined as the
minimum concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter that
can be detected by the olfactory systems of a panel of healthy
observers. Continuous, frequent, or repetitive odors detectable after
the odorous air has been diluted with five or more volumes of odor-free
air shall be a violation of these standards.
B. No use other than agricultural in any zone may generate any odor that
reaches the odor threshold, measured at:
(1) The outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the
enterprise generating the odor.
(2) The lot line if the enterprise generating the odor is the only
enterprise located on the lot.
(3) Exceptions.
(a) An odor detected for less than 15 minutes per day is exempt.
(b) No violation shall occur if the person or business causing or
allowing the emission of odorous air contaminants is
employing the best available treatment, maintenance, and
§ 84-113 SEWERS § 84-114
68:693
§ 84-115. Off-street loading.
control currently available to maintain the lowest possible
emission of odorous gases.
A. Location of required loading spaces. Loading spaces shall be located on
the same lot, or on a directly adjoining lot in the same zoning district, as
the building or structure to which they are accessory. No loading space
shall be located in any required front yard setback.
B. Required spaces. Loading spaces shall be provided in sufficient number
and of sufficient size so that no loading and unloading operations
infringe upon any street or sidewalk. A minimum of one space shall be
provided for every use and every expansion of an existing use involving
the receipt or distribution of goods, including trash removal by motor
vehicle.
C. Design and maintenance. Every loading space shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and
requirements herein set forth:
(1) Screening.
(a) No loading space shall be closer than 50 feet to any lot in any
R, S, or E Zoning District, unless completely enclosed on three
sides by a wall not less than eight feet in height.
(b) Sufficient screening shall be provided along all lot lines
abutting any residentially zoned or developed property to
buffer the residential use from all operations, materials and
vehicles within any loading space.
(c) Loading areas accessory to commercial uses, shopping centers
or planned business developments shall be so located and
screened from public view.
(2) Design standards.
(a) Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide.
(b) Every loading space shall be surfaced with an asphalt or
portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained
to dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a
positive stormwater drainage system connected to a public
storm sewer system.
(c) Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide
access to a street in a manner that shall create the least
possible interference with traffic movement. Access to and
from the right-of-way to the loading spaces shall be referred to
the Township Engineer for comment.
§ 84-114 PINE CODE § 84-115
68:694
§ 84-116. Off-street parking.
(d) No loading or unloading shall occur on the public right-of-way.
(e) Loading and unloading operations shall be designed so they
minimize the number and width of curb cuts.
(f) Individual loading spaces shall be clearly identified by
pavement markings four inches to six inches in width.
(3) Loading space uses.
(a) No part of a loading area utilized for the access, maneuvering
and temporary parking of delivery vehicles shall also be used
for the parking of employee or customer vehicles.
(b) No part of a loading area shall be utilized for the open-air
outdoor storage of materials, merchandise, and equipment.
(c) When any part of a loading area is also utilized for refuse and
trash disposal and storage purposes, all outdoor containers
shall be closed and permanently stationed in an area that is
easily accessible for pick up and removal and that satisfies the
screening requirements of this chapter.
A. No vehicle, in any district, shall be parked off-street at any time except
on an authorized parking lot, parking garage or driveway.
B. In no case shall parking be used for the lease or storage of vehicles or
other materials by an off-site use.
C. Computation of required spaces.
(1) When determination of the number of required parking spaces
results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to
and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half
shall require one parking space.
(2) In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly
in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other
similar seating facilities, each 20 inches of such seating facility
shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the
requirement for off-street parking under this chapter.
(3) When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of
faculty, staff, students, or employees, the maximum number per
peak shift shall govern.
D. Uses not specified. For uses not expressly listed in this section, parking
spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most
similar listed use, or as determined by the Zoning Officer.
E. Required parking spaces.
§ 84-115 SEWERS § 84-116
68:695
(1) Vehicular parking. For the following uses, the number of off-street
parking spaces shall include:
Use
Minimum Parking Space
Requirements
Adult-oriented
establishments
Parking demand analysis
Agriculture 2 per dwelling located within the
agriculture area and 1 for each fulltime
worker
Alcohol rehabilitative clinic Parking demand analysis
Animal day care 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 2
animals cared for at the care center
Animal hospital 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 2
animal enclosures
Automotive dealership, new 1 per each 2,000 square feet of lot
area for employee and customer
parking (excludes vehicle display
area)
Automotive dealership,
used
1 per each 2,000 square feet of lot
area for employee and customer
parking (excludes vehicle display
area)
Bed-and-breakfast 1 per each offered sleeping room
and 2 per each permanent resident
and 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift
Car wash 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per vehicle if
dropoff service is offered, plus
vehicle queue area
Cemetery 1 per each employee and ample
accessways to the cemetery sections
so as to allow parking on the
accessway for gravesite services and
visitations
Civic clubs 1 per each 5 members
College 1 per each faculty member and 1 per
each employee and 1 per each 5
students
Collocation/shared use
communication facility
1 per each service vehicle
Communication facility 1 per each service vehicle
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-116
68:696
Use
Minimum Parking Space
Requirements
Communication tower 1 per each service vehicle
Day-care center 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 2 of
the maximum number of persons
cared for at the center
Drive-in theater 1 per each employee, and the
customer parking spaces shall not
exceed the maximum number of
tickets sold for each showing
Entertainment facilities 1 per each 200 square feet of
enclosed area and 1 per each 1,000
square feet of outdoor area
Essential facilities 1 per each service vehicle that is
necessary to service the facility
Farm market 1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area, 4 spaces minimum
Freestanding self storage
units
1 per each employee and ample area
for the loading and unloading of
items into or out of each unit without
disruption of traffic
Garden apartments 2 per apartment unit and 0.5 spaces
per unit for guest parking
Group care facility Parking demand analysis
Group home 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each
employee on the preceding shift
Heliport 2 per each landing area
Hospital 1 per each 3 beds and 1 per each
employee on the maximum shift
Indoor theaters 1 per each 2 seats in the theater and
1 per each employee on the
maximum shift
Kennel 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 200
square feet of area devoted to the
kennel area
Life care community 2 per living unit and 1 per each
employee on the maximum shift
Light manufacturing,
research and testing
1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 300
square feet of office area
§ 84-116 SEWERS § 84-116
68:697
Use
Minimum Parking Space
Requirements
Medical clinic 1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area
Methadone treatment
facility
1 per each 200 square feet of area in
addition to spaces provided for other
uses within the same building
Mixed uses* The sum of each parking space
requirement for each use
Mobile home parks 2 per each unit plus .5 per each unit
for visitor parking
Mortuary 18 per each reposing room
Motel or hotel 1 per rentable room and 1 for each
employee on the maximum shift
Nature preserve 1 per each 5 acres of land if the area
is available to the public
Nursery 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift plus 5 spaces
minimum
Nursing home 1 per each 4 beds and 1 per each
employee on the maximum shift
Offices 1 per each 300 square feet of floor
area
Outdoor advertising sign 1 per each service vehicle
Parks 1 per each acre of land, 5 spaces
minimum
Patio homes 2 per housing unit
Place of worship 1 per each faculty member or
employee, and 1 per each 2 seats in
the auditorium or gymnasium,
whichever has seating for the
greater number of attendees
Planned residential
development
2 per housing unit
Public and semipublic uses 1 per each 2 seats in the main
seating area
Recreation facilities Parking demand analysis
Restaurant, with drivethrough
1 per each 50 square feet of floor
area, plus vehicle queue area
Restaurants 1 per each 50 square feet of floor
area
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-116
68:698
Use
Minimum Parking Space
Requirements
Retail sales and services 1 per each 200 square feet of floor
area
Single-family, detached 2 per housing unit
Single-family, attached 2 per housing unit
School 1 per each faculty member or
employee, and 1 per each 2 seats in
the auditorium or gymnasium,
whichever has seating for the
greater number of spectators
Trade schools Parking demand analysis
Vehicle repair station 3 per repair bay and 1 per each
employee
Vehicle sales 1 per each 2,000 square feet of lot
area for employee and customer
parking (excludes vehicle display
area)
Vehicle service station 3 per repair bay and 1 per each
employee
Veterinary services 1 per each 400 square feet of floor
area
Warehouse 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 300
square feet of office area
Warehouse sales 1 per each employee on the
maximum shift and 1 per each 200
square feet of area devoted to the
sales area
Wineries 1 per each worker during the peak
season, plus 5 spaces
(2) Accessible parking space requirements.
(a) Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces shall be
provided in compliance with the table below. The number of
accessible parking spaces shall be determined based on the
total number of parking spaces provided for the facility. Except
that accessible parking space requirements shall not apply to
parking spaces used exclusively for buses, trucks, other
delivery vehicles, law enforcement vehicles or vehicular
impound and motor pools not accessed by the public. Where
such lots are accessed by the public they shall be provided with
an accessible passenger loading and unloading zone.
§ 84-116 SEWERS § 84-116
68:699
Total Spaces
Provided
Required Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
More than 1,000 20, plus one for each 100 spaces over
1,000
(b) Van accessible parking spaces in accordance with Americans
with Disabilities requirements shall be provided at a rate of
one van accessible parking space for every six accessible
spaces required.
(3) Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided at 5% of the
vehicle parking requirements but not less than a minimum of two
bicycles for all multifamily dwellings (over 10 units) and
nonresidential uses.
F. Maximum number of parking spaces and parking demand analysis. No
use shall provide more than 110% of any of the above-listed
requirements, except through the submittal of a parking demand
analysis and approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with
§ 84-137. The parking demand analysis will include, at a minimum:
(1) The anticipated number of parking spaces needed to accommodate
the proposed use.
(2) How the parking spaces are accommodated (on-site, public lots, onstreet,
etc.).
(3) Rationale for additional parking spaces.
G. Shared parking.
(1) When a property develops adjacent to undeveloped or under
developed property, combined or cross access of the parking or
access road shall be considered and a provision of such
interconnection shall be provided. When a new development is
proposed adjacent to a development that provided such provision
for interconnection, then such connection shall be completed.
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-116
68:700
(2) When two adjacent property owners agree to combine access
points, the Township may grant an incentive bonus, in which case
the required number of parking spaces would be reduced by 15%
for each development, or the building coverage may be increased
by 10%.
H. Design and maintenance for vehicle parking. Unless otherwise stated,
the following shall apply to all off-street parking developed in the
Township of Pine:
(1) All open (non-garage) parking lots shall be designed to reduce the
negative visual effects of vast paved areas and contain landscaped
planting islands and defined landscaped pedestrian walkways.
(2) Location.
(a) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, parking shall be
located on the same parcel as the use served.
(b) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, in all residential
districts, no parking shall be located in the required front yard
setback except in a legal driveway, a detached or attached
garage. This shall not apply to governor's drives.
(c) In all nonresidential districts off-street parking lots or garages
shall not be located between a public street and the principal
structure.
(d) Unless otherwise provide in this chapter, required parking
areas shall not be located within the public right-of-way.
(e) In the C-1 District, parking for the use shall be entirely within
the C-1 District. In no case shall parking for a commercial use
in any commercial district be allowed in a residential district.
(f) Off street parking and access drives shall be a minimum of 25
feet from any residential district or use.
(g) Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
property lines of nonresidential districts or use.
(h) Parking shall not be located within 10 feet of any street
frontage, except where a decorative fence or wall of no more
than three feet in height is used in conjunction with
landscaping.
(3) Parking access. Vehicular access to parking areas from a
pedestrian-oriented street shall be limited to avoid conflicts with
the pedestrian movement.
(4) Parking protection. Parking abutting a slope exceeding 2 1/2%
shall be protected by a guardrail or fence of a strength sufficient to
prevent vehicles using the parking area from the slope.
§ 84-116 SEWERS § 84-116
68:701
(5) Parking stall requirements.
(a) The numbers and dimensions of accessible parking shall meet
all requirements of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(b) The following minimum stall dimension requirements shall
apply to the width and length of required parking spaces.
Type
of
Parking Angle
Stall
Length
Stall
Width
Aisle
Width
Minimum
Area
Traditional 90 18'00" 9'00" 24'00" 180 sq. ft.
Traditional 60 22'00" 10'00" 20'00"
Traditional 45 20'00" 10'00" 15'00"
Handicapped90 19'00" 13'00" 24'00"
Handicapped60 21'00" 13'00" 18'00"
Handicapped45 19'10" 13'00" 13'00"
I. Parking lot standards.
(1) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) Perimeter landscaped areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet
wide. Earth mounding, fencing or walls, or a combination
thereof, may also be used as a perimeter landscape screening,
subject to the approval of the governing body.
(b) Interior landscaping shall be required for new parking areas or
expansion of existing parking areas containing more than
6,000 square feet or 15 parking spaces.
(c) A minimum of 5% of the total parking area must be landscaped
in accordance herewith.
(d) Landscape islands.
[1] A minimum of one landscaped island with a minimum size
of 160 square feet shall be provided for every 15 parking
spaces.
[2] Landscape islands shall be installed at both ends of each
unbroken row of parking containing 15 or more adjacent
parking spaces.
[3] One internal landscape island, within the parking area,
shall be provided for every 15 parking spaces. One shade
tree shall be required for every 15 parking spaces and
shall planted in the landscape islands.
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-116
68:702
[4] Landscaped divider strips shall be placed at every third
row of adjoining parking to prevent traffic movement
across parking aisles.
(e) Parking shall be screened from abutting residential uses and
districts with a solid screening minimum height of six feet. An
earth berm may be credited toward the required height.
(f) Plant materials located in snow storage areas shall be selected
to withstand the conditions associated with these areas.
(g) All parking landscaping shall be salt tolerant.
(h) Trees located in paved areas shall be provided with adequate
tree pits to permit proper watering.
(i) Parking stops, where provided, shall be constructed of
permanent material.
(j) All required screening and landscaping shall be maintained
and, if required, replaced to comply with the requirements in
this section and any approvals.
(2) Parking lot ingress and egress.
(a) Every parking lot shall be provided with one two-way entry/exit
at least 22 feet in width or two one-way entry/exit, each at least
13 feet in width.
(b) When ingress and egress are proposed to be separate, then the
entrances and exits shall be designed so that traffic shall flow
in one direction only.
(c) The junction with the edge of a public street for a new entry or
exit exceeding 5% gradient shall include a vertical curve to
provide a suitable transition and leveling-out area.
(d) Curbs shall be installed on sides of access points to contain
vehicular traffic, protect pedestrians and reduce maintenance
of adjacent seeded or planted areas.
§ 84-116 SEWERS § 84-116
68:703
(3) Parking lot maneuvering space.
(a) Maneuvering space shall be located completely off the right-ofway
of a public street, place, or court.
(b) Maneuvering space shall be designed to prevent any vehicles
from backing into the public right-of-way except for singlefamily
and attached single-family dwellings.
(4) Parking lot surface.
(a) Off-street parking shall be constructed in such a manner so as
to provide an all-weather, durable and dustless surface.
Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by pavement
markings four to six inches in width.
(b) Parking surfaces shall be graded and drained to control all
surface water accumulation in accordance with the provisions
of § 84-125.
(c) Parking shall include provisions for positive subsurface and
subbase drainage under and at the outside edges of the paving.
In major cut or potentially wet areas, underdrains shall be
installed under edges of ingress/egress and connected to the
storm drainage system. A drainage plan shall be submitted for
all parking for more than five vehicles.
(d) The approved surface materials outlined in this Code shall
include asphalt, concrete, prefabricated pavers, or similar
materials, except that a compacted gravel parking surface may
be utilized for developments that require parking lots
containing five or fewer parking spaces.
(5) Parking lot lighting.
(a) Parking lighting shall be provided in accordance with § 84-112
of this chapter.
(b) Illumination shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or
attracting attention to the principal use.
(c) Lighting fixtures shall be sized, and located so as not to cast
direct rays of excessive brightness upon adjoining premises or
cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or person using adjacent
public streets.
(d) Parking areas used after sundown may be lighted to give
protection to persons using the parking area.
(6) Parking lot modules.
(a) Parking lots for uses that require greater than 90 spaces shall
be broken into modules.
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-116
68:704
(b) The size of any surface parking module shall be limited to 90
vehicles bounded by a public street, building, landscaped
pedestrian walkway or a structurally defined access drive.
(7) Parking lot pedestrian linkages.
(a) Clearly defined and marked sidewalks shall be required within
parking lots and be provided for the length of the parking to
the entrances of establishments.
(b) Clearly defined and marked sidewalks shall be distinguished
from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers (bricks,
scored concrete or other similar materials).
J. Bicycle parking standards.
(1) Bicycle parking shall be located and clearly designated in a safe
and convenient location, at least as convenient as the majority of
auto spaces provided.
(2) Facilities shall be designed to accommodate U-shaped locking
devices and shall support bicycles in a stable position without
damage to wheels, frame or other components and shall be
securely anchored and of sufficient strength to resist vandalism
and theft.
K. Reduction of the required number of parking spaces. An alternative
parking plan is a means to meet vehicle parking requirements other
than providing parking spaces on-site in accordance with the ratios
established in this section. The governing body may conditionally allow
fewer than the number of off-street parking spaces required in this
section under the following conditions:
(1) The area required for parking for any use shall be designed and
designated as parking or reserved for possible future parking.
(2) The nature or extent of the use does not require the minimum
number of parking spaces, which are set forth in this section.
(3) The proposed reduction enhances the development, is
environmentally sound, and advances the general welfare of the
Township.
(4) The proposed reduction in number of parking spaces will not be
inconsistent with the public interest and will preserve the health,
safety, and welfare of the Township.
(5) There is no potentially detrimental effect on adjacent property
values.
(6) There is no potential disruption or nuisance of or to adjacent lots.
(7) There is no potentially detrimental effect upon traffic patterns and
traffic safety.
§ 84-116 SEWERS § 84-116
68:705
(8) Applicants seeking to meet the requirements of this section by
alternative means shall be required to secure approval of an
alternative parking plan in accordance with the standards of this
section.
(a) Contents. Alternative parking plans shall include the parking
alternative and rationale for how the alternative will
compensate for the provision of the required parking on site.
(b) Review and approval procedure. An alternative parking plan
pursuant to this section shall require a conditional use permit
from the Board of Supervisors pursuant to § 84-137.
(c) Eligible alternatives. Potential alternatives to be considered
include, but are not limited to:
[1] Shared parking. Shared parking is encouraged to promote
efficient use of land and resources by allowing users to
share off-street parking for uses that are located near one
another and that have different peak parking demands or
different operating hours.
[2] Credit for on-street parking spaces. On-street parking
spaces may be used to satisfy up to 20% of the
requirements for off-street parking. Such on-street
parking shall be located only on arterials or collector
streets within the public right-of-way and shall be located
within 1,000 feet of the use.
[3] Bicycle parking. A reduction in the number of required offstreet
parking spaces for developments or uses that
provide bicycle parking or that make special provisions to
accommodate bicyclists may be made. Examples of
accommodations include bicycle lockers, employee shower
facilities, and dressing areas for employees. Consideration
of the seasonal nature of bicycle use shall be given in
approving this reduction.
[4] Pedestrian-oriented use. For uses that serve the immediate
neighborhood, a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces may be made.
[5] Valet parking. Valet parking may be used as a means of
satisfying otherwise applicable off-street parking
standards.
[6] Transit credit. When located proximate to a transit stop,
credit towards the otherwise required number of parking
spaces may be granted by the Board of Supervisors in such
numbers as determined by the Board of Supervisors. The
transit stop shall be within 1,000 feet of the use.
§ 84-116 PINE CODE § 84-117
68:706
§ 84-117. Off-street stacking or queuing requirements.
The vehicle stacking or queuing standards of this section shall comply with
all setback standards established for the district and the following shall also
apply:
§ 84-118. Outdoor storage.
A. Minimum number of spaces. In addition to minimum parking
requirements established in this chapter, the following stacking or
queuing areas are required:
Activity Type
Minimum
Stacking
Spaces Measured From
Automated teller
machine
3 Teller
Bank teller lane 4 Teller or window
Car wash stall,
automatic
9 Entrance
Car wash stall, selfservice
3 Entrance
Gasoline pump island 2 Pump island
Pharmacy 4 Window
Restaurant drivethrough
6 Order box
Restaurant drivethrough
4 Order box to pickup window
Oil change and quick
lube
3 Per bay
Other Determined by Zoning
Officer
B. Design and layout. Required stacking spaces are subject to the
following design and layout standards.
(1) The size of a stacking or queuing space shall be 20 feet in length by
10 feet in width.
(2) Each lane shall be clearly defined in a manner that is identifiable
during all seasons.
(3) Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic movements or
movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
(4) Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal roadways
for traffic movement and safety.
§ 84-117 SEWERS § 84-118
68:707
§ 84-119. Parks and recreation.
A. All commercial districts.
(1) All merchandise for sale at retail sales and services is to be
displayed inside or, if stored outside, screened from public view,
including but not limited to bottle cases, building supplies,
hardware, and fertilizer.
(2) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide the storage from public view.
(3) Screening shall be of sufficient height and density to completely
hide storage from major highways, passenger rail-lines, and other
public accessways.
(4) All screening shall be maintained in such a manner as to present a
neat and orderly appearance at all times.
(5) Large objects, such as automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats and farm
and construction equipment, need not be screened if permitted in
the specific district.
(6) Items stored outside shall not interfere with required parking or
sidewalk areas or any public right-of-way.
B. Shopping cart storage.
(1) All commercial uses, furnishing carts or mobile baskets as a service
to shoppers, shall provide temporary storage areas, within the
required parking for the carts or mobile baskets. A minimum of one
shopping cart storage area per 100 parking spaces shall be
provided.
(2) Shopping carts shall be removed from the parking area and stored
entirely within the principal building each evening.
(3) The storage area shall be clearly marked for storage of carts or
mobile baskets.
C. Temporary storage. When temporary exterior storage of material is
authorized under the provisions of this chapter, the temporary storage
shall be screened by opaque ornamental fences or walls so as not to be
visible from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots to a person
standing at the ground level.
A. Residential developments greater than 10 acres in size and having over
10 residential units and land developments over 10 acres in size shall
comply with the requirements of this section, except that simple
subdivisions shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
B. A plan shall be submitted for Parks and Recreation Commission review
showing the proposed open space, passive recreation area and active
§ 84-118 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:708
recreation land area locations and proposed facilities thereon for all
subdivisions, planned residential development and land developments
meeting the requirements of Subsection A above.
C. Submission requirements for Parks and Recreation Commission review.
(1) Prepare and submit plans for the parks and recreation commission
review as follows:
(a) A cover page for the drawing set, which shall contain:
[1] The proposed name of the subdivision or development and
the date the plan was prepared;
[2] The location by Township, county and state;
[3] The names and addresses of the
subdivider(s)/developer(s)/owner(s) and the principal
engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or landscape
architect(s) and/or surveyor(s);
[4] A vicinity map, which shows the tract proposed for
development on a current Township Zoning Map. The
vicinity map shall cover approximately 1/2 square mile
surrounding the proposed development. The site for the
proposed development shall be indicated;
[5] A sheet index of all plans in the plan set.
(b) A proposed development/recreation plan, which shall contain:
[1] The drawing title block;
[2] The proposed name of the subdivision or development;
[3] The location by Township, county and state;
[4] The names and addresses of the
subdivider(s)/developer(s)/owner(s)/and the principal
engineer(s) and/or architect(s) and/or landscape
architect(s) and/or surveyor(s);
[5] The legend, including the scale of the plan, north point and
the date the plan was prepared;
[6] The existing contours with intervals of two feet. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum if available. Reference
benchmarks used shall be indicated;
[7] The boundary of the site to be subdivided or developed
indicated by a heavy line;
[8] The layout of streets, including proposed names and
widths of proposed streets;
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-119
68:709
[9] The proposed layout, lot numbering, approximate
dimensions, approximate lot areas and approximate lot
widths provided at the street right-of-way line, or front
yard building setback line for cul-de-sac lots;
[10] The parcel(s) of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents
inhabiting the subdivision of development;
[11] Existing parks and common open spaces and permanent
buildings within or adjacent to the tract within such close
proximity of the tract so as to affect the design of the
subdivision or development;
[12] The location, widths and names of all existing recorded
streets and roads touching the subdivision or development
(unimproved roads shall be shown with dashed lines);
[13] Existing utility rights-of-way and/or easements;
[14] The approximate locations of existing sanitary sewers,
water mains, storm drains, manholes, catch basins,
surface water drains and surface water drainage
easements, and all above ground or underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with the
direction of flow indicated;
[15] The area that is proposed to be used for stormwater
detention and stormwater drainage;
[16] The proposed access to the stormwater detention area,
with the grade percentage of the access road shown;
[17] The existing watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, tree
masses, trees of significance and other natural features;
[18] The proposed final grade percentages of all proposed
streets;
[19] The names and addresses of the current owners of
contiguous property together with all boundaries, which
intersect the boundaries of the proposed subdivision or
development;
[20] The site data information, which shall include:
[a] The gross area of the parcel;
[b] The proposed number of dwelling units;
[c] The proposed density, expressed as dwelling units per
acre;
§ 84-119 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:710
[d] The gross area of common open space or area
designated for passive recreation use;
[e] The area of common open space or area designated
for active recreation use;
[f] The percentage of the parcel to be provided as
common open space or areas designated for passive or
active recreation use;
[g] The location, dimensions and descriptions of all
proposed recreation improvements including
sidewalks/trails, play equipment, soft surfacing,
benches, fields or courts, informal recreation fields,
etc.;
[h] Details, specifications and equipment descriptions of
all proposed recreation improvements including
sidewalks/trails, play equipment, soft surfacing,
benches, fields or courts, informal recreation fields,
etc.;
[i] An estimate of the site preparation costs of the active
recreation land area, and a cost estimate for all
recreation facilities proposed thereon.
(c) Where adequate details of the proposed active recreation
area(s) can not be shown due to the size of the proposed
development, an enlarged plan of each proposed active
recreation area shall also be submitted.
[1] All plans shall be prepared and sealed by a civil engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other professional
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. When recreation areas are required to be provided as a part of a
subdivision plan, planned residential development or land development
plan, such recreational areas shall consist of both active recreation
areas and passive recreation areas.
(1) Passive recreation areas may include:
(a) Resource protection areas;
(b) Steep slopes;
(c) Ponds, lakes, or streams and stream buffers;
(d) Wetlands and wetland buffers;
(e) Floodplains;
(f) Woodlands and trees of significance;
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-119
68:711
(g) Meadows;
(h) Internal trails.
(2) Active recreation land areas shall:
(a) Be in accordance with the land area size requirements of
§ 84-119D(3);
(b) Be visible from a public street for safety, and provide a
minimum of 100 feet of frontage along a public road;
(c) Be accessible from the internal pedestrian circulation system;
(d) Be designed to meet the needs of the target market of the
development;
(e) Be centrally located within the plan within the distance
requirements as required by § 84-119D(3);
(f) Be served by public utilities, including electric service, water
service, gas service, sanitary sewerage service, and telephone
service;
(g) Have internal accessible access to the active recreation
components of the active recreation area(s);
(h) Have a finished slope of not more than 3%;
(i) Provide parking spaces as required by § 84-116;
(j) Be landscaped in accordance with § 84-111.
(3) The following table provides the required active recreation land,
facilities requirements, and maximum distance permissible from
the furthest residence:
§ 84-119 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:712
Total Number
of Dwelling
Units or Land
Area
Open Space
Requirements
and Active
Recreation
Land Area
Requirements
Maximum
Distance
from
Furthest
Residence
Specific
Recreation
Facility
Requirement
Trails — if
shown on the
Trail
Feasibility
Study and
Trail Design
All
developments
When trails
are required
by the Trail
Feasibility
Study and Trail
Design and if
the required
trails are
outside of a
dedicated
right-of-way,
provide a
40-foot public
right-of-way or
easement
Not
applicable
If trails are
shown on the
Township trail
plan adjacent to
the property
proposed for
development,
and the trail
development is
identified as the
developer's
responsibility,
then the
developer shall
be responsible
for construction
in accordance
with the Trail
Feasibility Study
and Trail Design
Open space/
passive
recreation
areas
Subdivisions
less than 10
acres in size
Not applicable Not
applicable
Not applicable
Subdivisions
greater than
10 acres in
size
15% of the
total land area
Not
applicable
The open space/
passive
recreation
area(s) shall be
dedicated to a
homeowners'
association, an
approved
conservation
trust, or
reserved as
conservation
easements on
individual lots
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-119
68:713
Total Number
of Dwelling
Units or Land
Area
Open Space
Requirements
and Active
Recreation
Land Area
Requirements
Maximum
Distance
from
Furthest
Residence
Specific
Recreation
Facility
Requirement
Planned
residential
developments
35% of the
total land area
Not
applicable
The open space/
passive
recreation
area(s) shall be
dedicated to the
homeowners'
association
Land
developments
greater than
10 acres in
size
10% of the
total land area
Not
applicable
The open space/
passive
recreation areas
shall be
dedicated to a
homeowners'
association, a
merchant's
association, or
an approved
Conservation
Trust
Active
recreation
area and
active
recreation
facilities
Subdivisions
less than 10
acres in size
Not applicable Not
applicable
Not applicable
Greater than
10 dwelling
units but less
than 50
dwelling units
1/2 acre 1/4 mile 2 picnic tables
play structure
(1,000 square
feet minimum) 2
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation
§ 84-119 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:714
Total Number
of Dwelling
Units or Land
Area
Open Space
Requirements
and Active
Recreation
Land Area
Requirements
Maximum
Distance
from
Furthest
Residence
Specific
Recreation
Facility
Requirement
50 or greater
dwelling units
but less than
100 dwelling
units
1/2 acre
minimum plus
440 square
feet additional
per each
dwelling unit
over 50
dwelling units
(1.005 acres
maximum)
1/2 mile 4 picnic tables
play structure
(1,750 square
feet minimum)
1/2 basketball
court or equal 4
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation
100 or greater
dwelling units
but less than
250 dwelling
units
1 acre
minimum plus
365 square
feet additional
per each
dwelling unit
over 100
dwelling units
(2.256 acres
max)
3/4 mile 1 picnic shelter
play structure
(2,500 square
feet minimum) 1
basketball or
tennis court or
equal
multipurpose
athletic field to
accommodate
youth soccer 6
picnic tables 8
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation
250 or greater
dwelling units
but less than
500 dwelling
units
2 1/4 acre
minimum plus
220 square
feet additional
per each
dwelling unit
over 250
dwelling units
(3.512 acres
max)
1 mile 2 picnic shelters
play structure
(5,000 square
feet minimum) 1
basketball or
tennis court or
equal
multipurpose
athletic field to
accommodate
youth soccer 6
picnic tables 8
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-119
68:715
Total Number
of Dwelling
Units or Land
Area
Open Space
Requirements
and Active
Recreation
Land Area
Requirements
Maximum
Distance
from
Furthest
Residence
Specific
Recreation
Facility
Requirement
500 or greater
dwelling units
but less than
1,000 dwelling
units
3 1/2 acres
minimum plus
220 square
feet additional
per each
dwelling unit
over 500
dwelling units
(6.00 acres
max)
1.5 mile 3 picnic shelters
play structure
(7,500 square
feet minimum) 1
basketball/2
tennis courts or
equal 2
regulation
athletic fields to
accommodate
pony league
baseball and
adult soccer
outdoor pool 8
picnic tables 12
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation
1,000 or
greater
dwelling units
6 acres
minimum plus
220 square
feet additional
per each
dwelling unit
over 1,000
dwelling units
2 mile 3 picnic shelters
play structure
(7,500 square
feet minimum) 1
basketball/2
tennis courts or
equal 2
regulation
athletic fields to
accommodate
pony league
baseball and
adult soccer
outdoor pool 8
picnic tables 12
benches internal
pedestrian
circulation 3,000
square foot
community
center
§ 84-119 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:716
For the purpose of this section, the distance from furthest residence shall be
measured in a straight line from the closest point of a residential lot to the
nearest point of the active recreation land area.
(4) When active recreation facilities are required, such facilities shall
include all necessary amenities to make the facility functional,
including, but not limited to:
(a) Basketball courts: 84 feet by 50 feet hard surface area with an
additional three feet grass transition area around all sides of
the court, and include two goal posts, backstop, hoop and net,
and line striping in accordance with NCAA standards;
(b) Basketball courts (half size): 42 feet by 50 feet hard surface
area with an additional three feet grass transition area around
all sides of the court, and include one goal post, backstop, hoop
and net and line striping in accordance with NCAA standards;
(c) Tennis courts: 36 feet by 78 feet hard surface area with an
additional 12 feet grass transition area adjacent to all sides of
the court and 21 feet adjacent to the ends of the court, and
include fencing around the court, net supports, tennis net, and
line striping in accordance with USLTA standards;
(d) Sand volleyball courts: 30 feet by 60 feet with six feet minimum
grass transition area around all sides of the court, and include
net supports, and net in accordance with USVA standards;
(e) Baseball, grass little league field: 60 feet baselines, 46 feet
pitch distance, 200 feet foul line, 250 feet home plate to the
center of the outfield, and includes backstops, bases, outfield
fence and foul poles, in accordance with Little League
Baseball, Inc.;
(f) Baseball, pony league field: 80 feet baselines, 54 feet pitch
distance, 250 feet foul line, 300 feet home plate to the center of
the outfield, and includes sand mix infield and grass outfield,
backstops, bases, outfield fence and foul poles, in accordance
with Township of Pine standards;
(g) Softball: 55 feet baselines, 38 feet pitch distance, 200 feet foul
lines, 250 feet home plate to the center of the outfield, and
includes sand mix infield and grass outfield, backstop, bases,
outfield fence and foul poles, in accordance with ASA
standards;
(h) Soccer, youth field: 120 feet by 120 feet grass field with 10 feet
minimum grass transition area around all sides of the field, and
include two goal nets, in accordance with Township of Pine
standards;
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-119
68:717
(i) Soccer, adult field: 195 feet by 330 feet grass field with 10 feet
minimum grass transition area around all sides of the field, and
includes two goal nets, in accordance with NCAA standards;
(j) Multipurpose athletic field: 120 feet by 120 feet grass field
with 10 feet minimum grass transition area around all sides of
the field;
(k) Play structures: soft surface around all playground equipment
a minimum distance of eight feet beyond the structure on all
sides or two times the height of a pivot point above the
surfacing material (measured from a point directly beneath the
pivot on the supporting structure), whichever is greater. Soft
surface can include 12 inches depth wood carpet, sand or
rubberized safety surface in accordance with the Unites States
Consumer Product Safety Commission and the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA);
(l) Picnic shelters, picnic tables, and benches shall be in
accordance with Township of Pine standards;
(m) Outdoor pools and community shelters, when required, shall
be proposed by the applicant as a complete package, and
include all amenities normally associated with such structures,
for recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Commission;
(n) Internal pedestrian circulation shall include hard surface
access, a minimum of five feet in width meeting the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) to
provide handicap accessibility to the recreation facilities from
the street walk or trail.
E. Alternative compliance. Certain instances may dictate that the
recreation facilities required by this chapter may not be appropriate for
the proposed development. A developer is permitted to request the
Parks and Recreation Commission's recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors for alternative compliance when one or more of the
following conditions are met:
(1) Topography, soil conditions, existing vegetation, or other site
conditions are such that full compliance is impractical or
impossible, and such proposed alternative would result in improved
environmental quality.
(2) Existing considerations make the alternative compliance proposal
safer than the required recreation facilities.
(3) The target market of the proposed development would be less
likely to utilize the required recreation facilities.
§ 84-119 PINE CODE § 84-119
68:718
§ 84-120. Sidewalks/trails.
(4) If alternative compliance is determined to be appropriate for a
particular development, the alternative compliance should not be
construed as a precedent for future developments.
F. Should a developer or property owner propose to pay a fee in lieu of the
dedication of active recreation land, as provided in § 78-35 of Chapter
78 of the Township of Pine Code, then the requirements of said section
shall be submitted to the Parks and Recreation Commission for their
review and recommendation to the Board of Supervisors regarding the
adequacy of the submission.
A. All new roads and drives shall have a sidewalk on both sides with a
minimum width of five feet.
B. Sidewalks shall be installed at approximately the same elevation as the
adjacent roadway.
C. All main and secondary entrances to buildings shall be directly linked
from the street walk to the main secondary entrance with a public
sidewalk.
D. Sidewalks shall be required and shall be constructed in accordance
with Township specifications so as to facilitate pedestrian access
throughout the development, along all streets, to all recreation
amenities and parking lots and upon every lot and to service every use.
E. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a landscaped planting strip
shall be maintained in the area between the curb of the street and the
sidewalk.
F. For all parking lots:
(1) A continuous internal sidewalk shall be provided to link the
parking, sidewalk along the street and the principal entrance of any
building.
(2) The areas adjacent to the internal sidewalk shall feature
landscaping, benches, and other pedestrian amenities and when
the walkway is within the parking area, it shall be distinguished by
use of special pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance
pedestrian safety and attractiveness.
G. Accessibility ramp gradient, requirements of railings, and treatment of
pavement surfacing shall comply with applicable requirements of the
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
H. Trails may be considered as an alternate to a sidewalk if the trail
construction and location is as designated on the Trail Feasibility Study
and Trail Design Standards. Unless otherwise provided, the
maintenance and repair of sidewalks and/or trails, including the
§ 84-119 SEWERS § 84-120
68:719
§ 84-121. Sign regulations.
landscaping adjacent to such sidewalks and/or trails, is the
responsibility of the property owner on which the sidewalk or trail is
located or fronted.
I. Unless otherwise provided, the maintenance and repair of sidewalks
and/or trails, including the maintenance of landscaping adjacent to
such sidewalk and/or trail, is the responsibility of the property owner on
which the sidewalk or trail is located or fronted.
A. Definitions. Words and phrases used in this article and chapter shall
have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not
defined in this section, but defined in § 84-10, shall be interpreted with
the meaning set forth in that section.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign or sign structure on a site, which
identifies a business that is not operating or does not have services
offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
ADDRESS SIGN — The number or other designation assigned to a
housing unit, business establishment, or other structure for all
purposes of location, mail delivery, and emergency services.
ADVERTISING VEHICLE — Any vehicle and/or trailer which has affixed
to it any sign or advertising device which is parked on public or private
property and visible from any public right-of-way where the apparent
purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or
activity located on the same or nearby property.
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable.
AWNING SIGN — A sign mounted, painted, or attached to or integral to
an awning.
BACKLIGHTING or SILHOUETTE LIGHTING — A method of internal
illumination whereby the light source is contained within the sign
structure. Illumination is directed towards the building facade, thereby
backlighting or silhouetting the sign itself.
BANNER SIGN — A sign with or without characters, letters, or
illustrations applied to cloth, paper, fabric, or other nonrigid material.
CAMPUS SIGN — Any on-premises sign that assists the flow or
circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
CANOPY, ATTACHED — A multisided overhead structure or
architectural projection supported by attachments to a building on
one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also
supported by columns at additional points.
§ 84-120 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:720
CANOPY, DETACHED — A multisided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign mounted, painted, attached to, or integral to a
canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL — A sign that is designed so
that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged
manually to change the message on the sign without altering the face
or surface of the sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, REMOTE — A sign that is designed so
that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged
remotely by electronic or other means to changes the message or sign
without altering the face or surface of the sign.
EXPOSED TUBE-STYLE LIGHTING — A luminaire in which the light
source consists of or is contained in an uncovered extruded cylinder or
other shape, which may be formed into geometric patterns, lettering,
logos, or emblems. This may include, but not limited to LED's, exposed
glass tube lighting, neon, or rope lighting.
FLAG — Any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols,
used as a symbol of the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or the local municipality. A flag is not a sign.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential
flashing light source or has a light source which is not stationary,
varies in illumination intensity, or contains elements which give the
appearance of any of the aforementioned.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign detached from any
building and is supported by poles, posts, braces, or other type of base
on the ground.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign, which is owned, installed, and
maintained by the Township of Pine, County of Allegheny, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or other governmental agency.
GROUND/MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign, which is
completely self-supporting, has its sign face or base on the ground and
has no air space, columns, or supports visible between the ground and
the bottom of the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, EXTERNAL — A sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward
the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNAL — A sign containing a source of light
contained within the sign structure or sign cabinet.
KIOSK SIGN — A sign consisting of three or more sides that list names
of businesses or other directional information located on a property or
in a building.
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:721
MARQUEE — An integral part of the building consisting of a roof which
is supported by the building and may also be supported by columns
or piers, and which includes porches, porticos and porte-cocheres, but
does not include canopies or awnings.
MARQUEE SIGN — A wall sign attached to a marquee.
MENU BOARD SIGN — A sign that lists for consumers the various
options of products, goods, or services provided by a business.[Added
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
MOVING/ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign or part of a sign that changes
physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual
impression of such movement. This may include a flashing or remote
changeable copy sign.
MULTITENANT BUILDING — A nonresidential building that provides
occupancy for two or more tenants.
MULTITENANT BUILDING SIGN — A sign that provides space on a
freestanding sign that identifies all or most of the tenants within that
structure.
NONCONFORMING SIGNS — A lawfully existing sign that complied
with the Zoning Ordinance at the time the sign was erected but does
not meet the current zoning requirements.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN — A sign advertising a business, person, activity,
goods, or service not located on the premises where the sign is located.
PENNANT/STREAMER — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other
material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended
from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series and designed to move in
the wind.
POLE/PYLON SIGN — A freestanding sign erected on a pole, poles,
pylon, or pylons, or other supporting structure where the bottom edge
of a sign face is installed above the ground.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign that advertises a candidate or an issue,
which is to be voted on in a local, state, or federal election process.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign intended to be moved easily and is not
designed to be permanently affixed into the ground or to a structure.
PREMISES — The contiguous land in the same ownership or control,
which is not divided a street. Premises may be considered a lot as
defined in section § 84-10 of this chapter.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign that is projecting perpendicularly from
the facade of a building more than 12 inches from the face of the wall.
PROJECTION SIGN — A sign, which reproduces a remote image, by
optical or any other means, on any surface.
PUBLIC WAY — Any corridor designated for vehicular or pedestrian use
that is maintained with public funds.
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:722
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected on or attached to a roof or a sign
attached to a building that projects above the highest point on a wall
that supports the roofline.
SAFETY CONTROL SIGN — A public safety sign pursuant to federal,
state, or local public safety regulations.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A sign that provides a menu option or
other advertising for a particular use displayed on an easel-like frame.
SIGN AREA — The smallest quadrangle encompassing the entire face
of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim,
molding, background, and the supporting structure situated above the
lowest edge of the sign face.
SIGN BASE — The support on which a sign face stands.
SIGN FACE — The area or display surface, including the advertising
surface and any framing, trim, or molding, used for the message on a
single plane.
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the lowest
finished grade elevation directly beneath the sign to the highest point
of a sign, including all decorative embellishments.
SIGN or SIGNBOARD — Any writing, printing, painting, display,
emblem, drawing, graphic, electronic display, computerized display or
other device designed to be viewed by the public, designed and
intended for advertising, and the structure supporting the display.
SINGLE TENANT BUILDING — A nonresidential building that provides
occupancy for one tenant.
SITE DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign indicating that the premises is in
the process of being subdivided and/or developed for the construction
of dwellings or other buildings.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign erected for a limited time for a specific
promotion.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGN OR DISPLAY — A sign or any display
designed to attract attention to a business, having length, width or
depth and including, but not limited to, spheres, balloons, and inflatable
objects. A rectangular or square sign with a thickness of less than 13
inches is not considered a three-dimensional sign.
TIME-AND-TEMPERTURE SIGN — A sign which indicates changing
time and/or temperature.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN — A sign regulating traffic.
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted, attached to, or affixed to a building or
structure, attached flat against the wall surface, in such a way that only
one face of a sign is visible.
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:723
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service that is temporarily affixed inside
a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the
exterior of the window.
B. Permitted signs. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, permitted
types of signs, and their regulations shall be as follows:
(1) Wall signs. In commercial zoning districts, each business that has
its own public entrance from a parking area, street or sidewalk may
be permitted at least one wall sign, subject to the requirements of
this section and the following: [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 352; 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 366]
(a) All wall signs shall be attached to or professionally painted on
the outside wall(s) of the building they occupies and may be
comprised of individual lettering, insignias, logos, or other
symbols attached directly on the building facade. Wall signs
shall not be joined or contained by a sign cabinet containing
internal illumination, which contains a plastic, or similar
material translucent sign face; except that where an existing
building has a majority of the existing wall signs as internally
illuminated sign cabinets with a plastic, or similar material
sign face, the face of such signs may be replaced so long as the
new face panel is no less than seventy-five-percent opaque.
(b) Wall signs for buildings on corner lots. A building on a corner
lot is permitted a wall sign on each wall facing a street,
provided that one of the wall signs shall not exceed 50% of the
sign area of the sign installed on the primary wall frontage, and
that no more than two wall signs are permitted on a building on
any corner lot.
(c) Wall signs for office buildings. Each office building which has a
principal tenant that occupies the majority of the floor area of
the building shall be permitted at least one wall sign in
accordance with this subsection. Such wall sign shall project
no more than 12 inches therefrom and shall not exceed a total
sign area of 1.25 square feet in for each linear foot of wall
frontage that the sign is to be installed upon. If the sign
consists of one line of letters, the maximum height shall be 30
inches. If the sign contains multiple lines of letters or contains
graphics or a company logo, no more than two lines of letters
(each no more than 30 inches in height) may be utilized and the
total height of the stacked letters, graphics, or logo shall not
exceed 60 inches. No other wall signs shall be permitted for an
office building, unless the building has been previously
approved as an office building with mercantile use(s).
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:724
(d) Wall signs for office buildings with additional mercantile
use(s). Each office building which has a principal tenant that
occupies the majority of the floor area of the building shall be
permitted signage in accordance with the immediately
preceding Subsection B(1)(c); additionally, buildings with a
mercantile use, in addition to the office use component, shall
be permitted additional signage in accordance with the
following provisions of this Subsection B(1)(d). Office buildings
with a mercantile tenant(s) having individual store front
entrance(s) for public access from the parking lot directly into
the tenant space(s) shall be permitted one additional wall sign
per such mercantile tenant space(s) with a sign area not to
exceed 1.25 square foot for each linear foot of wall frontage
dedicated to the tenant(s). The total allowable sign height for
such mercantile tenant(s) shall be 30 inches.
(e) Wall signs for those multitenant buildings which are not
classified as an office building or an office building with
additional mercantile use(s). Such multitenant buildings shall
be permitted at least one wall sign for each tenant space in
accordance with this Subsection B(1)(e). Such wall sign(s)
shall not exceed 1.25 square feet for each lineal foot of wall
frontage for each tenant space. The total allowable height for
the tenants of a multitenant building shall be 30 inches in
height unless the multitenant building contains an anchor
tenant which occupies the majority of the floor area of such
building or has 125 feet or more of wall frontage, in which case
the anchor tenant's sign, if it contains multiple lines of letters
or contains graphics or a company logo, may utilize no more
than two lines of letters (each no more than 30 inches in
height) and the total height of the stacked letters, graphics, or
logo shall not exceed 60 inches. There may be only one anchor
tenant designated per multitenant building.
(f) Wall signs for single-tenant buildings which are not classified
as an office building or an office building with additional
mercantile use(s) or multitenant building. Each such building
shall be permitted one wall sign which shall not exceed 1.25
square foot for each lineal foot of wall frontage. The total
allowable height for the wall sign shall be a maximum of 30
inches unless such building has 125 feet or more of wall
frontage, in which case such wall sign, if it contains multiple
lines of letters or contains graphics or a company logo, may
utilize no more than two lines of letters (each no more than 30
inches in height) and the total height of the stacked letters,
graphics, or logo shall not exceed 60 inches.
(g) Wall signs for large single-tenant buildings two stories or
greater in height and which have at least one building
elevation facing a public street of 250 feet or more in length
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:725
(when such single-tenant building is not otherwise classified
as an office building, or an office building with additional
mercantile uses, or a multitenant building), shall be permitted
one wall sign with a maximum sign height not to exceed 84
inches, and a maximum total allowable area which shall be
calculated by multiplying the linear footage of the wall
elevation on which the sign is intended to be installed by 1.50.
An additional wall sign may be installed on such a large singletenant
building on a secondary elevation, provided that such
sign shall not exceed a maximum height of 36 inches and a
maximum total area which shall be calculated by multiplying
the linear footage of the wall elevation on which the sign is
intended by 1.25. Additional wall signs for buildings described
in this subsection may be permitted, if such additional wall
sign may be permitted in accordance with Subsections B(1)(b)
or B(1)(i). [Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
(h) Wall signs, including any graphics or logo, shall not exceed the
width of the space the use occupies, or exceed 10% of the wall
surface to which they are attached. [Amended 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
(i) Upon buildings which are set back from the main road 35 feet
or less (as measured from the road right-of-way) and which
have more than 50% of the parking for the use located on the
opposite side of the building, a wall sign may also be attached
to the wall facing the parking area. [Amended 2-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 373]
(j) In order to achieve continuity of sign height and location
across the building facade, wall signs on a multitenant building
shall be of a size, type, and appearance as any other wall sign
attached to the outside of the same building; wall signs for
multitenant buildings shall be located within the same
horizontal plane area. [Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
(k) Wall signs shall be located between the heads of windows and
doors on the ground floor of the structure and the sills of
windows on the second floor, or upon the parapet of a one-story
building. When a wall contains no windows, the heads of
windows or doors in an adjacent wall shall be used to
determine the wall sign's required location. Wall signs utilizing
stacked letters, graphics and/or logos may be otherwise
located as approved by the Township Code Official. [Amended
2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
(l) Wall signs/corporate logo. When an entity requires signage to
include a corporate-type logo on a building, the Board of
Supervisors may, in its discretion, authorize the installation of
such corporate logo (which may be in excess of the applicable
size requirements of this section, provided that a formal
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:726
request for same is submitted to the Board of Supervisors
along with verification that such logo placement is a
requirement imposed as a contingency to the continued
operation of such entity's business). The maximum sign area
shall not exceed 1.25 square feet for each linear foot of wall
frontage of the wall upon which the sign is to be installed.
[Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
(m) Wall sign size increase for certain buildings. For buildings that
front along Perry Highway (United States Route 19) and are
set back 180 feet or more from the road right-of-way, the
maximum height of a primary wall sign shall not exceed 36
inches, unless otherwise approved by the provisions of this
section. [Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
(2) Ground/monument, freestanding, or pole/pylon signs.
(a) Each building is permitted either a ground/monument,
freestanding, or pole/pylon sign. There shall be only one
ground/monument, freestanding, or pole/pylon sign for each
principal structure regardless of the number of businesses
conducted within said building.
(b) A ground/monument, freestanding, or pole/pylon sign shall
only be located in the front yard of a property but no closer to a
street pavement than 15 feet, or closer than 20 feet to any
intersection provided under all circumstances, that the
location does not create a hazard or interfere with traffic
visibility, or the safe ingress or egress for motorists because of
location on the property or height above the ground and does
not interfere with any right-of-way use.
[1] Ground/monument signs.
[a] Shall be set back no less than 15 feet from the edge of
the pavement of the road cartway or berm of the
cartway;
[b] May be increased in height by one foot for every
additional three feet of setback from the road cartway
or berm, to a maximum of 10 feet in height;
[c] May be increased in size by eight square feet for every
additional three feet of setback from the road cartway
or berm to a maximum of 100 square feet in size;
[d] The foundation of the sign shall not protrude from the
ground by more than 24 inches at its highest point
above the finished grade;
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:727
[e] All portions of the foundation extending above ground
level shall be completely faced in decorative stone,
brick, or similar veneer;
[f] Chart for allowable increases:
Setback
(feet)
Height
(feet)
Area
(square feet)
15 5 60
18 6 68
21 7 76
24 8 84
27 9 92
30 10 100
[2] Freestanding, pole/pylon signs.
[a] A single support structure is permitted, provided that
the structure is 30% of the width of the sign face;
[b] Except for a single support structure, supporting
structures shall not exceed 10% of the width of the
sign face;
[c] The foundation of the sign shall not protrude from the
ground by more than 12 inches at its highest point
above the finished grade;
[d] All portions of the foundation extending above ground
level shall be completely faced in decorative stone,
brick, or similar veneer;
[e] No portion of the bottom edge of the sign face shall be
lower than five feet above the ground;
[f] No freestanding or pole/pylon sign shall be affixed to
its pole or support structure with chains or cables;
[g] Chart for allowable increases:
Setback
(feet)
Height
(feet)
Area
(square feet)
15 10 30
20 14 40
25 18 50
30 22 60
(3) Address signs.
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:728
(a) Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a
position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property;
(b) Address numbers shall contrast with their background;
(c) Address numbers shall be alphanumeric style letters, and not
Arabic type numerals;
(d) Address numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in height
and a maximum of 12 inches in height with a minimum stroke
width of 1/2 inch.
(4) Campus signs.
(a) Campus signs may be permitted when a master planned
multibuilding development has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors to direct patrons to a particular building;
(b) When a master planned multibuilding development has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors within the Town Center
Design Overlay (TCDO) District, one master campus sign may
be permitted to identify the master planned multibuilding
development. Such master campus sign shall be subject to the
following requirements: [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
[1] The master campus sign shall be set back a minimum of 30
feet from the edge of the pavement of the road cartway or
berm of the cartway;
[2] The master campus sign's face shall not exceed 100 square
feet;
[3] The master campus sign shall contain no more than two
sign faces, one per side;
[4] Corporate logos are permitted as a part of the master
campus sign;
[5] The recognized corporate colors may be utilized;
[6] The master campus sign may be illuminated as permitted
by § 84-121C of this chapter, except that master campus
signs may not be internally illuminated;
[7] The location of a master campus sign must be approved by
the Township prior to any installation;
[8] A master campus sign is intended to indicate the main
entrance to a master planned multibuilding development;
[9] When a secondary vehicular entrance is provided to an
approved master planned multibuilding development, a
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:729
secondary master campus sign shall be permitted at such
secondary vehicular entrance. A secondary master campus
sign shall be subject to all the requirements for a master
campus sign, except the secondary master campus sign
shall be no larger than 25 square feet in size.
(c) Campus signs within a master planned multibuilding
development directing patrons to a particular building shall be
subject to the following: [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
[1] The sign face of each campus sign shall not exceed six
square feet;
[2] The campus sign shall contain no more than two sign
faces, one per side;
[3] No corporate logos are permitted on the campus signs;
[4] The recognized corporate colors may be utilized as a
background feature;
[5] The campus sign shall not be illuminated;
[6] The campus sign shall not be a substitute for a traffic
control sign;
[7] The locations and quantities of campus signs must be
approved by the Township prior to any installation;
[8] Campus signs are not intended to indicate the entrance or
exit to individual establishments.
(d) A master campus sign or a secondary master campus sign shall
each be only of a monument design type, with minimum letter
heights of eight inches. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352]
(e) All master campus signs or secondary master campus signs
shall include landscaped areas adjacent to the sign(s), which
shall contain appropriate vegetation and ground cover so as to
enhance the visual appeal of the development entrance.
[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352119]
(5) Changeable copy signs, manual.
(a) Changeable copy areas may be incorporated into a permitted
ground/monument sign, a freestanding pole/pylon sign or
marquee sign so long as the changeable copy area is no greater
than 25% of the sign face;
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B(4)(f) through (i), which
included provisions relating to campus signs.
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:730
(b) Manual changeable copy signs shall have a solid background
that is darker than the changeable copy.
(6) Changeable copy sign, remote.
(a) Remote changeable copy areas may be incorporated into a
permitted ground/monument sign, a freestanding pole/pylon
sign or marquee sign so long as the changeable copy area is no
greater than 25% of the sign face; [Amended 3-16-2020 by
Ord. No. 390]
(b) All parts of the sign face, including any message or sign copy
must remain stationary for a period of no less that one minute;
(c) Light-emitting lamps, devices, cells, or any means of providing
the remote copy shall not sequentially change, fade, scroll,
flash, dim, or brighten and shall change in unison so as not to
produce the illusion of movement.
(d) The operation of the remote changeable copy sign shall have a
mechanism that automatically adjusts the illumination
brightness of the display to account for the ambient lighting so
as not to create significant glare or a measurable footcandle
level of 0.5 of greater, as such level is measured at the road.
[Added 3-16-2020 by Ord. No. 390]
(e) The intensity of the sign light source shall not produce glare,
the effect of which constitutes a traffic hazard or is otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. [Added
3-16-2020 by Ord. No. 390]
(7) Kiosk (sign).
(a) A kiosk and its related signage shall only per permitted within
the Traditional Village Overlay (TVO) District, or within the
Town Center Core Area (TCCA) of an approved Town Center
Planned Residential Development (TC-PRD);
(b) The signage contained on a kiosk shall relate to direction to
particular establishments or notices of community events;
(c) The structure for any kiosk must contain design elements of
the area, and shall be approved by the Township prior to
erection;
(d) The maximum footprint for a kiosk shall be four square feet or
less;
(e) The maximum height of a kiosk shall be no greater than eight
feet;
(f) The number of kiosks shall be limited to the number deemed
appropriate to convey the desired message;
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:731
(g) No advertising, other than the name of business
establishments of any kind shall be a part of a kiosk sign.
(8) Marquee sign. A marquee sign shall comply with the requirements
of a wall sign except such wall sign shall be attached to a marquee
that is constructed as a part of a building.
(9) Outdoor advertising sign (billboard). Outdoor advertising signs
shall not be considered a sign regulated by this section. Outdoor
advertising signs are regulated by § 84-71 of this chapter.
(10) Pathfinder signs.
(a) A pathfinder sign is a municipally owned and maintained sign
directing traffic to, from, or within a region within the
municipality to providing information for a commercial,
residential, or industrial development.
(b) A pathfinder sign provides the necessary information to
facilitate safe and efficient traffic flow and is typically located
on a site other than the facility or event to which the sign
directs.
(c) Pathfinder signs may be permitted in the Township for
providing direction to tourist attractions, commercial uses with
no visible means of identification along collector roads, public
buildings and hospitals under the following conditions:
[1] The sign shall contain only the name of the facility and the
information or graphic symbols necessary to provide
direction to the destination in a safe and efficient manner;
[2] The sign shall not contain a message or symbols having
advertising value;
[3] The sign shall not be internally illuminated;
[4] Pathfinder signs shall only be located as approved by the
governing body;
[5] Pathfinder signs shall only be permitted along collector
roads which include: Route 19, Swinderman Road, Route
910, Babcock Boulevard, Wallace Road, and other roads as
may be designated by the Board of Supervisors;
[6] The sign shall be located so as not to constitute a hazard or
interfere with traffic visibility or with safe ingress and
egress from any lot, parking area, drive, or street;
[7] Pathfinder signs shall be designed in accordance with the
Township of Pine specifications.
(11) Political signs.
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:732
(a) Political signs shall be no larger than four square feet per sign.
(b) Political shall be promptly removed after the date of the
primary or general election for which the signs related. In no
case shall political signs remain posted more than three days
following the election.
(c) Failure to remove political signs within the prescribed time
period will result in Township personnel removing said signs
and the Township seeking reimbursement for time expended
on the sign removal.
(d) Political signs shall not be installed so as to limit site distance
or create a safety hazard.
(12) Projecting sign.
(a) Projecting signs shall only be permitted within the Traditional
Village Overlay (TVO) District or within the Town Center Core
Area (TCCA) of a Town Center Planned Residential
Development (TC-PRD).
(b) Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(c) The lower edge of a projecting sign shall not be lower than 10
feet above the finished grade.
(d) Projecting signs shall not project more than six feet from the
building wall.
(e) Projecting signs shall not extend higher than the first floor or
15 feet, whichever is less.
(f) Projecting signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in sign area.
(13) Real estate signs. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 356]
(a) All real estate signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the edge of the road cartway.
(b) The maximum sign area for a residential real estate sign shall
be four square feet per side.
(c) The maximum sign area for a nonresidential real estate sign
shall be 16 square feet per side and may be utilized when an
entire vacant parcel or an entire building is for sale or lease.
Only one such nonresidential real estate sign may be erected
along each road frontage abutting the property which is for
sale or lease.
(d) The maximum sign area for a nonresidential real estate sign
announcing the availability of lease area(s) shall be six square
feet per side. Such nonresidential real estate signs must be
attached to the property's existing freestanding monument,
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:733
pole or pylon sign, and be of a style and design consistent
with the existing monument, pole or pylon sign. Nonresidential
real estate signs announcing the availability of lease area(s)
shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum size
of monument, pole or pylon sign areas contained elsewhere in
this Code.
(e) A real estate sign shall only be erected upon the property for
sale or lease; off-site real estate signs are prohibited.
(14) Safety control signs.
(a) A safety control sign may be installed by any federal, state, or
local agency designed to protect the public safety according to
adopted public safety regulations.
(15) Sandwich board sign. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352;
11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 356]
(a) A sandwich board sign announcing the opening of a new
business may be permitted for any newly registered business
within the Township. The period of time to display such
sandwich board sign shall not exceed 45 days from the date of
the opening of such business to the general public.
(b) Sandwich board signs announcing the opening of a new
business may be placed on or adjacent to a sidewalk along the
frontage of the business provided that five feet of sidewalk
width remains unobstructed.
(c) A sandwich board sign which lists the daily menu options for
restaurant uses shall be permitted for restaurants with their
own direct entrance to/from a sidewalk or parking area.
(d) Sandwich board signs for restaurant uses may be placed on or
adjacent to a sidewalk within 12 feet of the main entrance to
the restaurant, provided that five feet of sidewalk width
remains unobstructed and such sign does not impede or
diminish the required fire exit discharge areas.
(e) Only one sandwich board sign is permitted per business.
(f) The maximum size of a sandwich board sign is six square feet.
(g) All sandwich board signs shall be securely anchored so as not
to create a hazard should the sign become dislocated from its
intended location.
(16) Site development sign.
(a) A single site development sign not exceeding 48 square feet
announcing the erection of a building, the architect, and/or
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:734
contractor(s) may be erected after final municipal approval,
and may be maintained during the construction period.
(b) Following completion of construction the sign shall be
immediately removed.
(17) Temporary signs.
(a) The maximum area of a temporary sign shall not exceed 32
square feet.
(b) Only one temporary sign is permitted per property.
(c) Temporary sign permits shall be valid for a maximum of 30
days, after which the temporary sign must be removed.
(d) Only one temporary sign shall be permitted per calendar year.
(e) Temporary signs shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the edge
of the cartway or paved berm.
(f) Temporary signs shall not be attached to a utility pole, trees,
any traffic control sign.
(g) Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
(h) Temporary signs shall be adequately secured to the ground or
building.
(i) Signs otherwise prohibited by the Township Code are not
eligible for permitting as a temporary sign.
(j) Applicants for temporary signs shall submit the required sign
permit fee with the appropriate application and required
submission information. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
352; amended 3-16-2020 by Ord. No. 390]
(18) Time-and-temperature signs.
(a) Time-and-temperature signs may be incorporated into a sign
permitted elsewhere by this section.
(b) The maximum number or letter size shall be 12 inches
(c) The display shall not change more frequently than once every
six seconds.
(19) Traffic control signs. A traffic control sign may be installed by any
federal, state, or local agency designed to protect the public safety
according to adopted public safety regulations.
(20)Window signs.
(a) A window sign shall be permitted to be installed on the inside
of the window only.
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:735
(b) Window signs shall not cover more than 50% of the glazing of
any window.
(c) The copy of a window sign shall be designed to communicate
information about an activity, business, community event, or a
sale or service offered.
(d) Window signs shall not be permanently affixed to a window or
windowpanes.
(21) Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within the
Township of Pine:
(a) Advertising vehicle;
(b) Awning sign;
(c) Banners;
(d) Canopy sign;
(e) Flashing sign;
(f) Moving/animated sign;
(g) Off-premises sign;
(h) Pennant/streamer;
(i) Portable sign;
(j) Projection sign;
(k) Roof sign;
(l) Three-dimensional sign or display;
(m) Any other sign not specifically permitted by this section.
(22) Menu board signs. [Added 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
(a) A menu board sign may be permitted for a particular use when
a component of the use involves a vehicular drive-up or drivethrough
service, and such use dictates a need for the menu of
services provided by the business.
(b) Proposed menu board signage shall be included as a part of the
land development application and its review and approval
process.
(c) When menu board signage contains speakers to convey
dialogue or instruction, the volume specifications for such
speakers shall be in accordance with the noise limitations
contained within this chapter and so as not to create a noise
disturbance to any adjacent use.
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:736
(d) Freestanding menu board signs shall be subject to the
following:
[1] Only one freestanding menu board sign shall be permitted.
[2] Freestanding menu board signs may not exceed 50 feet
square feet and in size and may contain signage on one
side only;
[3] Freestanding menu board signage may be illuminated only
as permitted by § 84-121 C of this chapter;
(e) Wall-mounted menu board signage shall be subject to the
following:
[1] Wall-mounted menu board signage may be permitted in
the number needed to convey the menu of services to each
of the locations deemed necessary;
[2] Wall-mounted menu board signs may not exceed six square
feet in size and may contain signage on one side only;
[3] Wall-mounted menu board signage may be illuminated as
permitted by § 84-121C of this chapter.
C. Illumination.
(1) In addition to the requirements of § 84-121, all signs may be
illuminated by a light source so placed so as not to cause confusion
or hazard to traffic or conflict with traffic control signs or lights.
Lighting shall be so arranged so that the source of the light is not
visible from any point off the lot and so that only the sign is directly
illuminated.
(2) The illumination from any sign shall not cause any reflection or
glare upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
(3) Sources of all illumination shall be hidden or shielded from view.
(4) If a sign is internally illuminated at least 75% of the sign face must
be opaque.
(5) Signs consisting of individual letters that are internally illuminated
must be illuminated through backlighting or silhouette lighting, or
the face of the individual letters must be 75% opaque.
(6) Wall signs on buildings that are set back more than 100 feet from
the road right-of-way may be internally illuminated and exempted
from the backlighting requirement, provided that the source of the
illumination is not visible. The face of the sign shall be of sufficient
opacity to shield the light source.
(7) No sign shall utilize flashing or moving lights, or stationary lights
that create the illusion of movement.
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-121
68:737
(8) Exposed tube-style lighting shall not blink, flash, move, or give the
visual impression of movement.
(9) Exposed tube-style lighting shall not be used to outline or highlight
a building or any portion of a building or structure unless approved
as an architectural element of the building design and as such is
not considered a sign.
(10) Awnings or translucent canopies shall not be illuminated from the
underside of the awning or canopy by the direction of the light
toward the underside of the awning or canopy. Individual awnings
which have been installed over windows may be illuminated from
the exterior by gooseneck (or other architectural effect) lighting
directed over the exterior of the awning (if such illumination is
provided as an architectural component of the building). [Added
11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 352]
D. Additional standards.
(1) All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the local
building code and the National Electric Code.
(2) There shall be no more than one freestanding, pole/pylon sign or
one ground/monument permitted for any one building on any one
site.
(3) There shall be no more that one wall sign, one projecting sign, or
one marquee sign permitted for any one building.
(4) No sign shall be attached to a tree, utility pole, or otherwise affixed
to anything other than an approved sign support structure.
E. Permits.
(1) No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected until the owner,
occupier, or the applicant has made an application for the same,
paid the fees, in accordance with the current fee schedule, and
received a permit for the erection of the sign.
(2) A separate permit shall be required for the erection of any sign
regulated by this chapter, except that no permit shall be required
for the sale or lease of property provided that the sign is four
square feet or less.
(3) The erector of political placards or signs or an authorized agent of
the political party or candidate shall apply and obtain a permit from
the Township. The permittee shall be responsible to remove all
signs within three days following the election for which the signs
were erected.
(4) Applications for a sign permit shall include:
§ 84-121 PINE CODE § 84-121
68:738
§ 84-122. Site restoration after clearing and construction.
§ 84-123. Solar energy structures.
(a) A scaled drawing showing the design proposed, showing the
size, character, and color(s) of the proposed sign. The drawing
shall be sealed by a professional registered in the State of
Pennsylvania;
(b) A scaled drawing showing the parcel of land for any proposed
freestanding, pole/pylon sign or ground/monument sign and
the exact location, including dimensions, of the proposed
location for the sign. The drawing shall be sealed by a
professional registered in the State of Pennsylvania;
(c) An illumination plan showing the proposed method of
illumination of the sign;
(d) A digital photograph depicting the existing surroundings and
the proposed sign depicted in the photograph.
F. Maintenance of signs.
(1) Signs shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition, in
compliance will all applicable building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with this code.
(2) Any lawfully existing nonconforming sign cannot be enlarged,
reworded, redesigned, or altered in any way, except to bring the
sign into conformance with the requirements of this article.
(3) Any sign replacing a nonconforming sign shall conform to the
requirements of this section.
A. All lands, regardless of their slope, from which structures or natural
cover has been removed or otherwise destroyed shall be appropriately
finished and seeded and revegetated in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 78, § 78-43 of the Township of Pine Code, within a
reasonable time of such clearing activity.
B. In the case where natural cover has been removed incidental to
imminent development, the finishing and seeding shall not be required
until grading and construction are completed.
C. In all cases where replacement of cover cannot be accomplished
immediately upon completion of clearance activities, erosion and
sedimentation control measures required by the Township Grading
Chapter120 during clearance and construction shall be maintained on
the site until the replacement of cover can be accomplished.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 48, Excavations and Grading.
§ 84-121 SEWERS § 84-123
68:739
§ 84-124. Steep slope controls.
Any portion of any lot or tract that has a natural slope or finished slope after
grading in excess of 25% shall be considered a steep slope area and shall
be subject to the following regulations.
A. A solar energy structure may be installed on an existing roof, provided
such structure shall not encroach into any required yard.
B. The solar energy structure shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
any property line.
C. Such a structure may be mounted on the roof provided it has a
maximum height of four feet above the roof line as measured from the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, the deck line of mansard roofs, or
the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
D. No solar energy structure may be installed before securing a building
or construction permit.
A. Slopes in excess of 40%.
(1) Slopes in excess of 40% shall not be disturbed by grading,
construction, or removal of vegetation, other than the removal of
dead or diseased trees or other vegetation.
(2) All applications shall be accompanied by a certification from a
registered civil engineer that slopes in excess of 40% shall not be
disturbed in accordance with this subsection.
(3) This provision, if acceptable to the Township Engineer, may be
waived if such slope is found to be a localized, isolated slope
condition that is not environmentally sensitive or unstable (such as
a previous man-made earth fill condition) and/or is necessary for
installation of utility lines.
B. Slopes of 25% to 40%.
(1) Slopes in excess of 25% but less than 40% may be altered, provided
that the alteration is no greater than 60% of the slope area and is
performed in compliance with the specifications of Chapter 48,
Excavations and Grading, of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(2) Any application which proposes cutting or filling of natural slopes
which are in excess of 25% slope shall be accompanied by a
geotechnical report and a certification by a registered soils
engineer regarding the feasibility of the proposed grading, the
stability of the finished slopes, measures to mitigate landslides, soil
erosion, sedimentation and stormwater runoff and potential
impacts on adjacent properties. The consultant selected to prepare
the geotechnical report shall have credentials acceptable to the
§ 84-123 PINE CODE § 84-124
68:740
§ 84-125. Stormwater management. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 345; 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 373]
Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for subdivisions, land
developments, planned residential developments, and all activities that
Township, and the cost of preparation of the report shall be borne
by the applicant.
(3) The portion of a lot or tract which has a finished slope in excess of
25% shall be used only for any of the following permitted uses:
(a) Parks or other public or private outdoor recreational uses, if
authorized in the zoning district.
(b) Permanent open space and/or required buffer yards.
(c) Agriculture, tree farming, or forestry, if authorized in the
zoning district.
(d) Any use authorized as a permitted use or conditional use in the
zoning district in which the property is located, provided that
the required minimum lot area shall comply with the
requirements of Article III and that the existing slope in the
area where the structure is proposed is less than 25% and that
any alteration of the existing slope for construction of any
building complies with Subsection § 84-124B above.
C. Any request for a variance to the steep slope requirements of this
chapter or any proposed construction or grading on land which has a
slope in excess of 25% authorized by § 84-124B above shall be
accompanied by a statement from a registered civil engineer certifying
the feasibility of the proposed construction or grading and the
precautions recommended to protect foundations, preserve watersheds
and protect soil stability. A certification of the structural integrity of the
foundation shall be provided by the same registered civil engineer upon
completion of the foundation.
D. The slope of driveways serving single-family or attached single-family
dwellings shall not exceed 15%.
E. Where evidence exists of undermining or other geologic hazards on the
site, the applicant shall submit support information that shall discuss
the relationship between the geologic hazards on the site and the
stability of the natural slopes and the finished slopes resulting from any
proposed alteration performed in compliance with Chapter 48,
Excavations and Grading.
F. All slopes from which cover has been removed in compliance with the
provisions of this section shall be restored with permanent seeding and
shall be revegetated in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
78, § 78-43 of the Township of Pine Code.
§ 84-124 SEWERS § 84-125
68:741
increase the amount of impervious area and shall be designed to ensure
that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff from the site shall be no
greater after development than the rate of runoff from the site prior to
development, and be subject to release rates within the Pine Creek or
applicable watershed.
A. Statement of findings. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
finds that:
(1) Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities
threatens public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration
of rainwater and increased runoff flows and velocities, which
overtax the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers,
and greatly increases the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
(2) Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
(3) Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
(4) Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to
erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
streams and storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to
carry and control stormwater, undermines flood plain management
and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases pollution of water resources.
(5) Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
(6) Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate
storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES). Permittees are required to enact,
implement, and enforce a prohibition of nonstormwater discharges
to the permittee's regulated small municipal separate storm sewer
systems (MS4s).
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote health, safety, and
welfare within the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the
harms and maximizing the benefits described in this section, through
provisions designed to:
(1) Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
(2) Provide review procedures and performance standards for
stormwater planning and management.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:742
(3) Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which
requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
(4) Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
(5) Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program
to address nonstormwater discharges into the Township's separate
storm sewer system.
C. Statutory authority. The Township also is empowered to regulate land
use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.121
D. Applicability. All activities related to proper operation and maintenance
of approved stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may
contribute nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are
subject to regulation by this section.
E. Repealer. Any other provision(s) or provision of the Code of the
Township of Pine or regulation of the Township inconsistent with any of
the provisions of this § 84-125 are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
F. Severability. In the event that any provision of this § 84-125 is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of such section.
G. Compatibility with other requirements. Actions taken under this section
do not affect any responsibility, permit or approval for any activity
regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
H. Definitions applicable to this section. As used in this section, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Township.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:743
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this section. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this section, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the Township.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:744
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake
rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according
to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after
prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides
a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Inclusive of any or all of the following
meanings:
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Pine, a municipality located in
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act,122 which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where a storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(3)
122. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C; § 1251 et seq.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:745
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.
QUALIFIED PERSON or QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise
qualified by law to perform the work required by this section.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more or earth disturbance.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation that flows off the land without
filtering into the soil.
SECTION — Section 84-125 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Pine Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance for managing stormwater runoff
adopted by the County of Allegheny as required by the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water
Management Act.123"
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
123. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:746
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
section. "Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as
"SWM site plan" throughout this section.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine, a municipality located in
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP'S STANDARD DETAILS — The most recent construction
specifications adopted by the Township of Pine and contained in
Chapter 70 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
I. General standards. The following provisions shall be considered the
overriding performance standards against which all proposed
stormwater control measures shall be evaluated:
(1) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety and other property.
Such measures shall include, but not be limited to, such actions as
are required to:
(a) Assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no
greater after development than prior to development activities.
(b) Manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which will not adversely impact
the health on, or value of, any affected properties and in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law.
(2) Design storms.
(a) Stormwater management detention/retention facilities within
a development shall be designed to handle the peak rate of
runoff from one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and onehundred-
year frequency storm events. Whenever the
provisions of federal or state law impose a greater design
storm frequency, as for example, where drainage systems cross
highways, the stricter standards shall prevail.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:747
(b) All stormwater retention/detention facilities shall be designed
with emergency overflow facilities for the one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour duration storm.
(c) The stormwater volume required for all stormwater retention/
detention facilities shall be that volume necessary to handle
runoff of a one-hundred-year storm in any development, less
that volume discharged during the same storm period used to
calculate the volume of rainfall, at the approved release rate.
(d) The SCS, Type II Rainfall distribution shall be used for all
analyses. The design storm frequencies for the watershed are:
Design Storm
Rainfall Depth 24 Hours
(inches)
1 year 1.97
2 year 2.35
5 year 2.88
10 year 3.30
25 year 3.90
50 year 4.40
100 year 5.20
(3) The stormwater management plan shall consider all of the
stormwater runoff flowing over the project site. Runoff calculations
shall be made to insure that runoff from the fully developed
upstream watershed area (based on the Township's Comprehensive
Land Use Plan) can be accommodated by the pipes, drainage
easements and watercourses, etc., on the site.
(4) Joint development of control systems. Stormwater control systems
may be planned and constructed in coordination with two or more
developments, provided they are in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this section.
(5) Method of computation. All computations used in conjunction with
the analysis and design of stormwater management facilities shall
be based on one or more of the following methods:
(a) TR-55 - Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55.
(b) TR-20 - Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 20.
(c) Modified rational method.
(d) Penn State runoff model.
(e) Virginia Tech/Penn State runoff model. These methods for
determining peak discharge shall be used to:
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:748
[1] Determine predevelopment runoff conditions;
[2] Analyze the impact of development and compute the
increase in runoff after development; and
[3] Perform calculations in the design of any detention/
retention facilities used in controlling runoff.
[a] These methods of runoff computation developed and
used by the Soil Conservation Service and other
authorities are hereby adopted by the Township.
[b] The use of the Basic Rational Method in estimating
runoff may be employed in the design of the storm
sewer system within the development. The storm
sewer system shall be interpreted as the conduits,
culverts, inlets, and appurtenant features for the
conveying of stormwater to, through, or from a
development site to the point of final discharge or
control facility. The Rational Method shall not be used
in the analysis of stormwater runoff from the
development in its entirety or in conjunction with the
design of any retention/detention facilities or other
runoff control measures.
(6) Release of detained stormwater. The approved peak release rate of
stormwater from all retention/detention facilities for any storm
event shall be that which is experienced prior to development for
the same storm event up to and including the one-hundred-year
storm. Therefore, all retention/detention facilities shall provide
staged release of the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
one-hundred-year storms.
(7) Design of stormwater management facilities outlined in the plan
requires that runoff calculations be made for the site and areas,
which contribute drainage to the site. These calculations should be
based on land use, time of concentration, and other standard
aspects of hydraulic analysis.
(a) Temporary control measures/facilities. Runoff calculations of
the site's condition during development will be used to size
temporary control measures.
(b) Permanent control measures/facilities. Permanent control
measures/facilities shall be designed to assure that the
maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater after
development than prior to development activities, utilizing the
one-hundred year storm as a basis for calculations. Storm
sewer systems may be designed for the twenty-five-year storm
provided that the runoff will naturally drain to the detention
facility; otherwise, the storm sewer system must be designed
for the one-hundred-year storm event. Runoff calculations
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:749
must be made to insure that runoff from the fully developed
upstream watershed area (based on the Township's or
Allegheny County's Comprehensive Land Use Plan) can be
accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements,
watercourses, etc., on the site as well as those downstream
of the site to a point of permanent stream discharge. Where
downstream facilities are not adequate to convey flow, reduced
release rates shall be considered and utilized.
(8) Runoff calculation shall also include complete hydrology and
hydraulic analysis of all downstream swales and pipe facilities to
permanent stream discharge point as well as all erosion control
facilities. Analysis shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Computation of hydraulic and energy gradelines. Velocities of
flow, slopes, capacity and roughness coefficient of conduits and
grassed waterways.
(b) Capacity of sediment basins and permanent holding ponds.
(c) All drainage facilities shall be designed to contain the energy
gradeline for the peak flow rate for the design storm within the
structure a minimum of two feet below the surface elevation.
The hydraulic grade line must be within the pipe. Swales and
channels shall provide at least one foot of freeboard above the
energy gradeline. Backwater effects of pipes discharging
under surcharge conditions shall be included.
(9) Single-family lots.
(a) Retention facilities shall be constructed for all single-family lot
developments or single-family lots located in land
developments, which for terrain reasons cannot utilize the
development's retention systems. Retention facilities shall
consist of gravel filled sumps, ponds, tanks or other approved
facilities, sized in accordance with standard details in the
Township Construction Standards. Refer to Figures SWM 6,
6-A and 7 for minimum volume size per single residence roof
area.
(b) Storage volumes for roof areas greater than 5,000 square feet
shall be calculated using the methods outlined in this section.
(c) All stormwater retention facilities shall be located at least 10
feet from foundation walls in a location approved by the
Township. All pipe from roof drains to a point 10 feet from the
structure shall be a minimum Schedule 40 PVC pipe or
approved equal.
(10) Easements. Easements for stormwater management facilities shall
be required to have a minimum width of 20 feet. Where a
subdivision or land development is, or will be, traversed by a
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:750
watercourse, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage
easement of a width sufficient for the purpose, but not less than 20
feet. The stormwater detention facilities must be provided within
a drainage easement. An access easement must be provided from
the public right-of-way to the stormwater detention facility with a
minimum width of 20 feet.
(a) Operation and management plans for stormwater management
approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code § 102 after the date of this
section shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
(b) If a conservation easement is provided the long-term
ownership, access, maintenance, and use restrictions must be
identified on the recording plan.
(11) Flood-prone areas. Land identified as flood-prone on maps issued
by the Federal Insurance Administration shall be subject to the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program and shall
comply with the provisions of the Code of the Township of Pine
governing floodplains.
(12) Stormwater detention facilities.
(a) If detention facilities are utilized for the development site, the
facility shall be designed such that the post-development peak
runoff rates from the development site are controlled to those
rates defined by the subarea release-rate percentage or noharm
evaluation for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-
, and one-hundred-year design storms. Except, however, where
downstream flooding problems exist, the Township may impose
additional reduced release-rate criteria. Detention facilities
shall drain within 24 to 72 hours from the end of the storm
event.
(b) All detention facilities shall be equipped with multistage outlet
structures to provide discharge control for the one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm
frequencies. Provisions shall also be made for safely passing
the post-development one-hundred-year storm runoff flows
without damaging (i.e., impairing the continued function of)
the facilities.
(c) Shared-storage facilities, which provide detention of runoff for
more than one development site, may be considered within a
single subarea. Such facilities shall meet the design criteria
contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the
development sites involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a
manner so as to avoid adverse impacts, such as flooding or
erosion, to channels and properties located between the
development site and the shared-storage facility.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:751
(d) Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple-use
facilities, such as lakes, ballfields, or similar recreation uses,
are encouraged wherever feasible.
(e) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the
design of the detention facilities include:
[1] Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and
installed to prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundmenttype
structures should be protected from soil erosion.
[2] Control and removal of debris, both in the storage
structure and in all inlet or outlet devices, shall be a design
consideration.
[3] Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations and other
structures shall be protected and designed to minimize
safety hazards.
[4] The water depth of a storage pond shall be limited to that
which is safe for children. Otherwise, appropriately
landscaped fencing at least four feet in height shall be
required.
[5] Side slopes of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1
horizontal to vertical dimension.
[6] Landscaping shall be provided for the facility, which
harmonizes with the surrounding area.
[7] The facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance,
considering the frequency and type of equipment that will
be required.
[8] Detention ponds shall be designed to be integrated into
the overall site design and incorporate landscaping
features, fountains and passive recreational amenities
such as benches and pathways to provide an aesthetic and
functional facility that fits within the character of the
Township.
[a] When aesthetic and passive recreational amenities are
incorporated into the design of the detention pond,
the detention pond may be calculated as a part of the
required open space as required elsewhere in this
chapter.
[b] Side slopes of such detention ponds shall not exceed a
ratio of four-to-one horizontal to vertical dimension.
[9] Infiltration best management practices (BMPs) shall be
spread out and shallow as much as practicable.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:752
J. Additional requirements.
(1) In conjunction with meeting the requirements of this section, the
applicant shall refer to and meet all conditions and requirements
set forth in the provisions of § 84-125.1 of the Code of the Township
of Pine regulating municipal separate storm sewer systems
("MS4s") prohibited discharge.
K. Design calculations and reports.
(1) Stormwater runoff and design calculations shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer for review and to the Board of Supervisors
for approval with the application for preliminary and/or final
approval of a subdivision, land development, or any other activity
that require stormwater management. Plans, profiles, cross
sections reports and/or specifications showing complete
construction details shall be submitted with the application for final
approval.
(2) The stormwater runoff and design calculations, plans and reports
shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Pennsylvania-registered
engineer with qualifications and experience in preparing
stormwater management plans.
(3) Additional analysis, calculations and design criteria may be
required for both on-site and off-site stormwater systems where it
has been determined by the Township Engineer that further study
is necessary.
(4) Upon request by the Township Engineer, stormwater runoff
calculations shall be provided for: the outlet and inlet sides of all
stormwater drainage and storage facilities and structures; at points
in a public street with a change of grade; or where water from a
proposed structure, facility or vehicular way is to enter an existing
public street, existing storm sewer, existing drainage ditch or
existing stormwater storage facility.
L. Exemptions for small developments.
(1) At the time of application, the Township shall determine if the
development qualifies as a "small development" and, therefore, is
eligible for a simplified stormwater plan submission. For the
purposes of this section, a small development is:
(a) Any development which results (or will result when fully
constructed) in the creation of 5,000 square feet or less of
impervious surface area.
(2) A small development shall be exempt from the preparation of a
stormwater management plan, pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. However, such developments shall
provide safe management of stormwater in accordance with the
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:753
performance standards of this section and as approved by the
Township.
(3) Application for small developments shall include a plan, which
describes, narratively and graphically, the type and location of
proposed on-site stormwater management techniques or the
proposed connection to an existing storm sewer system. Depending
upon actual site conditions, the number of lots proposed and
similar considerations, the Township shall determine if the plan
must be prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(4) The Township Engineer shall review and the Township shall
approve the proposed provisions for stormwater management for
small developments. Where the applicant is proposing to connect to
an existing storm sewer, the applicant's engineer shall determine
that sufficient capacity exists in the storm sewer from the point of
connection to the point of outlet in the natural drainage system.
The Township shall also determine if the proposed development
site is part of a larger parcel or tract, which was subject to any
specific stormwater management controls contained in a prior
plan.
(5) For a parcel or tract of land held in single ownership, only one
application for a small development, as defined above, shall be
permitted before requiring a stormwater management plan for the
entire parcel. A project cannot be phased to circumvent the
stormwater requirements by using the exemption for small
developments.
M. Stormwater plan content. The stormwater management plan for all
developments except small developments, as defined in Subsection L
above, shall consist of the following three components:
(1) Narrative report. The narrative report shall consist of a general
statement of the project giving the purpose and engineering
assumptions and calculations for control measures and facilities.
The following information shall be included.
(a) General description of the project.
(b) General description of accelerated runoff control plan.
(c) General description of erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(d) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start
and completion dates.
(e) Location and watershed characteristics.
(f) Hydraulic and hydrologic calculations, methodology, and basis
of design. Computation of hydraulic and energy gradelines
shall be included. All drainage facilities shall be designed to
contain the energy gradeline for the peak flow rate for the
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:754
design storm within the structures and pipes. Swales and
channels shall provide at least one foot of freeboard above the
energy gradeline.
(g) Brief soils description.
(h) A list of the permits and approvals relative to stormwater
management that will be required from other governmental
agencies and anticipated dates of submission and receipt.
Copies of the applications must be submitted to the Township.
(2) Preliminary plan. The preliminary plan shall provide, and be
accompanied by, maps and other descriptive material indicating
the feasibility of the plan and showing the following:
(a) A key map showing the development site's location within the
designated watershed and subwatershed (consult watershed
stormwater plans for boundaries). On all site drawings, show
the boundaries of the watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are
located on the development site and identify the watershed
names and/or subwatershed numbers.
(b) Location of the one-hundred-year floodplain on the
development site based on the Township of Pine Flood
Insurance Study Maps or a determination by the applicant's
engineer.
(c) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries within the
development site.
(d) The streets, storm sewers and other storm drains to be built,
the basis of their design, the outfall and outlet locations and
elevations, the receiving stream or channel and its high water
elevation and the functioning of the drains during high water
conditions.
(e) The areas of the proposed parking pavements, if any, which are
planned to be depressed to provide stormwater storage or
conveyance. A maximum of six inches depth of water may be
ponded in a proposed parking area, provided it is documented
that such ponding does not affect the health, safety, or welfare
of those persons using the property.
(f) Existing streams and watercourses to be maintained and new
channels to be constructed, their locations, cross-sections, and
profiles.
(g) Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, if any, their
materials, elevations, waterway openings, and basis of design.
(h) Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained,
enlarged, or otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be
built and the basis of their design.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:755
(i) The approximate location and percentage of the total land area
in the development, which will be covered by impervious
surfaces after construction is completed.
(j) The slope, type, and size of all proposed and existing storm
sewers and other waterways.
(k) Existing contours at intervals of two feet must be provided,
including elevations, watercourses, trees, and other significant
natural features.
(l) All existing buildings, sewers, waterlines, and other significant
man-made features.
(m) All natural features, including bodies of water (natural and
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales,
wetlands and other natural drainage courses on the
development site and those off-site which will be affected by
runoff from the development.
(n) Approximate depth, shape, size, and storage of any proposed
retention facility.
(o) One or more typical cross-sections of all existing and proposed
channels or other open drainage facilities, showing the
elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes
thereto, together with the high water elevations expected from
the one-hundred-year storm under the controlled conditions
called for by this chapter and the relationship of structures,
streets and other utilities.
(p) A site plan showing the property lines, dimensions of the site,
and location of existing and proposed structures, sewers,
waterlines, easements and rights-of-way.
(q) Certification of the registered professional engineer
responsible for preparation of the plan.
(3) Final plan. Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the final plan
shall be submitted to the Township. The final plan shall provide all
descriptive material and maps previously submitted and required
prior to the final plan, in addition to the following items:
(a) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of
the storm sewer system, detention facilities, and sediment and
erosion control operations. Hydraulic and energy grade lines
shall be provided for both the existing and proposed storm
sewers to evaluate the storm system.
(b) All plans and profiles of proposed storm sewers and open
channels, including horizontal and vertical controls, elevations,
sizes, slopes, and materials. All drainage facilities shall be
designed to contain the energy gradeline for the peak flow rate
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:756
for the design storm within the structures and pipes. Swales
and channel shall provide at least one foot of freeboard above
the energy gradeline.
(c) Locations, dimensions, and design details required for the
construction of all facilities.
(d) For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes
with corresponding water surface elevations and basin outflow
rates for those water surface elevations.
(e) For all detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and
outflow for the peak design flows from the site under natural
and developed conditions.
(f) A description of operation for all detention basins.
(g) Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two feet.
(h) The staging of earthmoving activities and program of
operation, including a schedule for the installation of all
temporary and permanent stormwater control measures and
devices.
(i) All information relative to the design and operation of
emergency spillways.
(j) Emergency routing of outfall for stormwater runoff in the event
of failure of off-site drainage structures.
(k) When major control facilities, such as retention basins,
requiring a PA DEP permit, are planned, soil structures and
characteristics shall be investigated. Plans and data prepared
by a licensed professional engineer with experience and
education in soil mechanics shall be submitted. These
submissions should consider and offer design solutions for
frost heave potential, shrink/swell potential, soil bearing
strength, water infiltration, soil settling characteristic, fill and
backfilling procedures and soil treatment techniques as
required to protect the improvements or structures.
(l) All erosion and sedimentation control measures, temporary as
well as permanent, in sufficient detail to clearly indicate the
effectiveness of the plan.
(m) Project specifications relative to stormwater control, erosion,
and sedimentation.
(n) Evidence that all on-site and off-site easements required to
convey runoff flow to an existing public drainage facility or a
permanent stream have been granted to the operating entity.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:757
(o) Provide the information to conform with the requirements
noted in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(p) Provide a list of adjacent property owners within 200 feet of
the subject property and documentation that the adjacent
property owners have been notified (in advance and in writing)
of the proposed project.
(4) Maintenance plan. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
establishing ownership and maintenance responsibilities for all
stormwater control facilities (identifying the specific person or
entity responsible) and detailing financial requirements and
sources of funding shall be submitted with the final plan. Any legal
agreements (substantially in the form specified in Appendix A to
this section124) or covenants required to implement the
maintenance program shall be submitted.
N. Stormwater management performance standards.
(1) Stormwater management districts.
(a) For purposes of stormwater management, the Township is
divided into the following stormwater management districts:
[1] Pine Creek.
[2] North Fork.
[3] Brush Creek.
[4] Montour Creek.
[5] Breakneck Creek.
(b) One or more of these districts may be further divided into
subareas which have similar hydrological characteristics and
drain to a common point.
(c) The location and boundaries of the stormwater management
districts and subareas are adopted as overlay districts to the
Township Zoning Map and are shown on Appendix D125
attached hereto and on the watershed maps which are
maintained in the Township office.
(2) General standards. The following provisions shall be considered
the overriding performance standards against which all proposed
stormwater control measures shall be evaluated, except for the
Pine Creek Watershed, which may have stricter standards, and they
shall apply in all stormwater management districts in the
municipality.
124. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
125. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:758
(a) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are
reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or
other property. Such measures shall include such actions as
are required:
[1] To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is
no greater after development than prior to development
activities; or
[2] To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health and property from possible
injury.
(b) The stormwater management plan for the development site
must consider all the stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
(c) No discharge of toxic materials into any stormwater
management system will be permitted.
(3) Watershed standards for all watershed districts. The stormwater
performance standards contained in this section are intended to
implement the standards and criteria contained in the Pine Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, as well as the other
applicable watershed areas, adopted and approved as required by
the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1 et
seq.). If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this
chapter and the standards and criteria of the plan, or if the
watershed plan is subsequently amended, then the standard
criteria of the current watershed plan shall govern.
(a) Release-rate percentage.
[1] Application. All subdivisions and land development
activities which result in an increase in the postdevelopment
peak rate of stormwater runoff from any
outfall on the development site shall be subject to releaserate
percentage for the watershed subarea in which the
site (or outfall) is located. A listing of the release-rate
percentage for each subarea in the Pine Creek Watershed
appears as Appendix E126 at the end of this section, and the
subareas are delineated on the watershed subarea map
(see Appendix D127 and as such is maintained in the
Township's office) in the watershed plan.
[2] Definition. The release-rate percentage defines the
percentage of the redevelopment peak rate of runoff that
126. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
127. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:759
can be discharged from an outfall on the site after
development. It applies uniformly to all land developments
or alterations within a subarea, and the post-development
rate of runoff discharging from each outfall of the
development site cannot exceed the release-rate
percentage for the subarea in which it is located.
[3] Procedure for use. The steps that must be followed to
utilize the release-rate percentage for a particular
development site are as follows:
[a] Identify from the watershed subarea map the specific
subarea in which the development site is located and
obtain the subarea release-rate percentage.
[b] Compute the pre- and post-development runoff
hydrographs for each stormwater outfall for the site,
using the soil cover complex method (SCS TR-55), for
the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five- and one hundred-year
design storms, applying no on-site detention for
stormwater management, but including any
techniques to minimize impervious surfaces and/or
increase the time of concentration for stormwater
runoff flowing over the development site. If the postdevelopment
peak runoff rate is less than or equal to
the predevelopment peak runoff rate, then additional
stormwater control shall not be required at that
outfall. If the post-development peak runoff rate is
greater than the predevelopment value, then
stormwater detention will be required and proceed to
Subsection E(3)(b)[3][c] below.
[c] Multiply the subarea release-rate percentage by the
predevelopment rate of runoff from the development
site to determine the maximum allowable release rate
from any detention facility for the two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five- and one-hundred-year design storm
events.
(b) No-harm evaluation.
[1] An applicant may seek to extend the otherwise applicable
subarea release-rate percentage by performing the noharm
evaluation, which requires an independent
engineering analysis to demonstrate that other reasonable
options exist to protect downstream areas from harmful
storm runoff impacts.
[2] The no-harm evaluation shall be prepared by a registered
engineer who is experienced in hydrology and hydraulics.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:760
[3] The analysis for the no-harm evaluation shall be submitted
to the Township for review by the Township Engineer and
approval of the Township.
(c) Runoff curve numbers.
[1] The following runoff curve numbers shall be used:
Ground
Cover
Hydraulic
Soil
Group
Curve Numbers
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Grass 39 61 74 80
Impervious 98 98 98 98
Gravel 89 89 89 89
[2] Wooded sites and developed sites shall assume for the
predevelopment condition that the site is wooded in good
condition.
(d) Time of concentrations.
[1] Sheet flow lengths shall not exceed 100 feet.
[2] Shallow concentrated flow lengths shall not exceed 1,000
feet.
(e) Mannings 'n' values.
[1] Impervious surfaces: n = 0.011.
[2] Agricultural lands: n = 0.17.
[3] Grass, lawn, or open space: n = 0.24.
[4] Wooded areas: n = 0.40.
(4) Redevelopments greater than 2,000 square feet shall conform to
the following requirements:
(a) One of the following minimum performance standards shall be
accomplished. Selection of the performance standard shall be
determined by which is the most appropriate for the given site
conditions:
[1] Reduce the total impervious cover of the site (i.e., by using
pervious pavement, replacement of pavement with
pervious planting areas or green roof systems) by at least
25%, based on a comparison of existing impervious cover
to proposed impervious cover; or
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:761
[2] Provide facilities designed to attenuate the runoff volume
from the one-year twenty-four-hour post development
storm event for at least 24 hours, or
[3] Provide facilities to insure that the post development peak
discharge rate shall not exceed the predevelopment peak
discharge rate multiplied by the "sub-basin release rate
percentage" (where determined in the Pine Creek
watershed) for the two- and ten-year twenty-four-hour
storm events. A maximum predevelopment cover CN of 70
shall be assumed.
(b) Water quality improvements shall be provided for drainage
areas not otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either
at the source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from
the source of runoff. Stormwater quality management facilities
shall be designed to capture and treat 0.25 inch of runoff from
all pavement areas (i.e., parking lots, pavements and
noncovered sidewalks). Roof area may be excluded from this
calculation.
(5) New developments shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Water quality improvements shall be achieved in conjunction
with or as part of infiltration practices (if used). Water quality
improvements shall also be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff
generated by the one-inch rainfall event. Follow current DEP
standards for design of water quality BMPs.
(b) The post development peak discharge rate shall not exceed the
predevelopment peak discharge rate multiplied by the "subbasin
release rate percentage" (where determined in the Pine
Creek watershed) for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm events
pursuant to the predevelopment cover assumptions.
(c) Facilities capable of attenuating rainfall runoff shall be
provided and be designed to attenuate the runoff volume from
the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event for at least 24
hours.
(d) Stormwater shall be infiltrated and/or discharged within the
same drainage area of the stream receiving the runoff from the
development site prior to development.
(e) Structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices that make best possible use of infiltration on-site
shall be considered in all site designs, when appropriate.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:762
O. Construction criteria for stormwater control facilities. Stormwater
management facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the
following minimum specifications:
(1) All workmanship and materials shall conform to the adopted
Township's Standard Details. In addition, all workmanship and
materials shall conform to the latest edition of Penn DOT Form 408
and be supplied by manufacturers or suppliers listed in Penn DOT's
Bulletin 15.
(2) All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
(3) All pond outlet structure pipes shall have suitable gaskets to
prevent leakage and piping of water through the pond
embankment.
(4) All pipe outlets shall discharge onto a stone riprap blanket to
prevent erosion of soil. Riprap will be sized considering pipe exit
velocities.
(5) Controls shall be installed at initial stages of earthmoving and
otherwise as outlined in the staging of earthmoving activities
section of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(6) The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined
drainage course, which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater
runoff cannot be discharged to a defined drainage course,
documentation of written permission from each downstream
property owner shall be provided and recorded for all properties
between the source of discharge and the defined drainage course.
(7) All stormwater detention facilities shall be screened from view of
existing roads or streets located within the Township, which is a
minimum of six feet in height with sufficient access or maintenance
vehicles. The screening materials must be approved by the
Township. Landscaping of the pond embankment shall not be
permitted.
(8) Provide a geotechnical report for the construction of all stormwater
facilities, including the following: stormwater detention basins and
the embankment; drainage swales; and infiltration areas.
P. Maintenance criteria for stormwater control facilities. Maintenance is
an essential part of the successful functioning of a stormwater
management system and the following shall be required:
(1) Maintenance during development. Maintenance during
development of a project shall be the responsibility of the
developer and/or landowner and shall usually include, but shall not
be limited to:
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:763
(a) Removal of silt from all debris basins, traps or other structures
or measures when 40% of capacity is filled with silt.
(b) Disposal of collected silt in a manner which will not adversely
affect the environment.
(c) Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities such as
replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters, or similar
measures.
(d) Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and
mulching or sodding of scoured areas where vegetation has not
been successfully established. A developer or landowner
retains this obligation as to property he or she has developed
or improved even if the proper season for "seeding" occur
initially sometime after the project is otherwise completed in
whole or as to a particular phase.
(e) Installation of necessary controls sufficient to protect against
problems caused by storm events within design frequencies.
(f) Removal of all temporary measures upon completion of the
project.
(2) After acceptance of the plan by the Township. In the event that the
Township accepts public improvements in the plan, except in cases
where an agreement between the developer and the Township have
been executed to the contrary, the maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the developer or his assigns and shall include,
where necessary:
(a) Mowing to maintain adequate stands of grass and to control
weeds. Chemical weed control may be used if state and
Township regulations are met. Selection of seed mixtures shall
reflect the type of maintenance desired by the Township.
(b) Removal of silt from all permanent structures, which trap silt
or sediment to keep this material from building up in grassed
waterways and other permanent structures, thereby, reducing
their capacity.
(c) Removal of trees and shrubs from pond embankments.
(d) Repair of animal burrows and removal of animals causing the
same.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the developer to inspect all
permanent facilities to see that corrective action is taken where
necessary.
(4) Stormwater facilities located on private property shall be
maintained by the landowner or his agent; however, this does not
relieve the landowner or his agent of the obligation to inspect their
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:764
own facilities. The Township reserves the right to enter upon
private property to make periodic reasonable inspections and to
require the landowner to take necessary corrective actions. An
easement shall be recorded granting access over private property
to the stormwater facilities.
(5) The owner shall convey to the Township easements and/or rightsof-
way to assure access for periodic inspections by the Township
and maintenance if required.
(6) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change new information
will be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the change.
(7) The owner shall establish any special maintenance funds or other
financing sources, in accordance with the approved maintenance
plan.
(8) The owner shall pay the amount due to the Special Stormwater
Facility Maintenance Fund.
(a) Persons installing stormwater storage facilities will be
required to pay a specified amount to the Township of Pine
Stormwater Facility Maintenance Fund to help defray the costs
of periodic inspections and annual maintenance expenses. The
amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
[1] If the storage facility is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic
inspections performed by the Township or its agents for a
period of 10 years, as reasonably estimated by the
Township. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed by the Township or its agents and billed directly
to the owner.
[2] If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual
costs for maintenance and inspections to be performed by
the Township or its agents for 10 years, as reasonably
estimated by the Township.
[3] The amount of the deposit to the maintenance fund
covering annual inspection and maintenance costs shall be
converted to present worth of the annual series values.
The Township Manager shall determine the present-worth
equivalents, which shall be subject to the final approval of
the Township Supervisors.
(b) If the storage facility which is proposed also serves as a public
recreation facility, such as a lake or ballfield, the Township may
reduce or waive the amount of the required deposit to the
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:765
maintenance fund based on the value of the land for public
recreation purposes.
(c) If at some future time any storage facility (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm
sewers or another storage facility (i.e., a distributed storage
facility), the unused portion of the maintenance fund will be
applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the
deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment and
connection are paid will be returned to the depositor.
(9) If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities,
following due notice by the Township to correct the problems, the
Township shall perform the necessary maintenance or corrective
work. The owner shall reimburse the Township for all costs upon
presentation of documentation of same.
(10) Additional items may be included in the maintenance agreement
where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
maintenance of all facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Township's Solicitor.
Q. Inspections of stormwater management controls during construction.
(1) The Township or a designated representative shall field review the
construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities for the development site. The permittee shall
notify the Township 48 hours in advance of the completion of the
following key development phases:
(a) At the completion of the preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction
of temporary stormwater management and erosion control
facilities.
(b) At the completion of rough grading, but prior to placing
topsoil, permanent drainage or other site development
improvement and ground covers.
(c) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at
such times as specified by the Township.
(d) Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
(e) Completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures
or other site restoration work done in accordance with the
approved plan and permit.
(2) No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the
preceding one has been field reviewed by the Township Engineer
and approved by the Township in writing. If there are deficiencies
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:766
in any phase, the Township shall issue a written description of
the required corrections and stipulate the time by which the
corrections must be made.
(3) If during construction the contractor or permittee identifies any
site conditions, such as subsurface soil conditions or alterations in
surface or subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of
the approved stormwater facilities, said person must notify the
Township within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition and
request a field review by the Township. The Township shall
determine if the condition requires a stormwater plan modification.
(4) In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of
landslide-prone soils or where other special site conditions exist,
the Township may require special precautions, such as soil tests
and core borings, full-time resident project representative services
and/or similar measures. All costs of any such measures shall be
borne by the permittee.
R. Stormwater culverts. Stormwater culverts, bridges and similar
structures serving public streets, access driveway or other vehicular
rights-of-way shall be designed to support HS-20 loading and any other
imposed loadings necessary without structurally damaging the
drainage system. Stormwater culverts, bridges or other structures
which do not serve vehicular traffic shall be designed to support the
necessary loading without structurally damaging the pipe or affecting
its capacity for drainage. Said design shall be approved by the
Township Engineer and shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) Conduit size of culverts and other enclosed components of a
stormwater drainage system shall be based on computed
hydrologic and hydraulic data and computations shall be approved
by the Township. The minimum size of any enclosed structure to be
maintained by the Township shall be 15 inches in diameter. The
minimum size of any enclosed structure to be privately maintained
shall be 15 inches in diameter, unless the design calculations,
approved by the Township, justify a lesser size. In no case shall
larger pipes/culverts be connected to smaller pipes/culverts.
(2) The design of any enclosed drainage course shall provide a
minimum cleaning velocity of three feet per second. When the
design provides for a maximum velocity greater than 10 feet per
second, the enclosed components shall be lined or protected to
prevent scour.
(3) The design of headwall and endwall structures for enclosed
stormwater facilities shall be approved by the Township and shall
be in accordance with the Township Construction Standards.
(4) Energy dissipaters shall be required at the outlet side of all
enclosed culverts or similar components and shall be designed in
accordance with the Township Construction Standards.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:767
(5) The type of materials used for enclosed culverts and similar
components shall comply with the Township's Standard Details. No
stormwater facility shall be enclosed or covered over until the
Township has field reviewed the construction.
S. Open stormwater drainage courses. Open stormwater drainage courses
shall be designed for a maximum velocity not to exceed 10 feet per
second and a minimum velocity of five feet per second. A minimum
velocity of three feet per second may be authorized by the Township
where a greater slope cannot be achieved to permit the standard
required minimum velocity. An open stormwater drainage course shall
include a lining (riprap, concrete or bituminous) to prevent erosion. The
applicant shall obtain approval from the Allegheny County
Conservation District (ACCD), if required.
T. Prohibition against nonstormwater discharges. Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer
system which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(a) As provided in § 84-125T(2); and
(b) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
(2) Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
Township that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(a) Air-conditioning condensate;
(b) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(c) Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
(d) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(e) Irrigation drainage;
(f) Lawn watering;
(g) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred, and where detergents
are not used;
(h) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and
fire hydrant flushing;
(i) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
(j) Springs;
(k) Uncontaminated groundwater;
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:768
(l) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains;
(m) Water from individual residential car washing;
(n) Water from sump pumps.
(3) In the event that the Township determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 84-125T(2) significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP,
the Township will notify the responsible person to cease the
discharge.
(4) Upon notice provided by the Township under § 84-125T(3), the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
(6) Prohibited connections. The following connections are prohibited,
except as provided in Subsection T(2) above:
(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows any nonstormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks; and
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system, which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records, and approved by the Township.
U. Requirement for erosion and sediment controls.
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
(2) The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more,
under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
(3) In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES
Construction Activities permit is required for any earth disturbance
of one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters
or the Township's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "regulated earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during any stage of, a
larger common plan of development.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:769
(4) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or
Allegheny County Conservation District must be provided to the
Township. The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide General Permit (PAG-2)]
satisfies this requirement.
(5) A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
V. Postconstruction stormwater runoff controls for new development and
redevelopment, including operations and maintenance of stormwater
best management practices (BMPs).
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a plan, which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements
after construction, is complete.
(2) The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses
(e.g., drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the
level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 (collectively referred to herein as "state water quality
requirements").
(3) To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated
earth disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can
be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff
conditions, so that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (#392-0300-002, September 28,
2002), this may be achieved by the following:
(a) Infiltration: Replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
(b) Treatment: Use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff; and
(c) Streambank and streambed protection: Management of
volume and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to
prevent physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from
scouring and erosion).
(4) DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation, and maintenance of best management practices
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:770
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and
redevelopment (hereinafter "development") after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete. These requirements include
the need to implement postconstruction stormwater BMPs with
assurance of long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
(5) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or
Allegheny County Conservation District must be provided to the
Township. The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide General Permit (PAG-2)]
satisfies this requirement.
W. Post-construction stormwater record plan.
(1) Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or utilization of the
proposed improvements, the applicant must provide the Township
a certified post-constructed stormwater record plan, a copy of a
recorded stormwater operations and maintenance (O&M) plan and
stormwater operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement and the
proof of recording for any project containing stormwater
management facilities including storm sewers and BMPs.
(2) The owner shall provide a digital file, on state plain coordinate
system, of the location of all BMPs constructed on the property.
X. Right of entry.
(1) BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf
of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this section.
(2) Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
(3) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a BMP
shall be deemed a violation of this section.
Y. Enforcement and sanctions.
(1) The violation of any provision of this section is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
(3) Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
Township may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:771
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of prohibited discharges;
(c) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs;
(f) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(g) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
(4) Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this section. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township
from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
(5) Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals. Any building,
land development or other permit or approval for regulated earth
disturbance activities issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit;
(b) A violation of any provision of this section; or
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others.
(6) Penalties.
(a) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable
with costs, or imprisonment, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
(b) In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this
section. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the
right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy
or relief.
Z. Fees and expenses.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:772
(1) General.
(a) The Township may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP
operations and maintenance plans to defray review costs
incurred by the Township. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
(2) Expenses covered by fees. The fees required by this section may
cover:
(a) Administrative/clerical costs.
(b) The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Township's Engineer and the review or preparation of any
necessary associated documents by the Township's Solicitor.
(c) The site inspections including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of
stormwater BMPs, and final inspection upon completion of the
stormwater BMPs.
(d) Any additional work or costs required to monitor and enforce
any provisions of this section, correct violations, and assure
proper completion of stipulated remedial actions (including but
not limited to attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in
pursuit of legal proceedings associated therewith).
AA. Operations and maintenance of BMPs.
(1) The stormwater operations and maintenance (O&M) plan for the
project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as
follows:
(a) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the
Township;
(b) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to
be privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of
the owner or private management entity.
(2) The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Township
reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and
maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
(3) The Township shall review the BMP operations and maintenance
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this
section, and any permits issued by DEP.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:773
(4) The Township shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
(5) The Township may require an "as-built survey" of all stormwater
BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations
and maintenance plan.
(6) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater
BMP required by an approved stormwater operations and
maintenance plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved operations and
maintenance plan, unless an exception is granted in writing by the
Township.
(7) An operation and maintenance agreement (substantially in the
form specified in Appendix A to this section)128 shall be required to
be executed by the landowner. Other items may be included in the
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Township.
(8) The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with this section.
(9) If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the Township may require persons installing
stormwater BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Township's
Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund, to help defray
costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may be
determined as follows:
(a) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Township, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Township.
(b) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the
annual series values.
(c) If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a public recreation
facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the Township may reduce or
waive the amount due accordingly (based upon the value
received for public recreation purposes).
BB. Storm sewer and drainage facilities.
(1) Size and grade. Storm drains shall be adequate for the anticipated
runoff when the area is fully developed. The minimum diameter of
storm sewers shall be 15 inches, and the minimum grade shall be
128. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:774
1%, unless approved by the Township. Minimum pipe cover shall
conform to manufacturer's recommendations.
(2) Manholes. Manholes for pipe sizes of 24 inches or less shall be
spaced at a maximum of 400 feet and for larger pipe sizes, the
maximum distances between manholes shall be 600 feet. In
addition, manholes shall be installed at all points of changes in
horizontal alignment and vertical grade. Inlets may be substituted
for manholes where practical.
(3) Inlets. Inlets of the type shown in the Township's Standard Details
shall be installed. Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on
the tangent and not on the curved portions.
(4) Castings. Manholes and inlet castings shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Form 408
and PennDOT Standards for Roadway Construction. Inlet grates
shall be bicycle safe. Frames and grates shall be cast iron or
structural steel. Concrete frames shall not be permitted.
(5) Stormwater roof drains. All roof drains shall discharge to an on-lot
sump or to a storm sewer system, which is controlled by a detention
pond. Outlets from roof drain sumps shall not discharge directly
onto fill slopes. Outlets shall not discharge directly to the gutter
line of any street. All pipes from roof drains shall be a minimum
four-inch Schedule 40 ABS, PVC or SDR 35 pipe. Four-inch
Schedule 40 PVC or ABS pipe is required for a distance of 10 feet
from the foundation of the dwelling. No stormwater drainage
system shall be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer
system. No pipes shall be permitted to be constructed through any
curbing on any public street.
(6) Unnatural drainage. All points of concentrated flow discharge shall
outlet directly to a well-defined drainage channel, with a defined
bed and bank. Whenever construction stops or concentrates the
natural flow of storm drainage in such a way as to affect adjoining
properties, approval of the owners shall be obtained in writing.
Approval of plans by the Township shall not authorize or sanction
drainage affecting adjoining properties.
(7) Watercourses. Open watercourses shall not be permitted within the
rights-of-way of streets. The stopping, filling up, confining or other
interference with, or changing the course of, drains, ditches,
streams and watercourses in the Township shall not be permitted
unless approval in writing is obtained from the Township. A permit
must be obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
construction or changes in a watercourse subject to the regulations
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(8) Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscape banks designed to
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:775
carry the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff
from upstream contributory areas. If the runoff from stormwater
collection and conveyance facilities would drain over land to a
stormwater detention facility, the twenty-five-year frequency storm
event may be used. The Township Engineer with the approval of the
Township may increase the design storm, as conditions require. All
open channels shall be designed with one foot of freeboard above
the design water surface elevation of the design runoff condition.
(9) Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm, such
that a positive discharge of this runoff is to a natural drainage
course with a defined bed and bank.
(10) Where drainage swales are used in lieu of or in addition to storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they
cross. Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 1% but
shall not exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for
conveyance are not the same as open vegetated channels.
(11) When requested by the Township the developers shall obtain or
grant a minimum twenty-foot-wide drainage easement over all
storm sewers, drainage swales, channels, etc., that are a
component of the stormwater management system when located
within undedicated land. All permanent detention basins and/or
other stormwater management facilities providing stormwater
control for other than a single residential lot shall be located within
a defined drainage easement that allows proper legal access and
maintenance vehicle access.
(12)No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or
carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage swale to the
detriment of any other property owner, whether upstream or
downstream. All subdivision and/or land development plans
containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or
other conveyance systems that cross property boundaries, existing
or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries shall
contain a note stating the above.
(13)No stormwater pipe (public or private) shall be less than 15 inches
in diameter that conveys surface runoff. The minimum pipe slope
shall be such that a minimum of two-feet-per-second velocity is
maintained. Where a culvert or pipe is used to replace a stream, the
cross-sectional area shall be at least as large as the original stream
channel. All stormwater BMPs shall be constructed in accordance
with the Township's adopted Standard Details. Minimum pipe cover
shall conform to the manufacturer's recommendations. Stormwater
conveyance pipes utilized in BMPs shall have a pipe size of fourinch
diameter or larger.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:776
(14) Where open watercourses for stormwater drainage are used the
following standards shall apply:
(a) Artificial channels shall be of trapezoidal cross section, with
the channel width at the bottom at least 10 times the maximum
water depth which would be produced by the one-hundredyear
design storm and with rough, permeable and flexible sides
and bottom. No artificial channel shall be used to replace a
natural stream.
(b) At all points in the drainage system the velocity shall be less
than the erosion threshold of the conveyance material,
including at the outlet from the construction area or
subdivision site.
(15) All stormwater collection and conveyance facilities (pipes, swales,
and structures) shall be designed for a one-hundred-year design
storm event, unless the runoff would naturally drain overland to a
stormwater detention facility, in which case a twenty-five-year
design storm event may be used. All drainage facilities shall be
designed to contain the energy gradeline for the peak flow rate for
the design storm within the structures a minimum of two-footbelow-
surface elevation. The hydraulic grade line must be within
the pipe. Swales and channels shall provide at least one foot of
freeboard above the energy gradeline. Backwater effects of pipes
discharging under surcharge conditions shall be included in the
calculations.
(16) All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Township's
Standard Details. In addition, all workmanship and materials shall
conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be supplied
by manufacturers or suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin 15.
(17) All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
(18) All pipe outlets shall discharge onto a stone riprap blanket to
prevent erosion of soil. Riprap shall be sized considering pipe exit
velocities.
(19) The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined
drainage course, which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater
runoff cannot be discharged to a defined drainage course,
documentation of written permission from each downstream
property owner shall be provided for all properties between the
source of discharge and the defined drainage course.
(20) Inlets of each type shown in the Township's Standard Details shall
be installed. Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on the
tangent and not on the curved portion of the intersection radii.
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:777
(21) Bridges and culverts. All bridges and culverts shall be designed to
support expected loads and to carry expected flows and shall be
designed to meet current standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. All bridges and culverts shall be
subject to all permits required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, and Waterways.
(22)Water quality inlets. Storm drainage systems that collect runoff
from parking areas and/or loading areas exceeding 10,000 square
feet of impervious coverage and discharge to stormwater
management systems, including surface or subsurface infiltration
systems, shall have a minimum of one water quality inlet per each
acre of drainage area. The water quality inlet must provide for the
removal of oil, grease, and heavy particulates and total suspended
solids, hydrocarbons and other floating substances from
stormwater runoff.
CC. Intersections of private driveways and public streets. Stormwater
drainage facilities shall be placed where each private driveway
intersects with a public street. The design shall be approved by the
Township and shall meet the following requirements: The facility shall
be placed to maintain the flow line of the stormwater drainage facility in
the public street.
(1) Where an apron gutter is to be utilized, said apron gutter shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Township's
Standard Details.
(2) Where reinforced concrete, metal or tile pipe is to be used beneath
the driveway, said pipe shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter
and shall extend across the full width of the driveway and beyond
the driveway for a distance determined by the Township. The pipe
shall be installed with flared end sections and shall be designed to
support H-15 loading and any other imposed loadings necessary
without structurally damaging the system. The installation of the
pipe shall be in accordance with the adopted Township's Standard
Details.
DD. Testing. All construction materials used in storm sewers shall be tested
by a qualified testing laboratory, if required by the Township. The cost
for such tests shall be borne by the developer.
EE. Standard schedule for maintenance of stormwater management
facilities.
(1) The stormwater management plan developed for the project is
supplemented by this maintenance plan to help ensure continuing
operations of all stormwater facilities.
(2) The following is a list of items that shall be inspected and corrective
action taken by the owner. (Note: "Owner" refers to individual
ultimately responsible for storm facility condition and function).
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125
68:778
(a) Outlet conditions in detention facility.
(b) Storm sewer, swales, concrete gutters, and other conveyance
devices.
(c) Catch basin, manholes, and other stormwater catchments/
transition structures.
(d) Access for maintenance.
(3) The following actions will be taken by the owner to help ensure the
facilities shown on the plan and identified above are in working
order:
(a) Replace or repair facilities so as to function as intended.
(b) Remove silt debris and trash in catch basin/storm sewers.
(c) Repair outlet structures.
(d) Remove any silt, debris, and trash in detention facility.
(e) Disposal of collected silt, debris and trash in a manner which
will not adversely affect the environment.
(f) Replace eroded material and revegetate eroded areas. Seed
and mulch disturbed areas.
(g) The corrective actions to be taken are not limited to those
listed above.
FF. Stormwater facilities inspection.
(1) Stormwater management facilities should be inspected by the
landowner, or the owner's designee (including the Township for
dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of
minimum frequencies:
(a) Annually for the first five years following construction.
(b) Once every three years thereafter.
(c) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm event.
(2) The Township of Pine may require other items to be included in the
operations and maintenance agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all
facilities. If stormwater facilities are not maintained by the
Township of Pine, the owner shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and shall
keep all facilities maintained in a safe and attractive manner. The
owner shall convey to the Township of Pine easements and/or
rights-of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by Pine and
maintenance if required. The owner shall keep on file with Pine the
§ 84-125 SEWERS § 84-125
68:779
§ 84-125.1. MS4 Prohibited discharge. [Added 2-2-2015 by Ord. No.
373]
name, address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities and an as-built drawing of
all stormwater facilities.
(3) In the event of a change, new information will be submitted to the
Township of Pine within 10 days of the change. The owner shall
establish any special maintenance funds or other financing sources,
in accordance with the approved maintenance plan. If the owner
fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities, following due
notice (30 days) by Pine to correct deficiencies, Pine shall perform
the necessary maintenance or corrective work. The owner shall
reimburse Pine for all costs associated with the required
maintenance of the stormwater control facilities.
A. Statement of Findings. The governing body of the Township of Pine
finds that:
(1) Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to
erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
streams and storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to
carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management
and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases pollution of water resources.
(2) Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal
separate storm sewer systems is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
(3) Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
(4) Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate
storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES). Permittees are required to enact,
implement, and enforce a prohibition of nonstormwater discharges
to the permittee's regulated small municipal separate storm sewer
systems (MS4s).
B. Purpose. The purpose of this § 84-125.1 is to promote health, safety, and
welfare within the Township of Pine and its watershed by minimizing
the harms and maximizing the benefits described herein, through
provisions designed to:
(1) Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
§ 84-125 PINE CODE § 84-125.1
68:780
(2) Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters
of this commonwealth.
(3) Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
(4) Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
(5) Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
(6) Provide proper operation and maintenance of all facilities and all
SWM BMPs that are implemented within the Township of Pine.
C. Statutory authority. The Township of Pine also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.129
D. Applicability. All activities related to proper operation and maintenance
of approved stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may
contribute nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are
subject to regulation by this § 84-125.1.
E. Compatibility with other requirements. Actions taken under this
§ 84-125.1 do not affect any responsibility, permit or approval for any
activity regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or any other
provision of the Code of the Township of Pine.
F. Interpretations and definitions. For the purposes of this § 84-125.1,
certain terms and words (as defined below) used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater
impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise
meet the purposes of this section. Stormwater BMPs are commonly
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 84-125.1 SEWERS § 84-125.1
68:781
grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural"
or "nonstructural." In this section, nonstructural BMPs or measures
refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt
to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a
physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat
stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to,
a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention
ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales,
riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined
in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)]
that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with
DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations
promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other
human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including,
but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;
embankments; road maintenance; building construction; and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials. Earth disturbance activity is subject to regulation under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean
Streams Law.130
MUNICIPALITY — Township of Pine, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(previously SCS).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activities that may affect
stormwater runoff and any activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4.
SECTION — Section 84-125.1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water
quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean
Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Pine, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
130. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 84-125.1 PINE CODE § 84-125.1
68:782
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses,
storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and
all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
G. General requirements.
(1) For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
section and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and
their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), [NOTE:
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.]
No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated.
(2) Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered unless
complying with the requirements of this section.
Manual (E&S Manual), [NOTE: Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.] No. 363-2134-008 (April 15,
2000), as amended and updated.
(3) Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered unless
complying with the requirements of this section.
(4) For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented,
operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements
of this section and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water
Management Act.
(5) Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual, [NOTE: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and
updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. Harrisburg, PA.].
H. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 84-125.1 SEWERS § 84-125.1
68:783
(1) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management
BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances
and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that
run with the land.
(2) O&M plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102 after the effective date of this section shall
be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
(3) The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this section.
I. Operation and maintenance agreements.
(1) Prior to completing construction of a SWM facility, the property
owner shall sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement (substantially in the form set forth in Appendix A to
Section 84-125 of this chapter131) covering all stormwater control
facilities which are to be privately owned.
(a) The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain
all facilities in accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the
O&M plan.
(b) The owner shall convey to the Township conservation
easements to assure access for periodic inspections by the
Township and maintenance, as necessary.
(c) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for operation and maintenance activities. In the
event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the
owner to the Township within 10 working days of the change.
(2) The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M
agreement, the Township may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result
in a lien against the property.
J. Prohibited discharges and connections.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small
MS4 or to enter the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
(2) No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
131. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 84-125.1 PINE CODE § 84-125.1
68:784
(a) As provided in subsection J(3) below; and
(b) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
(3) The following discharges are authorized unless they are
determined to be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated
small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth:
(a) Discharges from fire fighting activities.
(b) Potable water sources including water line flushing.
(c) Irrigation drainage.
(d) Air-conditioning condensate.
(e) Springs.
(f) Water from crawl space pumps.
(g) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(h) Diverted stream flows.
(i) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(j) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing
drains.
(k) Lawn watering.
(l) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(m) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(n) Water from individual residential car washing.
(o) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(p) Rising groundwaters.
(4) In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection J(3) above significantly
contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of
this commonwealth, the Township or DEP will notify the
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
K. Roof drains and sump pumps. Roof drains and sump pumps shall
discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs.
L. Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township
or its authorized agent(s) may enter at reasonable times upon any
§ 84-125.1 SEWERS § 84-125.1
68:785
property within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this
section.
M. Inspection. SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the
owner's designee (including the Township or its authorized agents for
dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of
minimum frequencies:
(1) Annually for the first five years following construction.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
N. Enforcement. It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill,
landscape, or alter any approved SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or
structures without the written approval of DEP or a delegated County
Conservation District, and the Township.
O. Suspension and revocation.
(1) Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended
or revoked for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
an approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(b) A violation of any provision of this section or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to a
regulated activity.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or
endangers the life or property of others.
(2) A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
(a) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to
the violations that caused the suspension.
(b) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
(3) An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may only apply for a new approval under
the provisions of this section.
(4) If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases,
the Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with
a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the
owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the
§ 84-125.1 PINE CODE § 84-125.1
68:786
§ 84-126. Yard areas; residential.
§ 84-127. Vegetation preservation.
All developments shall be subject to the following specifications:
violation within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke
or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining
to any provision of this section.
P. Penalties.
(1) Any person or entity violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate
offense and penalties shall be cumulative.
(2) In addition to the criminal penalties set forth in this section, the
Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this section. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
Q. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this section, may appeal to
the Township's Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action
for a final decision thereon by the Township.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the Township,
relevant to the provisions of this section, may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken
place within 30 days of the Township's final decision.
A. Except for driveways and walks, no portion of the front yard shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete.
B. Decorative stone surfaces shall be used only when an integral part of a
landscape plan.
C. To the maximum extent practical, the front yard, side yard, and the
unpaved area between the sidewalk and the street paving shall be
covered with turf or vegetative ground cover.
D. To the maximum extent practical, the rear yard shall be fine graded to
ensure proper grades and drainage.
A. No removal of trees, shrubbery, foliage, grass, or other natural growth
shall be permitted except in conformance with the provisions of this
§ 84-125.1 SEWERS § 84-127
68:787
chapter, except that the activity of "grubbing" (defined as the cleaning
of underbrush from a well-treed area) shall be permitted.
B. Grubbing activity is permitted where the purpose is to improve the
appearance of the land or property.
C. Violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties of § 84-151 of
this chapter for each day in excess of 30 that the cleared property is not
subject to significant development activities, as defined above.
D. This language is not intended to prohibit the cutting of diseased, dead
or dying plants or trees; the development of flower or vegetable
gardens; or the removal of single trees or clumps of vegetation for
aesthetic, safety or other concerns. It does prohibit the mass or largescale
defoliation of property preparatory to development until shortly
before the proposed development actually takes place.
§ 84-127 PINE CODE § 84-127
68:788
ARTICLE VII
Nonconformities
§ 84-128. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming uses,
nonconforming buildings and structures, nonconforming lots and
nonconforming signs. The zoning districts established by this chapter are
designed to guide the future use of the Township's land by encouraging
the development of desirable residential, commercial and other uses with
appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses that promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The regulations of
this article are intended to restrict further investments that would make
nonconformities more permanent in their location in inappropriate districts
as well as to afford opportunities for creative use and reuse of those other
nonconformities that contribute to a neighborhood and are consistent with
the goals of the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 84-129. Identification and registration of nonconforming uses and
structures.
The Zoning Officer shall identify and register all nonconforming uses,
buildings/structures, and lots within the Township, together with the
reasons why the Zoning Officer identified them as nonconformities. Legally
registered nonconforming uses shall not lose their nonconforming status
due to acquisition in part for a state or local highway project, whether by
amicable deed or condemnation, that affects the dimensional nonconformity
of the property. If a variance request is deemed required for such a property,
the impact of the acquisition for public purposes shall be an unnecessary
hardship to the property.
§ 84-130. Nonconforming use.
A. Continuation of nonconforming use. Any lawfully existing
nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the regulations contained in this section. Ordinary
repair and maintenance or replacement, and installation or relocation
of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing, may be performed.
B. Structural alteration or enlargement of nonconforming use. No
structure containing a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered
or enlarged unless the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. No parking,
yard, space or bulk nonconformity may be created or increased.
C. Change of nonconforming use to conforming.
(1) Whenever any nonconforming use shall have been changed or
altered so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter or its
amendments, then such nonconforming use shall no longer be
§ 84-128 SEWERS § 84-130
68:789
nonconforming to the extent to which it then conforms to this
chapter or its amendments.
(2) The prior nonconforming use shall not be resumed; provided,
however, that if a later amendment to this chapter should make the
use as so changed or altered nonconforming with its provisions
then such use as changed or altered shall become a new
nonconforming use to the extent of such nonconformance or
noncompliance.
D. Expansion or extension of nonconforming use.
(1) No nonconforming use may be extended or expanded in any
building or structure, or in or on the lot on which it is located, nor
may any nonconforming use be moved to a different position upon
the lot on which it is located, so as to alter the use or its location
which existed at the time that the use became nonconforming.
(2) A nonconforming use or structure may not be extended, expanded,
structurally altered or changed unless to a conforming use or
structure, except as a conditional use allowed by the governing
body pursuant to this chapter, provided that structural alteration
may be made pursuant to an order of an authorized public officer to
assure the safety of the structure.
(3) Whenever a use district shall be hereafter changed by a duly
adopted amendment to this chapter, then any existing legal,
nonconforming use of such changed district may be continued, and
such use may be extended throughout the structure, provided that
such extension does not displace any residential use in an E, S or R
District.
E. Abandonment or discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
(1) The lawful use of the land existing at the time this chapter or any of
its amendments was adopted, although such use does not conform
to the provisions hereof, may be continued, but if such
nonconforming use is abandoned for a period of one year, any
future use of said land shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Any subsequent use shall conform to the applicable provisions of
this chapter or its amendments and the prior nonconforming use
shall not be resumed, unless in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter or its amendments.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the following circumstances, which
shall not be exclusive, shall contribute towards evidence of
discontinuance or abandonment of a use:
(a) Failure to maintain regular business hours, typical or normal
for the use (past operations of the use and/or industry
§ 84-130 PINE CODE § 84-130
68:790
§ 84-131. Nonconforming buildings or structures.
standards may be used to determine typical or normal hours);
or
(b) Failure to maintain equipment, supplies or stock-in-trade,
which would be used for the active operation of the use; or
(c) Failure to maintain utilities which would be used for the active
operation of the use; or
(d) Failure to pay taxes, including but not limited to sales taxes,
workers' compensation taxes, corporate taxes, etc., that would
be required for the active operation of the use; or
(e) Failure to maintain required local, state, or federal licenses or
other approvals that would be required for the active operation
of the use.
F. Nonconforming accessory uses and structures. No use, structure or
sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue
after such principal use or structure has been abandoned or removed,
unless it shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
A. Continuation of nonconforming buildings or structures. Any
nonconforming building or structure which is devoted to a use which is
permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions in this
section.
B. Structural alteration or enlargement of nonconforming buildings or
structures. The lawful use of a structure existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter or an amendment hereto may be continued or a
structure lawfully under construction at the time of the enactment of
this chapter may be used as contemplated, although such use or
structure does not conform to the provisions hereof, and such use may
be extended throughout the structure, provided that such extension
does not displace any residential use in an S or R District. No parking,
yard, space or bulk nonconformity may be created or increased.
C. Changes to nonconforming buildings or structures to conforming.
(1) Whenever any nonconforming building or structure shall have been
changed or altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter or
its amendments in effect at the time of such change or alteration, or
whenever any amendment to this chapter shall make such building
or structure conforming with the provisions of this chapter or its
amendments, then such building or structure shall remain in
conformance with the applicable provisions of this chapter or its
amendments.
§ 84-130 SEWERS § 84-131
68:791
(2) If a later amendment to this chapter should make the building or
structure as changed or altered nonconforming with its provisions,
then the building or structure as changed or altered will become a
nonconforming building or structure to the extent of such
nonconformance or noncompliance.
D. Damage or destruction of nonconforming buildings or structures.
(1) When a building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any
means not within the control of the owner, to the extent of 60% or
more of the cost of replacement of the structure, the structure shall
not be restored unless its use thereafter conforms to the use
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. No parking,
yard, space or bulk nonconformity may be created or increased.
(2) When a structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within
the control of the owner thereof to the extent of 60% or less of the
cost of replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of
such structure may be made; provided, however, that no parking,
yard, space or bulk nonconformity is created or increased.
(3) In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by
any means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored,
except in accordance with this section.
E. Expansion or extension of nonconforming buildings or structures.
(1) No nonconforming building or structure may be extended on the lot
on which it is located, nor may any nonconforming building or
structure be moved to a different position upon the lot on which it is
located, except to a position in conformity with the current Codes,
except as a conditional use allowed by the governing body pursuant
to this chapter, provided that structural alteration may be made
pursuant to an order of an authorized public officer to assure the
safety of the structure.
(2) Whenever a use district shall be hereafter changed by a duly
adopted amendment to this chapter, then any existing legal,
nonconforming structure of such changed district may be
continued, and such use may be extended throughout the
structure, provided that such extension does not displace any
residential use in an E, S or R District.
(3) For dwellings, if the reason for the existing nonconformity consists
only of the inadequacy of required yards, then expansion may occur
without a conditional use permit if such expansion, extension or
other increase in size in itself conforms with all applicable
ordinances and laws.
F. Repairs, renovation and modernization of nonconforming buildings or
structures.
§ 84-131 PINE CODE § 84-131
68:792
§ 84-132. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) Repairs, renovations and modernization of nonconforming
buildings or structures, such as renewal or replacement of outer
surfaces, windows, addition of soundproofing materials, air
conditioning and repair or replacement of structural parts or
members of the building or structure shall be permitted
notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter.
(2) Such repairs, renovations, or modernizations are allowed provided
they do not change or alter substantially the physical configuration
of the nonconforming building or structure or change its position
on the ground.
(3) No increase in the size of or area covered by the nonconforming
use or area of the use within the building or structure is allowed.
(4) The areas of nonconforming use within a building or structure may
be rearranged in connection with such repairs, renovation, or
modernization, provided that no enlargement or expansion of the
nonconforming use occurs.
G. Reconstruction of nonconforming buildings or structures.
(1) In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is
destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other cause,
the nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed and
the nonconforming use thereof continued if the reconstruction is
commenced within one year of the date of destruction or damage.
(2) If reconstruction does not commence within one year after the
occurrence of the damage or destruction, or is not thereafter
diligently completed, then any use, building, or structure on the lot
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The reconstruction of the said building or structure shall not
exceed the size of the nonconforming building or structure
destroyed or damaged and shall be placed in the same location on
the ground as the nonconforming building or structure destroyed
or damaged.
(4) The nonconforming use thereof shall not differ from that existing
prior to such damage or destruction unless a variance is applied for
and obtained under this chapter, except that the repair, renovation
and modernization of such nonconforming building or structure
authorized by this section shall nevertheless be permitted.
(5) Any such reconstruction shall be subject to and in accordance with
any applicable building, electrical, fire and plumbing codes, safety
regulations or other regulations or laws.
§ 84-131 SEWERS § 84-132
68:793
§ 84-133. Nonconforming signs.
Continuation of nonconforming signs. Subject to the limitations and
termination provisions hereinafter set forth, any lawfully existing
nonconforming sign may be continued so long as it otherwise remains
lawful after the effective date of this chapter:
A. In any district in which single-family dwellings are a use by right,
notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other provisions of this
chapter, a single-family detached dwelling which complies with the
yard, space and bulk requirements of the district in which it is located
may be erected on a nonconforming lot adjacent to an improved street.
Nothing in the requirements of this chapter relating to lot area per
dwelling unit shall be held to prohibit the erection of a single-dwelling
unit upon a lot having less than the required street frontage or the area
of which is less than that prescribed as the lot area per dwelling unit,
provided that such lot, at the time of the passage of this chapter, was
held under separate ownership from any adjoining lots or provided that,
at the time of the passage of this chapter, a recorded plan of lots or
subdivision of property shows such lot to be a separate and distinct
numbered lot.
B. In any district in which single-family dwellings are not permitted, a
nonconforming lot of record may be used for any use by right in the
district in which it is located if land development approval is granted in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 78.
A. Alteration or moving. A nonconforming sign of any type may not be
moved to another position or location upon the building, structure or lot
on which it is located, nor may the size or area of such nonconforming
sign be changed or its structure or construction changed unless such
changes are minor in nature.
B. Damage, destruction or replacement. Whenever any nonconforming
sign has been damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 60%
of its market value at the time of destruction or damage, such sign shall
not be restored or replaced, unless it conforms to all provisions of this
chapter.
C. Abandonment. If use of a nonconforming sign is abandoned for a
continuous period of more than one year, then such nonconforming sign
together with its panel cabinet, supports, braces, anchors, and
electrical equipment shall be removed within 14 days from the end of
the aforesaid one-year period and the use of such sign shall not be
resumed except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 84-132 PINE CODE § 84-133
68:794
ARTICLE VIII
Procedures
§ 84-134. Request for additional review prior to approval.
The governing body may, in its discretion, request that a landowner or
developer submit any plan, plot, design or application to the North
Pittsburgh Community Development Corporation for its review, findings and
recommendations prior to any action, review or approval by any officer or
agent of the Township.
§ 84-135. Building permits required.
A. Authority. The Zoning Officer in the Township of Pine shall have the
authority to issue building permits in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Purpose. The building permit provides a procedure for ensuring
compliance with this chapter and a means for evidencing such
compliance. Further, it serves as an adjunct to, and thus must be
obtained prior to or with, all applications filed pursuant to this chapter
with respect to a specific use or development proposal.
C. Standards.
(1) No person shall erect, reconstruct or structurally alter a structure
or fence in any district unless there has been duly issued to such
person a building permit by the Zoning Officer. However, no permit
shall be required for the erection or structural alteration of a fence
not exceeding six feet in height.
D. Procedure.
(1) Applications for building permits shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer, and a duplicate shall be filed with the Township Manager.
The application shall include plans and other information sufficient
to establish compliance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code.
(2) No zoning or building permits shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter until the stormwater management plan and all other
required plans for the property or lot have been submitted and
approved in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter and Chapter 78, Subdivision and Land Development, of the
Pine Code. Further, the Township shall not issue the permit until
any required floodplain, dam safety or obstructions, erosion/
sedimentation approval/permits, permits from the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, or other required permits have been received from
the applicable local, county or state agencies. Copies of the
approval/permit must be filed with the Township.
§ 84-134 SEWERS § 84-135
68:795
§ 84-136. Certificates of occupancy and compliance.
(3) Any sewerage plans, sewage systems, and treatment facilities,
other than conveyance to an approved authority, or an individual
on-lot system approved by the Allegheny Department of Health
shall be approved by the appropriate sanitary authority before a
building or sewage permit is issued.
(4) All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat
in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected and such
other information as may be necessary. A file of such applications
and plats shall be maintained by the Zoning Officer.
A. Authority. No building hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered shall be used or changed in use and no owner, tenant or person
shall begin to use an existing building until a certificate of occupancy
and compliance shall have been issued by the governing body stating
that the building or the proposed use of the same complies with the
provisions of this chapter and any of its amendments and the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
B. Purpose. The certificate of occupancy and compliance provides a
procedure for reviewing plans for compliance with this chapter and a
means for evidencing such compliance. Further, it serves as an adjunct
to, and thus must be filed prior to or with, all applications filed pursuant
to this chapter with respect to a specific use or development proposal.
C. Certificate issued in conflict is void. Any certificate issued in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
D. Standards.
(1) Certificates of occupancy and compliance, either for the whole or a
part of a building, may be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit or after completion of
construction and may be issued after the erection or structural
alteration of such building or part shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code.
(2) A record of all certificates shall be maintained by the governing
body, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person who
has a proprietary or possessory interest in the building affected.
E. Procedures.
(1) All applications for certificate of occupancy and compliance shall
be made on printed forms to be furnished by the Zoning Officer and
shall contain accurate information as may be required by the
Zoning Officer to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 84-135 PINE CODE § 84-136
68:796
§ 84-137. Conditional uses.
(2) Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer, and a duplicate copy shall be filed with the
Township Manager.
F. Temporary certificate of occupancy and compliance.
(1) The Zoning Officer may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy
and compliance which may permit the use or occupancy of a
building or structure during structural alteration thereof or may
permit the partial use or occupancy of a building or structure
during its construction or erection.
(2) Such a temporary certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be
valid only for a period not exceeding six months from its issuance,
and shall be subject to such restrictions and provisions as may be
deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to adequately insure the
safety of persons using or occupying the building, structure or land
involved.
(3) Application for such a temporary certificate of occupancy and
compliance shall be made in the same manner as for a certificate of
occupancy and compliance, and the application for or issuance of
such a temporary certificate of occupancy and compliance shall in
no way affect the obligation to apply for and obtain a certificate of
occupancy and compliance nor in any way alter the rights, duties
and obligations of the Township or the owners and users of
buildings, structures or land within the Township with regard to the
matters governed by this chapter except as expressly set forth in
this section.
A. Authority. In certain portions of this chapter, certain specified
conditional uses may be authorized if first approved by the Board of
Supervisors. Conditional uses may be allowed or denied by the
governing body after recommendation by the Planning Commission and
following a public hearing.
B. Purpose. Conditional uses are those uses having some special impact or
uniqueness which requires a careful review of their location, design,
configuration and special impact to determine, against fixed standards,
the desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site.
They are uses that may or may not be appropriate in a particular
location depending on the applicant's ability to assure compliance with
the Township's codes and regulations.
C. Standards.
(1) Where the Zoning Chapter has stated conditional uses to be
granted or denied by the governing body pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the governing body shall hold hearings on
and decide requests for such conditional uses in accordance with
§ 84-136 SEWERS § 84-137
68:797
such standards and criteria. In granting a conditional use, the
governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purpose of this act in the Zoning
Chapter.
(2) A conditional use shall be approved if and only if it is found to meet
the following general criteria and specific criteria for each
conditional use listed in this section and requirements found
elsewhere in this chapter.
(a) The proposed use shall conform to the district and conditional
use provisions and all general regulations of this chapter.
(b) The proposed use shall meet all special standards that may be
applied to its class of conditional use as set forth in this
chapter.
(c) The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any
other property or persons and shall comply with the all
requirements of this chapter.
(d) The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped so
that the relationship of its building and grounds to adjacent
buildings and properties does not impair health, safety, or
welfare and does not adversely affect values of adjacent
property.
(e) The proposed use shall produce a total environmental effect
that is consistent with, and not harmful to, the environment of
the neighborhood.
(f) The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking
to minimize conflicting traffic movement on adjacent streets.
(g) The proposed use shall promote the objectives of this chapter
and shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the
Township of Pine.
(h) Community uses, when located in or adjacent to a residential
district, shall provide proper separation and protection for
abutting residential property.
(i) Public buildings and uses, when located in or adjacent to a
residential district, shall provide proper separation and
protection for abutting residential properties.
(j) All conditional uses shall be subject to Article V of this chapter.
(3) Buildings and structures may be conditionally allowed to exceed 45
feet in height in the C-1 and C-2 Districts, as a conditional use,
§ 84-137 PINE CODE § 84-137
68:798
which may be granted by the governing body on the basis of the
following standards and criteria.
(a) The governing body may refer the proposed development plan
to a competent fire-control authority, who need not be an
employee of the Township or a member or official of the
Volunteer Fire Department, and request a report within 30
days as to the adequacy of fire protection for the proposed
structure.
(b) The governing body, after review of the report from said firecontrol
authority, shall have determined that adequate fire
protection from presently available fire equipment is afforded
to the structure.
(c) All required setbacks shall be increased by two feet for every
one-foot increase in height above 45 feet.
(d) The proposed structure shall not be located closer than 150
feet to any other structure.
(e) The proposed structure will not adversely affect the light, air,
or view of any adjoining property.
(f) The structure complies with all other Township ordinances.
D. Procedure.
(1) Application submittal. Applicants shall submit to the Township, for
review by the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors,
plans and specifications meeting the requirements set forth in
Chapter 78 outlining the requirements for land developments.
(2) Requirement for public hearing. No conditional use shall be
approved except pursuant to public notice and hearing held on the
application for any such use by the Board of Supervisors. All public
hearings shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania MPC.
(3) Other requirements.
(a) The applicant shall provide photographs of the present site and
the surrounding contiguous area to a depth of 200 feet.
(b) Schematic floor plans and elevations (not to be considered to
require working drawings or construction drawings) shall be
provided. The schematic elevations shall identify the proposed
materials on the exterior of the proposed buildings and other
structures.
(c) The applicant may furnish testimony concerning features and
effects of the proposed use upon the adjacent properties and
the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 84-137 SEWERS § 84-137
68:799
§ 84-138. Landowner curative amendment.
(d) In order to demonstrate whether a proposed use will conform
to the requirements of this chapter, the governing body may
require a qualified consultant to testify, whose cost for services
shall be borne by the applicant.
(4) Approval.
(a) In granting its approval for a specific conditional use, the
Board of Supervisors may impose such reasonable conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those otherwise specified in this
chapter or incorporated herein by reference, as it may deem
necessary to implement the Zoning Chapter.
(b) The Board of Supervisors may require that such conditions and
safeguards be incorporated in a plan of lots or other
appropriate recordable form and filed in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County.
(c) Each situation shall be deemed to be separate and individual,
and the disposition made by the Board of Supervisors shall
apply only to the case in point and shall in no way be construed
to establish precedent.
E. Revocation of approval.
(1) Approval by the Board of Supervisors of a conditional use referred
to in this section shall be void in the event a building permit is not
applied for within 12 months and construction is not started within
18 months.
(2) An extension of up to six months may be granted by the Zoning
Officer in the event the applicant has shown good cause for the
delay.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of a zoning ordinance or map or any portion thereof, which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest, may submit a curative amendment to the governing body with
a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be
heard. The governing body shall commence a hearing thereon within 60
days of the request as provided in § 84-137. The curative amendment
and challenge shall be referred to the Allegheny County Planning
Department and the Township Planning Commission and
Environmental Advisory Council for their recommendations.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
C. If the governing body determines that the validity challenge has merit,
the governing body may accept the landowner's curative amendment,
with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment,
§ 84-137 PINE CODE § 84-138
68:800
§ 84-139. Municipal curative amendment.
The Township shall declare by formal action that its Zoning Chapter or
portions thereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, the governing body shall:
which will cure the challenged defects. The governing body shall
consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory material
submitted by the landowner and shall consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of the proposed use on
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources, and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources, and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development, and any
adverse environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposed use on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses, which are essential to the public health and
welfare.
A. By resolution make significant findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the Zoning Chapter, which may include:
(1) References to specific uses, which are either not permitted or not
permitted in sufficient quantity;
(2) Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
(3) Reference to the entire chapter which requires revisions.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
municipality shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm
the validity of, its Zoning Chapter pursuant to the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Upon initiation of the procedures, as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, the governing body shall not be required
to entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment, nor shall
the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report subsequent to
§ 84-138 SEWERS § 84-139
68:801
§ 84-140. Land development review.
§ 84-141. Variance.
the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical to or
substantially similar to those specified in the resolution. Upon
completion of the procedures as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, no rights to cure shall, from the date
of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis
of the subsequent invalidity of the amended Zoning Chapter for which
there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this section.
A. Authority. In considering the proposed development for purposes of
approving its location, land development and general character, the
Board of Supervisors and the Planning Commission shall apply the land
development regulations as outlined in Chapter 78 and shall further
review the said application from the standpoint and with the object of
promoting the community development goals as set forth in this
chapter.
B. Purpose. The purpose of requiring the submission of a land
development for review and approval prior to the issuance of any of the
permits and prior to the use and occupancy of any land, building or
structure for which the submission of an application is required, is to
assure the appropriate treatment of sites in accordance with certain
minimum standards of development outlined in this chapter.
C. Standards.
(1) Building permit, grading permit, street opening permit, or other
applicable permits shall be obtained for all development as
required by Township ordinance, state, or federal law.
(2) Uses permitted subject to land development review in each district
shall be subject to land development review as outlined in this
section.
(3) Conditional uses shall be required to follow the requirements of
this section.
(4) The provisions of these regulations shall be considered as the
minimum requirements for an approved land development.
D. Procedure. The owner or owners of land to be developed in any district
shall follow the land development review procedure outlined in Chapter
78 of the Township of Pine Code.
A. Authority. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority, in
accordance with the procedures hereinafter established, to authorize
use, area, or other variances within the Township of Pine. The variance
procedure is intended to provide a means by which relief may be
§ 84-139 PINE CODE § 84-141
68:802
granted only when no other applicable remedy, pursuant to other
provisions of this chapter, is available.
B. Purpose.
(1) Use variances. Use variance shall mean the authorization by the
Zoning Hearing Board for the use of land for a purpose that is
otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning
regulations. A use variance is approved subject to specific plans,
terms, and conditions. Modification of such plans, terms, and
conditions shall require approval by the Zoning Hearing Board. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall have the authority to grant use
variances to restore structures damaged or destroyed or establish
a use of greater intensity as outlined in § 84-146.
(2) Area variances. Area variance shall mean the authorization by the
Zoning Hearing Board for the use of land in a manner that is not
permitted by regulations of this chapter related to:
(a) A dimension, such as size, height, and setbacks.
(b) Physical requirements of this chapter.
(c) The expansion, structural alteration, or enlargement of a
legally existing nonconforming use as outlined in § 84-130.
(d) The waiver of the additional requirements for conditional uses
for permitted uses set forth in Article V.
(e) Any design guideline outlined in Article VI.
C. Standards.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of the Zoning Chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may grant a variance, provided that
all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Chapter and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
§ 84-141 SEWERS § 84-141
68:803
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this act and the Zoning Chapter.
D. Procedure. An application for a variance may be filed by the owner of,
or any other person having a contractual interest in, the subject
property.
(1) A public hearing shall be set, advertised, and conducted by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Within 45 days following the close of the public hearing, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall render its decision, approving or denying the
variance.
(3) If the Board finds in favor of the applicant, it may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards deemed necessary to
implement the purpose and intent of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
(4) Within five business days following such decision or the expiration
of such period, the Zoning Officer shall mail notice of such decision
or failure to act to all persons entitled to such notice and file such
decision in the office of the Township Clerk.
(5) Notice of hearings.
(a) Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, such other persons as the governing body shall
designate, from time to time, by ordinance and to any other
person who has made a timely request for the same.
(b) Notices shall be sent mail at least five days prior to the date of
the hearing by first class mail.
(c) The applicant and any other person requesting any notice not
required by ordinance shall pay to the Board the actual cost of
such notice.
§ 84-141 PINE CODE § 84-141
68:804
(d) Notice of said hearing shall also be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land.
(6) Hearing procedures.
(a) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board
may appoint any member as a hearing officer.
(b) The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Board, but the parties involved may, prior
to the decision of the hearing officer, waive the decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the
hearing officer as final.
(c) Parties to the hearings.
[1] The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any
person affected by the application who has made a timely
appearance of record before the Board and any other
person, including civic or community organizations
permitted to appear by the Board.
[2] The Board shall have the power to require that all persons
who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
(d) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board, or the hearing
officer presiding, shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(e) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel
and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present
evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses
on all relevant issues.
(f) The formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded
from the hearing.
(g) Record of the hearing.
[1] The Board or the hearing officer shall keep a stenographic
record of the proceedings.
[2] The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board.
[3] The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the
Board or hearing officer if such original transcript is
ordered by the Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such
§ 84-141 SEWERS § 84-141
68:805
appeal is made. In either event, the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the persons requesting such
additional copies.
[4] A transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or
written material in evidence shall be made available to any
party at cost.
(h) The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate,
directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice
of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or
its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any
party or his representatives unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
(i) Decisions.
[1] The Board or the hearing officer shall render a written
decision or make written findings on the application
involved within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Board or hearing officer.
[2] Where the application is contested or denied, each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons
thereof.
[3] Conclusions based on any provisions of the Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, or of any Township ordinance,
rule or regulation shall contain a reference to such
provisions relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
[4] If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there
has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are
final, the Board shall make his report recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties
shall be entitled to make written representations thereon
to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and
the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days
after the decision of the hearing officer.
[5] Where the Board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to hold the
required hearing within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant
§ 84-141 PINE CODE § 84-141
68:806
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time.
(j) Distribution of decision.
[1] A copy of the final decision or the final findings shall be
mailed to the applicant not later than the day following the
date of decision.
[2] All other persons who have filed their name and address
with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing
shall be mailed a brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of a place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
[3] A copy of the final decision shall be forwarded to the
governing body, the Chairman of the Planning Commission
and the Township Solicitor.
(k) No persons shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Board later than 30 days after any application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Zoning Officer
or the Board, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such person
alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be
bound by the knowledge of his predecessor-in-interest.
(7) Stay of proceedings.
(a) Upon the filing of any proceeding referred to in this section
and during its pendency before the Board, all land
development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of any other Township agency
or body and all official action shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Officer or any other appropriate Township agency or body
certifies to the Board facts indicating that such a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise
than by restraining order, which may be granted by the Board
or by the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
(b) When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or
limit approval are filed with the Board by persons other than
the applicant, the applicant may petition the Court of Common
Pleas of Allegheny County to order such persons to post bond
as a condition to continuing the proceeding before the Board.
The Court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the
appeal is frivolous and is for the purpose of delay. At the
hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case.
§ 84-141 SEWERS § 84-141
68:807
The question of whether or not such petition should be granted
and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound
discretion of the Court.
E. Limitations on variances.
(1) The Board may prescribe a time limit, consistent with the nature of
the variance granted and the conditions surrounding the lot, within
which the action for which the variance is granted shall be begun
and completed.
(2) Failure to comply with any time limits set by the Board shall render
the variance void.
§ 84-141 PINE CODE § 84-141
68:808
ARTICLE IX
Jurisdictions and Authorities
§ 84-142. Board of Supervisors.
In addition to the jurisdiction conferred on it by other provisions of the
Charter, codes and ordinances of the Township of Pine, the Board of
Supervisors shall have the following jurisdiction and authority.
§ 84-143. Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission of the Township, consisting of seven members,
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and Chapter 38 of the
Township Code, as now enacted or as may hereafter be amended. The
responsibilities of the Planning Commission shall include the following.
A. Text amendments. The Board of Supervisors shall be responsible for
reviewing zoning text amendment applications and for taking final
action to approve, approve with conditions, modify or deny such
applications.
B. Map amendments. The Board of Supervisors shall be responsible for
reviewing map amendment (rezoning) applications and for taking final
action to approve, approve with conditions, modify or deny such
applications.
C. Conditional use permits. The Board of Supervisors shall be responsible
for reviewing conditional use permit applications and for taking final
action to approve, approve with conditions, modify or deny such
applications.
D. Approval of land developments. The Board of Supervisors shall be
responsible for reviewing land development applications and for taking
final action to approve, approve with conditions, modify or deny such
applications.
A. Advisory role to the Board of Supervisors.
(1) The Planning Commission shall function as an advisory body to the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with the purpose and intent of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and Chapter 38 of
the Township Code as now enacted or as hereafter amended.
(2) The Planning Commission shall perform such advisory functions as
shall be requested from time to time by the Board of Supervisors
and in the performance of such advisory functions as so requested
shall have such powers and duties as are granted and established
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and Chapter 38
of the Township Code as now enacted or as hereafter amended.
§ 84-142 SEWERS § 84-143
68:809
§ 84-144. Environmental Advisory Council.
B. Land development review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for reviewing land development applications, subject to
Chapter 78, and for making recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors regarding action to approve, approve with conditions,
modify, or deny such application.
A. Establishment. In accordance with the authority granted by Act No. 148
of 1973 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 11501 et seq.),
132 there is hereby established an Environmental Advisory Council for
the Township of Pine to advise the Township of Pine, its Board of
Supervisors, its Planning Commission and all other Pine Township
elected or appointed boards and officials on matters concerning the
protection, conservation, management, promotion and use of natural
resources, including air, land and water resources, located within Pine
Township.
B. Composition; appointment of vacancies. The Environmental Advisory
Council (the "Council") shall be composed of seven residents of the
Township who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Pine
Township. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township.
C. Terms of members; designation of Chairman.
(1) Such appointed Council members shall serve for terms of three
years, except that initial appointments shall be so staggered so that
the terms of two persons shall expire in three years, the terms of
two persons shall expire in two years, and the term of one person
shall expire in one year.
(2) The Environmental Advisory Council shall designate its Chairman
of the Council annually at the first meeting of each year, who shall
serve until a new Chairman is selected the following year.
D. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses. Members of said
Environmental Advisory Council shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be reimbursed for such expenses actually and
necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. The
Board of Supervisors of Pine Township shall have sole discretion and
authority to determine the appropriateness of expenses for which
reimbursement is requested.
E. Powers.
(1) The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the power to:
132. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 11501 through 11508 were repealed Dec. 19, 1996, by P.L. 1158,
No. 177, § 2(a). See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2322 to 2329.
§ 84-143 PINE CODE § 84-144
68:810
(a) Identify environmental problems and recommend plans and
programs for the promotion and conservation of the natural
resources and for the protection and improvement of the
quality of the environment within the Township of Pine.
(b) Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land
areas of the Township of Pine.
(c) Promote a community environmental program.
(d) Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps and
other unique natural areas for the purpose of obtaining
information on the proper use of such areas.
(e) Advise the appropriate local governmental agencies and the
Board of Supervisors in the acquisition of property, both real
and personal, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, easement,
devise or lease, in matters dealing with the purposes of this
chapter and Act 148 of 1973 (53 P.S. § 11501 et seq.).133
(2) The Environmental Advisory Council shall also have the power,
upon formal request from the Pine Township Board of Supervisors
or Planning Commission, to review any proposed municipal or park
development or any private development in excess of five acres, for
purposes of rendering an advisory opinion as to the effect such
development will have upon the environment.
F. Scope of authority. The Environmental Advisory Council shall not
exercise any powers or perform any duties which are conferred or
imposed by law upon a state agency; nor shall the Environmental
Advisory Council exercise any powers or perform any duties which are
conferred upon the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine or
which have been delegated or conferred by said Board of Supervisors
upon other local governmental agencies, officials or boards. All action
and work of the Environmental Advisory Council is strictly advisory only
and shall not in any way be binding on the Board of Supervisors of Pine
Township or any of the Township's other local governmental agencies,
officials, boards, or persons.
G. Records, annual report. The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report,
which shall be printed in the Annual Township Report and which shall
otherwise be available for public inspection.
H. Appropriation of funds. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Pine may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Environmental Advisory Council. Appropriations may be expended for
such administrative, clerical, printing and legal services as may from
133. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 11501 through 11508 were repealed Dec. 19, 1996, by P.L. 1158,
No. 177, § 2(a). See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2322 to 2329.
§ 84-144 SEWERS § 84-144
68:811
§ 84-145. Parks and Recreation Commission.
time to time be required. The Board of Supervisors of Pine Township
shall have the sole authority and discretion to determine the
appropriateness of such expenses and may require that proposed
expenditures by the Council be submitted for advance approval by
the Board of Supervisors. The whole or any part of any funds so
appropriated by the Township in any year may be placed in a
conservation fund and allowed to accumulate from year to year and/or
be expended in any year.
A. Creation. A permanent Parks and Recreation Commission, consisting of
eight total members thereof, as set forth herein, is hereby created for
the Township of Pine. Five additional persons shall serve on the
permanent, standing subcommittees of the Parks and Recreation
Commission, as hereinafter specified.
B. Appointment of members and qualifications of members.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall, by majority vote, appoint two
residents of the Township of Pine to the Parks and Recreation
Commission. In addition, the Board of Supervisors shall, by
majority vote, appoint nine other residents of the Township of Pine
to serve either on the Recreation Subcommittee or on the Parks
Subcommittee, and specified hereafter, and an appointee may not
serve simultaneously on both such subcommittees.
(2) The first such appointments after adoption of this chapter shall be
as follows: three members for terms expiring December 31, 1997;
three members for terms expiring December 31, 1998; and four
members for terms expiring December 31, 1999. Appointments
following the completion of the initial terms shall be for a period of
three years. Appointments to fill any vacancies in membership shall
be made by the Board of Supervisors for the remainder of the
vacant position's unexpired term. Members may be reappointed by
the Board of Supervisors.
(3) One member of the Board of School Directors of the Pine-Richland
School District (who shall be a resident of the Township of Pine)
shall be appointed by such Board of School Directors and shall
serve as a member of the Parks and Recreation Commission. In the
event that such Board of School Directors shall fail to make such
appointment to the Parks and Recreation Commission, then the
Township's Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to make
the appointment of such member.
(4) The Township's Recreation Director shall be a member of the Parks
and Recreation Commission in an ex officio and nonvoting capacity.
§ 84-144 PINE CODE § 84-145
68:812
(5) Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission and its
subcommittees should exhibit and possess the following
qualifications:
(a) Interest in and commitment to recreation and parks.
(b) Sensitivity to all residents of the community and their needs.
(c) Interest in and commitment to providing recreational and
sports opportunities to the youth of the community.
(d) Good judgment and an ability to work cooperatively with
others.
(e) Ability to inspire the confidence, respect, and support of the
community.
(f) Time to attend the meetings of the Parks and Recreation
Commission and its subcommittees and to undertake and
complete its assignments.
(g) Ability to understand, appreciate and administer the financial
aspects and components of a comprehensive parks and
recreation program for the community.
C. General functions and duties.
(1) Function. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be generally
responsible for the periodic review of parks and recreation
programs for the purposes of recommending changes and for
advising the Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors, the
Department of Parks and Recreation and the Recreation Director
on recreation needs, use of facilities, and programs and fee
structures relating thereto.
(2) Responsibilities. The general responsibilities of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall include the following:
(a) To define the objectives of public recreation services and make
plans and general policies harmonizing with them.
(b) To maintain the highest quality of recreation service.
(c) To help secure a comprehensive recreation and park plan in
order to provide an adequate system of recreation areas and
facilities.
(d) To interpret the need for and importance of recreation and
park services to the general public and the Board of
Supervisors, and to elicit support.
(e) To serve as a forum for the introduction of new ideas,
programs, policies and procedures.
§ 84-145 SEWERS § 84-145
68:813
(f) To advise on the acceptance of any gift, grant, bequest or
donation for the recreation and park program.
(g) To assist in establishing a sound fiscal plan and budget to
achieve recreation goals.
(h) To assist in developing a comprehensive recreation program
and advise on operation and maintenance.
(i) To assist in developing and maintaining an ongoing public
relations program.
(j) To evaluate the services of recreation and park system in
relating to its objectives.
(k) To take an active role in promoting and implementing related
legislation at the local, state, and federal level.
(3) Duties. The general duties of the Parks and Recreation Commission
are as follows. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall:
(a) Make recommendations to the Township Manager, the Board of
Supervisors, and the Recreation Director on rules, regulations,
and practices concerning the utilization of programs and
facilities, schedule of fees for programs and facilities and
operation of concessions at parks and recreation facilities.
(b) Advise the Township Manager, the Board of Supervisors, and
the Recreation Director on needed facilities and programs.
(c) Coordinate any parks and recreational facilities and programs
with other municipalities.
(d) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors a
comprehensive park, recreation, and open space plan for the
Township of Pine. The plan should be reviewed and updated, if
necessary, no less often than every five years and more often if
conditions or recreational demands change. The Parks and
Recreation Commission shall consider public input in its
creation, review, and update of the plan.
(e) Recommend feasible methods to reach the long- and shortrange
goals set forth in the comprehensive park, recreation,
and open space plan.
(f) Respond, in writing, to the request of the Board of Supervisors
for parks and recreation information and provide written
reports regarding all activities and recommendations of the
Parks and Recreation Commission to the Board of Supervisors
at the Board of Supervisors' meetings at least once per month.
(g) Seek funding sources for parks and recreation activities
through grants, donations, and local fundraising programs.
§ 84-145 PINE CODE § 84-145
68:814
(h) Affirmatively seek new information on parks and recreation
from local, national, and international sources, paying
particular attention to the latest developments, and inform the
Board of Supervisors of said developments.
(i) Prepare an annual parks and recreation budget for submission
to and consideration by the Board of Supervisors as part of the
Township's annual budget adoption process.
(j) Carry out such additional duties as may be assigned from time
to time by the Board of Supervisors.
(k) Provide written reports to the Board of Supervisors concerning
the Parks and Recreation Commission's reviews of proposed
subdivisions, land developments or planned residential
developments, as per the provisions of § 78-14, 78-42, or 84-98,
respectively, of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(l) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors a Master
Plan for the development of the Pine Community Park and
other present or future Township parks.
(m) Prepare and recommend to the Board of Supervisors a ten-year
development plan for Pine Community Park and other
Township parks (with said plan to be reviewed no less than
every five years).
(n) Recommend to the Board of Supervisors the need to hire
seasonal personnel.
D. Officers and subcommittees.
(1) A Chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be
appointed by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors at its annual
organizational meeting each year. The Board of Supervisors may
accept a recommendation from the members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission regarding the appointment of such
Chairperson.
(2) Two persons shall be elected as Vice Chairpersons of the Parks and
Recreation Commission. Such Vice Chairpersons shall be elected
(one each) from the membership of each of the Commission's
permanent, standing subcommittees at such subcommittees' first
meeting in any calendar year. The officers shall so serve until new
officers are appointed and elected at the first such meetings of the
following year. Officers may be reappointed or reelected, but shall
not serve more than two consecutive terms in any one office. Either
Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the
event of his/her absence.
(3) The Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet no less often than
once per month.
§ 84-145 SEWERS § 84-145
68:815
(4) The Chairperson shall be directly responsible to the Board of
Supervisors for all activities of the Commission and shall give a
report to the Board of Supervisors at its regular monthly meeting.
(5) The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have the following
permanent, standing subcommittees consisting of five identified
persons on the Recreation Subcommittee and four identified
persons on the Parks Subcommittee (as such may be specified by
the Board of Supervisors). Each subcommittee shall have
responsibility for advancing and relating the general functions set
forth in the § 84-145C and shall have the specific following
responsibilities:
(a) The Recreation Subcommittee shall have direct responsibility
for volunteer recruitment and parks and recreation
programming. Such programming shall include, but need not
be limited to, recreation programs (e.g., summer recreation
program, line dancing, Easter egg hunt, volleyball
tournaments, Halloween hayride, etc.) and community
recreation (e.g., basketball, volleyball, soccer, baseball,
football, swimming and athletic tournaments).
(b) The Parks Subcommittee shall have direct responsibility for
park and facility development, trails, greenways, operations,
and management.
(c) The Recreation Subcommittee and the Parks Subcommittee
shall consist of five and four identified persons, respectively,
(none of whom may serve on more than one of the
subcommittees) and shall have a Chairperson elected by it
(who shall also serve as a Vice Chairperson of the Parks and
Recreation Commission) and shall meet no less often than once
per month.
(d) In addition to the Chairperson of each above-named
subcommittee serving as a Vice Chairperson and member of
the Parks and Recreation Commission, each such
subcommittee shall also designate one other of its members to
serve as an at-large member of the Parks and Recreation
Commission.
(6) The Township's Board of Supervisors may create such other
subcommittees, on an ad hoc basis, as it deems necessary to assist
the Parks and Recreation Commission in either its administration of
special events or for the effective carrying out of its duties and
responsibilities. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the
members of such other subcommittees and prescribe their officers,
duties, and required meetings.
E. Removal of members. If a member of the Parks and Recreation
Commission misses three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission or his/her subcommittee or five total regular meetings of
§ 84-145 PINE CODE § 84-145
68:816
§ 84-146. Zoning Hearing Board.
the Commission or his/her subcommittee in any one calendar year and
such absences, in the opinion of the Township's Board of Supervisors,
adversely affect the operations of the Parks and Recreation Commission
or its subcommittees, then the Township's Board of Supervisors may
remove that member prior to the expiration of his/her term and appoint
a new member to fill the vacancy thus created.
A. Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board. The jurisdiction of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be as set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended, and other applicable law.
B. Administration and procedures of the Board.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board presently in existence shall continue
and be constituted as the Zoning Hearing Board under this chapter.
(2) Matters pending before the Zoning Hearing Board at the time this
chapter becomes effective shall continue and be completed under
the law in effect at the time such Board took jurisdiction of them.
(3) Membership and organization.
(a) The terms of office of the five-member Board shall be five years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of no more than one
member of the five-member Board shall expire each year.
(b) Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other
office in the Township.
(c) The five-member Board shall not be changed to a threemember
Board except upon an affirmative vote on the question
by a majority of the electors of the Township voting thereon at
a referendum held at the municipal or general election prior to
a year in which the terms of two of the members on the Board
expire.
(d) The members of the Board shall be removable, for cause, by
the governing body, and the governing body shall appoint a
successor for the unexpired term of any member whose term
becomes vacant.
(e) The Board shall promptly notify the governing body of any
vacancies that occur on the Board.
(4) Rules and regulations. The Board may make, alter, and rescind
rules, regulations, and forms for its procedures such as are
consistent with the Township of Pine Code and the laws of the
commonwealth. Copies of rules, regulations, and forms adopted by
the Board shall be prepared and shall be made available for
§ 84-145 SEWERS § 84-146
68:817
§ 84-147. Zoning Officer.
inspection by any interested person in the offices of the Zoning
Officer.
A. Administrative responsibility. The appointed Zoning Officer of the
Township of Pine, and in such capacity, shall administer this chapter
and amendments hereto, in accordance with its literal terms.
B. Appeals from Zoning Officer's actions. Any appeals from a decision or
other action of the Zoning Officer may be made to the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with law.
C. Enforcement of this chapter. In the event any building, structure,
landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, or used in violation of
this chapter, the Zoning Officer, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, in addition to any other remedies permitted under this
chapter, may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate
action or proceeding, to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any such
building, structure, landscaping, or land, or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
D. The Zoning Officer shall be synonymous with the Director of Code
Administration, Director of Land Development, and Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 84-146 PINE CODE § 84-147
68:818
ARTICLE X
Administration
§ 84-148. Amendments.
§ 84-149. Fee schedule.134
§ 84-150. Notification of violation.
A. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries, and requirements set forth in
this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed,
through amendment by the Board of Supervisors, from time to time.
B. This chapter may be amended in accordance with the applicable
procedures of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, as amended.
C. In the event any owner or owners of property petition for
supplementing or changing the district boundaries or regulations
established in this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall collect fees prior to
such petition being heard by the Board of Supervisors, as established
by the Board of Supervisors, for the payment of the costs of advertising
the notice of hearing in such case and the cost of preparation of the
proposed amendment.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall determine a schedule of fees, charges
and expenses, as well as a collection procedure for permits, variances,
conditional uses, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this
chapter.
B. The Township shall charge fees for the issuance of building permits,
sign permits, occupancy permits, and other permits.
C. All fees shall be paid to the Township.
D. The Zoning Officer shall keep on file in his office a record of all permits.
E. The Board of Supervisors shall be empowered to reevaluate the fee
schedule from time to time to make necessary alterations to it. The
governing body may increase the amount of any filing fee, by resolution,
based upon actual cost and expense to the Township. Such alterations
shall not be considered an amendment to this chapter, and may be
adopted at any public meeting by resolution.
A. The Zoning Officer shall have the power to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his/her employment. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, the Zoning Officer shall
issue a written enforcement notice to the person responsible for such
violation.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 84-148 SEWERS § 84-150
68:819
§ 84-151. Violations and penalties.
B. Written notification of violations of this chapter and actions to be taken
to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be provided in accordance
with the applicable notification procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, or other applicable law.
C. The enforcement notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements, which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
D. Any person receiving notification of a violation of this chapter may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board by filing a written notice of appeal
on or before the expiration of 30 days from the date of mailing of the
notice.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable thereof in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof.
B. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the Judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
D. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice, determining that there has been a violation,
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
§ 84-150 PINE CODE § 84-151
68:820
§ 84-152. Other remedies.
In case any building, land, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed
to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation.
§ 84-153. Condemnation of unsafe structures.
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs, and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
E. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
F. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
G. Violations and penalties; heliports.
(1) All heliports in the Township shall be subject to the requirements of
§ 84-55.
(2) In addition, in case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this section, the Board
of Supervisors or, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, an
officer of the Township, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct or business or
use constituting a violation.
A. Whenever any building, structure, part thereof, or appurtenance
thereto is found to be in an unsafe condition by the Zoning Officer, he
shall notify, in writing, the owner, lessee, tenant-occupant, or agent
thereof, describing said unsafe condition and ordering the abatement
thereof.
B. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, the condition of any building,
structure, part thereof or appurtenance thereto is such as to warrant its
condemnation, he shall prepare a notice of condemnation describing
§ 84-151 SEWERS § 84-153
68:821
the unsafe condition and ordering the abatement thereof. Such notice
shall be sent to the owner or the owner's agent by registered or
certified mail or served personally, as provided by complaint under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
C. The time limit stated in said notice for abatement of the unsafe
condition shall be 30 days, except that where, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, the hazard to life, limb or property warrants such action,
he shall have authority to order such abatement within a shorter period
of time.
D. If, after the expiration of time specified in the notice of condemnation,
the owner, agent or person responsible has not abated the unsafe
condition described in said notice or appealed to the Court of Common
Pleas as provided by law, the Zoning Officer shall have authority to
abate said unsafe condition by repairing or removing or demolishing
said building, structure, part thereof or appurtenance thereto at the
expense of the Township.
(1) The cost may be recovered by the Township from the owner in
action of law in the Court of Common Pleas.
(2) When such suit, with statement of claim and description of the lot,
is filed by the Township, the Prothonotary shall index the same
upon the Judgment docket, and the Township shall have a lien for
the amount of said claim against said lot.
§ 84-153 PINE CODE § 84-153
68:822
Part III: General Legislation
Chapter 90
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 84. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 94.
§ 84-153 ADULT USES § 84-153
90:823

ARTICLE I
Adult Entertainment
[Adopted 8-1-1977 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this article and unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
DEVICE — Any item manufactured or processed, intended to be used or sold
for use in lewd or obscene activities.
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
demonstration which appears in the film or publication or knowledge of the
acts of lewdness, obscenity, assignation or prostitution which occur on the
premises.
LEWD —
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body, for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within Pine Township, which is open to members of the general public, with
or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATERIAL — A motion-picture film or publication or device, or all.
MODEL STUDIO —
Any matter which:
The average person, applying contemporary Pine Township
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest, or
(1)
Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of sexual intercourse or other ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation,
excretory functions or exhibition of the genitals or genital area.
(2)
A.
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or prescribe any matter
which, when considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is
used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
B.
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed
or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for the
persons who pay a fee or other consideration or compensation or a
gratuity for the right or opportunity to so depict the figure model or
A.
§ 90-1 ADULT USES § 90-1
90:825
MOTION-PICTURE FILM —
NUDE —
OBSCENE — A publication, act or motion-picture film which depicts or
describes the sexual conduct of having human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy, of fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast and which, taken as a whole, appeals to
for admission to or for permission to remain upon or as a condition for
remaining upon the premises; or
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise
similarly depicted.
B.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school, government-approved school or any governmental
agency wherein the person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating it has met the requirements established by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring
of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a
diploma or honorary diploma;
(1)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this section; or
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
C.
A. Any film or plate negative;
B. Any film or plate positive;
C. Any film designated to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Any films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen; or
D.
Any videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce
images on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
With the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with
less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a discernibly erected
state.
B.
§ 90-1 PINE CODE § 90-1
90:826
the prurient interest in sex, which portrays sexual conduct in a patently
offensive way, and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself, located within the geographical limits of Pine Township.
PUBLICATION — Any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing, printing,
illustration, picture, sound recording or motion-picture film which is
displayed in an area open to the public or offered for sale or exhibited in a
coin-operated machine.
SALE — Passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration, and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of or transfer of possession of lewd
matter.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of Pine Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania,
depending upon the context.
§ 90-2. Declaration of public nuisance.
The Supervisors find the commercial exploitation of obscene and lewd
materials and the use of m parlors and model studios for the purposes
of obscenity, lewdness, assignation, prostitution or the manipulation of the
body by a member of the opposite sex to be contrary to the morals and
general welfare of the Township; to have an adverse effect on the physical
and mental health of the residents, jeopardizing the safety of the areas
in which such commercial exploitation is permitted to occur; to have an
undesirable effect on the Township policy of neighborhood preservation and
development; and to erode the high quality of life existing in the Township;
now, therefore, such commercial exploitation is a public nuisance.
§ 90-3. Exhibition and possession of lewd and obscene films.
A. Any and every place in the Township where lewd or obscene films are
publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition, and
any and every place in the Township where a lewd film is publicly or
repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibitions, is
a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd or obscene film which is publicly exhibited or for
such purposes at a place which is a public nuisance under Subsection A
above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the theater or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of the
§ 90-1 ADULT USES § 90-3
90:827
§ 90-4. Lewd and obscene publications.
§ 90-5. Massage parlors.
§ 90-6. Maintaining public nuisance.
resolution and order of summary abatement provided for in § 90-7
hereof, all moneys paid thereafter as admission price to such
exhibitions are also declared to be a public nuisance, as personal
property used in conducting and maintaining a declared public
nuisance.
A. Any and every place in the Township in which lewd or obscene
publications constitute any portion of the stock-in-trade is a public
nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd or obscene publication possessed at a place which
is a public nuisance under Subsection A above is a public nuisance per
se.
C. From and after the service on the place or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct
copy of the resolution and order of summary abatement provided for in
§ 90-7 hereof, all valuable consideration received for the sale of such
lewd or obscene publications is also declared to be a public nuisance as
personal property used in conducting and maintaining a declared public
nuisance.
A. Every massage parlor or model studio which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation, prostitution
or massage by a member of the opposite sex, and every such massage
parlor or model studio in or upon which acts or lewdness, assignations
or prostitution are held or occur are a public nuisance which shall be
enjoined, abated and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of the
resolution and order of summary abatement provided for in § 90-7
hereof, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for services
rendered to customers are also declared to be a public nuisance, as
personal property used in conducting and maintaining a declared public
nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of the resolution and order of summary abatement provided for in
§ 90-7 hereof, any and every person who shall own, legally or equitably,
lease, maintain, manage, conduct or operate a place in the Township
which is declared to be a public nuisance as set forth in § 90-3, 90-4 or
90-5 of this chapter is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of
such nuisance for the purpose of this chapter and is, thereafter,
responsible for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.
§ 90-3 PINE CODE § 90-6
90:828
§ 90-7. Action by Supervisors upon finding public nuisance.
Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in § 90-3, 90-4 or
90-5 of this chapter, exists in the Township, the Township Supervisors, in
applying the provisions of this chapter to such nuisance, shall provide for
the following by resolution:
B. The place and subject matter declared to be public nuisances under
§§ 90-3, 90-4 and 90-5 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists;
B. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes the nuisance,
C. Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Township Supervisors
in arriving at their factual determination:
(1) In the ease of a motion-picture film or films, such shall include a
recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which the
Township Supervisors find are patently offensive, lewd or obscene
and the basis for the finding by the Township Supervisors that:
(a) Such films are publicly exhibited in the course of business; or
(b) Such film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited or held for such
exhibition at the place declared to be a public nuisance.
(2) In the case of, a publication or publications, such shall include a
recitation of.
(a) The particular publications or types of publications considered
by the Township Supervisors and those which the Township
Supervisors find to be patently offensive, lewd or obscene.
(b) The basis for the finding of the Township Supervisors that such
publications are displayed, sold or held, for sale at any place
found by the Township Supervisors to be a public nuisance.
(c) The basis of the finding by the Township Supervisors that such
publications constitute a portion of the stock-in-trade of such
place of business or other place.
(3) In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such shall include
a recitation of:
(a) The particular acts of lewdness, assignation, prostitution or
massage by a member of the opposite sex which have
occurred.
(b) The basis for the finding by the Township Supervisors that such
acts occur in the course of business.
§ 90-6 ADULT USES § 90-7
90:829
D. Order all persons described in § 90-6A hereof to summarily abate such
public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order on any such
persons, by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession for sale of
such lewd or obscene subject matter or by ceasing to use the place
where the nuisance is declared to exist or by terminating the use of said
premises for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, or
causing the same to be terminated, and notifying the Township
Secretary and the Township Supervisors of compliance therewith by
sworn affidavit as ordered by the action of the Township Supervisors in
such resolution.
E. Order the Township Solicitor to proceed as directed in § 90-9 of this
chapter and do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the
court to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the court.
F. Inform and give notice to persons designated in § 90-6A that:
(1) The Township Supers have determined that a public nuisance
presently exists at such place and address, and that under § 90-6A
of said chapter they are deemed to have knowledge thereof and are
responsible therefor.
(2) In the event that the order of the Township is not complied with
within 24 hours, the Township Supervisors have ordered the
Township Solicitor, as provided under § 90-9 hereof, to commence
necessary legal proceedings naming such persons as defendants in
a civil action to abate the same judicially under § 90-7 of this
chapter, and that under § 90-8A and B of this chapter, the costs of
abatement of such civil abatement action filed, including
investigate costs, court costs, attorney's fees and other expenses,
are made a special assessment against the parcel of land upon
which such nuisance is being maintained and, upon their
determination in such court action, will be a separate legal
procedure, be made a lien against any person, persons, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or other entity deemed to be
in violation of this chapter.
(3) All lewd or obscene motion-picture films or lewd or obscene
publications being used in conducting and maintaining such public
nuisance are contraband and the subject of forfeiture; and
(4) From and after service on the place or its owner, manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and
correct copy of such resolution, any and all moneys paid as
admission price to or for the exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd
or obscene motion-picture films and valuable consideration
received for the sale of such lewd or obscene publications and all
moneys or other valuable consideration received for services
rendered in such massage parlors or model studios are a public
§ 90-7 PINE CODE § 90-7
90:830
§ 90-8. Forfeiture of valuable consideration to general fund; cost of
abatement; violations and penalties.
nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and maintaining
such nuisance, and, as such, are the subject of forfeiture.
G. Order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true and
correct copy of this chapter be delivered forthwith in any manner
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property, and to
the owner, manager or acting manager or persons in charge of the
place therein declared a public nuisance.
A. Upon judgment for the Township in legal proceedings brought pursuant
to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by such defendant or
defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration received by them
which have been declared to be a public nuisance under § 90-3C, 90-4C
or 90-5B of this chapter. Such moneys or their equivalent and any
valuable consideration received shall be forfeited to the general fund of
the Township or to the Township as property of the Township if any
valuable consideration received be not money.
B. Cost of abatement.
(1) The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(a) Investigative costs.
(b) Court costs.
(c) Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for
and trial of the case, and appeals therefrom, and other costs
allowed on appeal.
(d) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and other papers
filed in such proceeding.
(2) Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment
against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained.
Upon its determination in a civil action, such shall be a separate
legal proceeding, be made a lien against such property and a
personal obligation against any person, persons, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or other entity and shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes
are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the
same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection
and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such
special assessment
C. Any person, persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity found to be in violation of this chapter, upon summary
§ 90-7 ADULT USES § 90-8
90:831
§ 90-9. Commencement of legal proceedings.
Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Township Supervisors of the fact
that a public nuisance exists at a particular location, the Township shall,
not later than five days after passage of said resolution, commence legal
proceedings by the filing of a civil action seeking the following relief:
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $300, plus costs of
prosecution, for each offense. Each calendar day in which the person,
persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity
remains in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
A. A declaratory judgment that the matter named by the Township
Supervisors is lewd, as defined herein.
B. A declaratory judgment that the matter found to be lewd is or are public
nuisances per se under this chapter and such resolution.
C. A declaratory judgment that each place named by the Township
Supervisors is a public nuisance under this chapter and such resolution.
D. An accounting of all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films and valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications and all
moneys or other valuable consideration received for services rendered
in such massage parlors or model studios, from and after the time the
persons maintaining said nuisance receive notice of the finding by the
Township Supervisors by resolution that the public nuisance exists and
a judgment that such moneys or valuable consideration are a public
nuisance under this article.
E. An order that all admission price moneys or valuable consideration
received and enumerated in the court-ordered accounting be forfeited
as contraband to the general fund of the Township or a property
belonging to the Township.
F. An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons responsible for
maintaining said nuisance from possessing or publicly exhibiting said
lewd motion-picture films or from selling or possessing for sale said
lewd publications or from committing acts of lewdness, assignation,
prostitution or massage on members of the opposite sex, at any time in
the future in the Township, and such other injunctive relief as the court
may order.
G. An order that all positive prints of the named lewd film and all lewd
publications or copies or reproductions thereof be forfeited as
contraband under this chapter.
H. Judgment for the Township for all costs therein expended, including
investigative costs, court costs, reasonable attorney's fees and such
other expenses as are provided for herein.
§ 90-8 PINE CODE § 90-9
90:832
I. Collection of penalties.
J. All other relief as the court may deem proper.
§ 90-9 ADULT USES § 90-9
90:833

ARTICLE II
Adult-Oriented Establishments
[Adopted 8-2-1999 by Ord. No. 270]
§ 90-10. Legislative findings and intent.
A. Findings. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine finds as
follows:
(1) Adult-oriented establishments within the Township of Pine require
special regulation by law and the supervision by public safety
agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and
welfare of patrons of such establishments, as well as the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Pine.
(2) Statistics and studies performed in a substantial number of
communities in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and in the
United States and by the State of Delaware indicate that:
(a) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent adultoriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed
booths, cubicles, stalls, compartments, studios and rooms for
the private viewing of so-called adult motion pictures,
videotapes or live entertainment or a combination of such adult
motion pictures, videotapes and live entertainment;
(b) The closed booths, cubicles, stalls, compartments, studios and
rooms and holes in partitions between such booths, cubicles,
stalls, compartments, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in sexual acts;
(c) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
adult-oriented establishments in order to provide sex for hire
to the patrons, clients or customers within the booths,
cubicles, stalls, compartments, studios and rooms;
(d) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on
the entrances or exits, or both, of the booths, cubicles, stalls,
compartments, studios and rooms which are closed while the
booths, cubicles, stalls, compartments, studios and rooms are
in use encourage patrons using the booths, cubicles, stalls,
compartments, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts in
the closures and through holes in partitions between the
closures with prostitutes, patrons, clients or customers,
thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the
commission of sexual acts which result in the direct exchange
of bodily fluids which put the participants at high risk for
contracting communicable diseases, including AIDS, and
which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the
floors or walls, or both, of the booths, cubicles, stalls,
§ 90-10 ADULT USES § 90-10
90:835
§ 90-11. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment which has a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in, or an establishment which, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale books, films, video
cassettes or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or
compartments, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove
detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may
come in contact with such deposits; and
(e) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adultoriented
establishments tend to discourage sexual acts and
prostitution and thereby promote the health, safety and
welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such
establishments.
(3) The unregulated operation of such adult-oriented establishments,
including, without limitation, those specifically cited in Subsection
A(1) above, is and would be detrimental to the general health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Pine.
(4) The Constitution of Pennsylvania, the Home Rule Charter and
Optional Plans Law (53 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.135) and the Charter of
the Township of Pine grant to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Pine the power, especially police power, to enact
reasonable legislation to regulate and supervise adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. Intent. It is not the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Pine in enacting this article to deny to any person rights of speech
protected by the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, or both, nor is it the intent of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Pine to impose by this article any additional limitations
or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and other
materials. Further, by enacting this article, the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Pine does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of
any adult to obtain or view, or both, any sexually oriented materials
protected by the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, or both, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of
sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit these
materials.
135. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
§ 90-10 PINE CODE § 90-11
90:836
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and, in
conjunction therewith, has facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment for observation by patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT —
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, meaning those
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing
or appearing unclothed, pantomiming, modeling or any other personal
services offered customers.
B.
The term includes, without limitation, the following establishments
when operated for profit, whether direct or indirect:
(1) Adult bookstores.
(2) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(3) Adult mini-motion-picture theaters.
Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited
or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures, or where an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a
member.
(4)
An adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically
arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented
as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio,
(5)
A.
§ 90-11 ADULT USES § 90-11
90:837
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any service directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — A person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an
employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Allegheny County Health Department
authorized and designated by the director of such department; the
Township of Pine's Manager, Assistant Manager, Solicitor, Director of Code
Administration and Land Development and/or Code Enforcement Officer; an
employee of the Pine Marshall Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force authorized
by the commanding officer of such police force; or other persons designated
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine to inspect premises
regulated under this article, to cooperate in taking the required actions
authorized by this article where violations are found on a premises and to
request correction of unsatisfactory conditions found on a premises.
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — A person, partnership or corporation owning, operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The term does not include any of the following:
encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, massage
parlor, health spa or any other term of like import.
The terms "booths, cubicles, stalls, compartments, studios and rooms,"
for purposes of definition in connection with adult-oriented
establishments, do not mean enclosures which are private offices used
by the owner, manager or persons employed on the premises for
attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out
to the public for the purpose of viewing motion pictures or other adult
entertainment for a fee, and which are not open to any persons other
than employees.
B.
Medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or
films.
A.
Any art or photography publications which devote at least 25% of
the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with
subjects of art or photography.
B.
Any news periodical which reports or describes current events and
which from time to time publishes photographs of nude or seminude
persons in connection with the dissemination of the news.
C.
Any publications or films which describe and report different cultures
and which from time to time publish or show photographs or depictions
of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity
or seminudity is indigenous to the populations.
D.
§ 90-11 PINE CODE § 90-11
90:838
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The term includes any of the following:
§ 90-12. Requirements for adult-oriented establishments.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals or pubic region;
(2) Buttocks; or
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
A. Loitering by minors prohibited. No operator or employee of an adultoriented
establishment shall permit any minor to loiter in any part of
such establishment, including the parking lots immediately adjacent to
such establishment used by its patrons.
B. Interior plan. Every adult-oriented establishment in the Township of
Pine shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such
a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls where adult entertainment is provided
shall be clearly visible from the common areas within the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or
stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions,
drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to
install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or
stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose, but
especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of
adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of adult entertainment.
C. Certain apertures prohibited. No adult-oriented establishment shall
contain partitions between subdivisions of a room or portions or parts
of a building, structure or premise with an aperture which is designed
or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on either
side of the partitions.
D. Illumination and visibility. The operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room
or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted
and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to
§ 90-11 ADULT USES § 90-12
90:839
§ 90-13. Liability of operator.
Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of this article
shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if the act or omission
occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator
or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's
conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for the act or omission in the
same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
§ 90-14. Establishments open for inspection.
All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by inspectors.
§ 90-15. Civil action to enjoin or abate violations.
view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 10
footcandles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the
operator and the operator's agents to ensure that such illumination is
maintained at all times that a patron is present in the premises.
A. Action authorized. An action to enjoin or abate a violation of this article
may be brought in the name of the Township of Pine by its solicitor. The
action shall be brought and tried as an action in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
B. Procedures.
(1) If it is made to appear, by affidavits or otherwise, to the satisfaction
of that court that a violation exists, a temporary writ of injunction
shall forthwith issue, directed to the operator of the adult
entertainment establishment or the owner of the premises, or both,
restraining the operator or owner from continuing or permitting
the continuation of any violation or violations of this article until
the conclusion of the hearing and a decision by the court. No bond
shall be required in instituting such proceedings. This article,
insofar as it provides for methods of service and bond, shall not be
deemed to be suspended or affected by the Pennsylvania Rules of
Civil Procedure governing the action in equity.
(2) It shall not be necessary for the court to find that the property
involved was being unlawfully used at the time of the hearing, but,
on finding that the material allegations of the petition are true, the
court shall order that neither the premises nor any part of the
premises be used in violation of this article. Upon judgment of the
court ordering the violations to be abated, the court may order that
neither the premises nor any part of the premises shall be occupied
or used for any purpose for up to one year following the date of the
court's order, but the court may, in its discretion, permit the
§ 90-12 PINE CODE § 90-15
90:840
§ 90-16. Violation of abatement order of injunction.
An operator or owner of an adult-oriented establishment or any agent of
the operator or owner who, after any injunction has been granted, uses the
premises or any part of the premises, or knowingly permits the premises or
any part of the premises to be used in violation of an order of abatement
or injunction, shall be subject to summary punishment as for contempt of
court, in the manner now provided by law.
§ 90-17. Violations and penalties.
A person violating any provision of this article commits a misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for each violation.
§ 90-18. Existing remedies preserved.
This article shall not be deemed to affect any other existing remedy
available against an adult-oriented establishment, adult bookstore, adult
motion-picture theater or adult mini-motion-picture theater, including but
not limited to those set forth in Article I. (§§ 90-1 through 90-9 of Chapter
90, Adult Uses, of the Code of the Township of Pine).
premises to be occupied or used by the operator or owner if the
operator or owner, or both, posts a bond or a joint bond in the
discretion of the court with sufficient surety to be approved by the
Court in the penal and liquidated sum of not less than $1,000 nor
more than $2,500, payable to the Township of Pine and conditioned
that neither the building nor a part of the building be used in
violation of this article, and that the operator will pay all fines,
costs and damages that may be assessed for any violation of this
article upon the premises.
(3) Service of any preliminary or permanent injunction shall be made
personally upon the operator and owner of the premises if such
persons can be found in Allegheny County. If the operator or owner
cannot be found, a copy of the order shall be delivered to any
employee of the operator on the establishment premises or, in the
case of the owner, upon an agent, if any. If no employee or agent
can be found or service cannot be made on an employee or agent of
the owner, then service shall be made as the court may direct. Any
person other than the operator or owner who shall be served with
any notice of an injunction shall, within 24 hours thereafter, deliver
the notice to the operator or owner, as the case may be, or mail it to
the operator or owner, as the case may be, known to the person
served.
§ 90-15 ADULT USES § 90-18
90:841
Chapter 91
ALARM DEVICES
§ 91-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALARM — A communication to the Police Department or Fire
Departments which serve the Township of Pine indicating that a crime
or fire or other emergency situation warranting immediate action by
such Police Department or Fire Departments has occurred or is
occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A self-contained device present inside a building
and which is designed to detect the presence of smoke, heat, carbon
monoxide or motion and to then emit a sound audible within the
building to warn persons therein of such presence.
ALARM SYSTEM — A system designed to automatically transmit an
alarm, by wire, telephone, radio or other means, to the County of
Allegheny's 911 Dispatch Center or to a person who is instructed to so
notify the County of Allegheny's 911 Dispatch Center of the alarm or to
activate a bell or other sounding device to be heard outside a building
and which is intended to alert the police or others to the existence
of a crime or fire or other emergency situation warranting immediate
official response.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Fire Department and/or Police
Department serving the Township of Pine responds and which results
from the activation of an alarm system or alarm device when a crime,
fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by such Police
Department or Fire Department has not in fact occurred. For the
purpose of the imposition of charges set forth in § 91-2 of this chapter
concerning false alarms to which the Fire Department serving the
Township of Pine responds, a "response" by such Fire Department
shall not be deemed to have occurred until and unless its emergency
equipment actually arrives at the scene or site of the alleged emergency
in answer to a fire false alarm.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or other similar entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Northern Regional Police Department of
Allegheny County.
YEAR — Calendar year.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 90-18 PINE CODE § 91-2
91:842
§ 91-2. False alarms; charges.
A. Any person causing or reporting accidental false alarms for any reason
or the permit holder of an alarm system that transmits a false alarm for
any reason shall pay a charge for each and every false alarm to which
such Police Department and/or Fire Departments serving the Township
of Pine responds, in each calendar year, as follows:
(1) Police false alarm (payable to the Northern Regional Police
Department of Allegheny County):
(a) First false alarm from an alarm system, each calendar year:
$50 or proof of yearly maintenance contract in effect.
(b) Second false alarm, each calendar year: $50.
(c) Third false alarm, each calendar year: $75.
(d) Fourth false alarm, each calendar year: $100.
(e) Each false alarm in excess of four, each calendar year: the
amount of the charge assessed for the immediately preceding
false alarm during that calendar year, plus an additional $25.
(2) Fire false alarm (payable to the Township of Pine).
(a) First false alarm from an alarm system, each year: $100 or
proof of yearly maintenance contract in effect.
(b) First false alarm from an alarm device, each year: $100 or
proof, acceptable to the Township of Pine and submitted within
30 days from the date of the notification described in
Subsection D of this section, of the repair or replacement of the
alarm device from which the false alarm originated.
(c) All other false alarms each year: $300 per false alarm.
B. When a false alarm to which the Police Department responds shall
occur, the Police Department which serves the Township of Pine shall,
within 45 days from the date of the false alarm, notify the permit holder
for the alarm system or owner of the alarm device from which the false
alarm originated or other person causing said false alarm that a police
false alarm charge is due and the amount thereof. Such notice shall be
in writing and mailed by regular mail, postage paid, to the last known
address of the permit holder, owner of the alarm device, or other person
causing said false alarm.
C. A police false alarm charge shall be due to (and payable at the
headquarters of) the Police Department which serves the Township of
Pine (230 Pearce Mill Road) 30 days from the date of the mailing of the
notice of assessment of the charge.
D. When a false alarm to which the Fire Department which serves the
Township of Pine responds, the Township of Pine shall, within 45 days
§ 91-2 ALARM DEVICES § 91-2
91:843
§ 91-3. Testing by permission only.
No person shall conduct or test any alarm device without first obtaining
permission from the Police Department which serves the Township of Pine.
Where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary, no such permission
is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to the central
receiving station.
§ 91-4. Nonliability of municipality.
The issuance of a permit for an alarm system shall not constitute acceptance
by the Township of Pine of any liability to maintain any such equipment,
to answer alarms nor otherwise render the Township of Pine liable to any
person for any loss or damage relating to the alarm system or procedure.
§ 91-5. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the functions of
the Township of Pine and the Police Department which serves it (to the
respective extents specified herein).
§ 91-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter or who shall fail to pay a charge for a false alarm shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500, which amount shall be in addition to any charge imposed
pursuant to § 91-2 of this chapter.
Chapter 91A
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
from the date of such false alarm, notify the permit holder for the
alarm system or owner of the alarm device from which the false alarm
originated or other person causing said false alarm that a fire false
alarm charge is due and the amount thereof. Such notice shall be in
writing and mailed by regular mail, postage paid, to the last known
address of the permit holder, owner of the alarm device, or other person
causing said false alarm.
E. A fire false alarm charge shall be due to (and payable at its Municipal
Building, 230 Pearce Mill Road) the Township of Pine 30 days from the
date of the mailing of the notice of assessment of the charge.
§ 91-2 PINE CODE § 91-6
91A:844
ARTICLE I
Bottle Clubs
[Adopted 7-1-1996 by Res. No. 510]
§ 91A-1. Operation prohibited.
The operation of establishments commonly referred to as "bottle clubs" (as
such are defined within Act 66 of 1995136) is hereby prohibited within the
Township of Pine pursuant to the terms of Act 66 of 1995 and the results
of the referendum question from the primary election of April 23, 1996, as
certified by the Department of Elections of the County of Allegheny on May
13, 1996.
§ 91A-2. Violations and penalties.
The operation of establishments commonly referred to as "bottle clubs" (as
such are defined within Act 66 of 1995) within the Township of Pine is now
punishable as a criminal offense constituting a misdemeanor of the third
degree per the terms and conditions of Act 66 of 1995.
§ 91A-3. Prohibition to be included in records.
The Township's staff is authorized and directed to take all necessary steps
to ensure that the certified results of the aforementioned referendum
question, the prohibition of the operation of establishments commonly
referred to as "bottle clubs" (as defined in Act 66 of 1995) within the
Township of Pine, the penalty therefor, and the provisions of this article be
listed in the official records of the Township of Pine and incorporated into
the Code of the Township of Pine.
136. Editor's Note: 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7328.
§ 91A-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 91A-3
91A:845
Chapter 92
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 94. Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 92-1. Repealer; conflict with other regulations.
The provisions of former Chapter 92 (Amusement Devices) of the Code of
the Township of Pine are hereby repealed,137 as are all other ordinances
or parts of ordinances insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this
chapter; however, such repeal shall not affect any act done or any liability
or violation accrued under any such prior regulation herein repealed or
superseded, and all such liabilities or violations shall continue and may be
enforced in the same manner as if such repeal or supersession had not been
made; and any offense or violation committed and any penalty or forfeiture
incurred under any such regulation herein repealed or superseded, may be
prosecuted in the same manner as if this chapter had not been approved.
§ 92-2. Word usage; construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The Township of Pine intends to favor the public interest as against any
private interest.
G. The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter
shall not be considered to control but may be used to aid in the
construction thereof.
H. General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be
restricted by preceding particular words.
137. Editor's Note: Said former Ch. 92, Amusement Devices, was adopted 12-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 173.
§ 91A-3 PINE CODE § 92-3
91A:846
§ 92-3. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases, used in this chapter or in an application for license of amusement
devices, shall have the meanings given to them in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A video or mechanical amusement device,
jukebox or pool table and/or other electronic device, machine or apparatus
whatsoever for the playing of games and amusement.
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which
seeks to obtain a license for an amusement device under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES — The document
filed by an applicant requesting a permit to possess in the Township of Pine
any video or mechanical amusement device, jukebox or pool table and/or
other electronic device, machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of
games and amusement.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, bar or tavern or retail,
manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business,
whether or not in operation.
GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for the
playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo or other casino games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, disc, slug or token.
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus
designed and/or specifically equipped to be used for the playing of poker,
blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or other casino gambling games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token, which has,
or is designed to facilitate the ready use of, a knockoff or knockdown device
or other capability for erasing or eliminating accumulated playing credits.
JUKEBOX — Any device, machine or apparatus which plays recorded music,
whether by record, tape, compact disc or other means, by the insertion
therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
POOL TABLE — Any device or apparatus upon which is played the games
of 8-ball, billiards, pool, snooker or other similar games for which a fee is
charged, whether or not such device is operated through the insertion of
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
PROPRIETOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which
owns, leases or maintains the business establishment in which any jukebox,
pool table or video or mechanical amusement device and/or other electronic
device, machine or apparatus is placed for the use, patronage, recreation
or amusement of the public or of persons in or about the business
establishment.
VENDOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who or which is the
lawful owner of any jukebox, pool table or video or mechanical amusement
device and/or other electronic device, machine or apparatus used for the
playing of games and amusement for which a license is sought under this
§ 92-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 92-3
91A:847
chapter, or any individual, partnership or corporation who or which makes,
assembles, sets up, maintains, sells, lends, leases, gives away or offers for
sale, loan, lease or gift any jukebox, pool table or video or mechanical
amusement device and/or other electronic device, machine or apparatus
used for the playing of games and amusement for which a license is sought
under this chapter.
VIDEO OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, machine
or apparatus used for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token, including but not limited to claw
machines, electric or electronic dart boards, gambling devices, pinball
machines and video games.
§ 92-4. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall at any time
exhibit, display, maintain or have in his, her or its possession within the
Township of Pine any video or mechanical amusement device, jukebox or
pool table and/or other electronic device used for the playing of games and
amusement without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter
provided in this chapter.
§ 92-5. Application for license.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to procure a license
as required in § 92-4 of this chapter shall apply therefor, in writing, to the
Township of Pine's Manager or his or her designee. Said application shall
be on an application form prepared and provided by the Township of Pine
which shall set forth at least the following information:
A. The name and address of the vendor of each jukebox, pool table or
video, mechanical or electronic amusement device to be licensed.
B. The name and address of the proprietor of the business establishment
in which each jukebox, pool table or video, mechanical or electronic
amusement device is to be located, used or installed and the address of
such business establishment (if different from the address of the
proprietor).
C. If vendor and/or proprietor are citizens of the United States.
D. The manufacturer, name of machine, serial number, type and fee for
each machine, video, electronic or mechanical amusement device, pool
table, jukebox or other apparatus to be located on the premises,
installed or used.
E. A verification by the vendor and proprietor that the facts set forth in the
application are true and correct to the vendor's and proprietor's
personal knowledge, information or belief and that any false statements
therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes Code, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to authorities.
§ 92-3 PINE CODE § 92-5
91A:848
§ 92-6. Persons ineligible for licenses.
The Township Manager, or his/her designee, shall not issue a license for any
video or mechanical amusement device to any person who:
§ 92-7. Conditions for issuance.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed from
the date of application, during which time the Township Manager (or his/
her designee) may, at his or her discretion, investigate the facts set forth in
the application.
F. That the vendor and proprietor have been provided with a copy of the
provisions of this chapter and that he/they have read and agree to be
bound by all terms and provisions hereof.
G. That the issuance of a license does not sanction or condone the use or
possession of any illegal gambling device, whether illegal per se or as
modified.
H. That the illegal use or possession of an unlawful gambling device, either
per se or as modified, may result in a criminal prosecution by law
enforcement officials.
I. The number, character and type of amusement devices previously
installed and licensed at the applicant's or proprietor's business
establishment.
A. Is not a citizen of the United States.
B. Is not 21 years of age.
C. Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative
disposition, for possessing or using a video or mechanical or electronic
amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, within three years of the date of
application.
A. The Township Manager shall refuse to issue a license for any device
that the applicant has not affirmed is not designed, or intended to be
used, for gambling purposes.
B. A license shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
(1) That obtaining or displaying a license issued by the Township of
Pine does not sanction or permit the use of any device for gambling
purposes or possession of an illegal gambling device, either per se
or as modified; and
(2) That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an
unlawful gambling device, either per se or as modified, he or she
may be prosecuted by the Township of Pine, the Pine Marshall
§ 92-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 92-7
91A:849
§ 92-8. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit
any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, either per se or as modified,
or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
§ 92-9. License fees and term of license.
§ 92-10. Issuance and display.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, and if the
application fully complies with this chapter, the Township of Pine's Manager
shall issue a disc, plate or sticker setting forth the number of the license
for each machine or device so licensed, and said disc, plate or sticker shall
be attached and fastened to the respective machine or device so that the
same may be clearly observable and readable. Discs, plates or stickers
Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force or other appropriate law
enforcement officials.
A. No license shall be issued until the following annual fees shall have
been paid by the applicant to the Township of Pine for each and every
device to be installed or used:
Device
Fee
(each device)
Shuffleboard $70
Pinball machine $100
Electronic/computer game $100
Pool table/billiard $70
Bowling machine $70
Jukebox $25
Electronic game or machine not
specified above
$100
B. The above annual fees paid shall be a license fee for the period
beginning June 1 of each year and continuing for 12 months thereafter
until May 31 of the succeeding year, and such fees shall be paid to the
Township of Pine's Treasurer for the use of the Township. The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine may, from time to time, increase,
decrease, amend, alter or otherwise revise the amount or applicability
of the license fees provided herein either by separate resolution or by
the passage of amendments to its standard fee resolution, which
resolution is contained in Chapter A144 of the Code of the Township of
Pine.
§ 92-7 PINE CODE § 92-10
91A:850
issued for a particular machine or device are not transferable to another
machine or device. All discs, plates or stickers issued by the Township of
Pine for video, mechanical or electronic amusement devices shall state that
the video, mechanical or electronic amusement device is for amusement
purposes only, that it is not a gambling device and that only games and
not money may be won on the machine or device. The licensee shall not
permit the license, disc, plate or sticker issued hereunder to remain posted,
displayed or used after the time period for which it was issued has expired
or when it has been suspended, revoked or, for any reason, has become
ineffective.
§ 92-11. Inspection.
The Township of Pine or its agents (including but not limited to the
Township Manager, his/her designee or any officer of the Pine Marshall
Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force) may, during regular business hours,
conduct inspections of any business establishment where any video or
mechanical or electronic amusement device, jukebox or pool table licensed
under this chapter is located, installed, placed or used to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
§ 92-12. Revocation, debarment and contraband declaration.
A. In the event that any applicant, vendor or proprietor falsifies any
information on an application for license of amusement devices or
violates this chapter (or any rules and regulations promulgated in
accordance herewith) or conducts business in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety and welfare of
the general public, the Township of Pine shall immediately revoke all
licenses issued under this chapter to such applicant, vendor or
proprietor. The obstruction of or denial of entry for authorized
inspections pursuant to this chapter shall constitute grounds for such
revocation.
B. Moreover, in the event that a vendor of a video or mechanical or
electronic amusement device or a proprietor of a business
establishment is convicted of possessing or using a video or mechanical
or electronic amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township of Pine shall revoke all
licenses issued under this chapter to such person, as an applicant,
vendor or proprietor.
C. Additionally, the Township of Pine shall not issue a license of
amusement devices to any person who has been found guilty of or
accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition, for possessing or using
a video or mechanical or electronic amusement device in violation of
the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, within three
years of the date of application.
D. Any video or mechanical or electronic amusement device used or
possessed in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
§ 92-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 92-12
91A:851
§ 92-13. Prohibition of suggestion or promise of nonprosecution.
Because the Township of Pine intends to foster compliance with the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States regarding illegal
possession and/or use of gambling devices, no employee or agent of the
Township of Pine may promise, suggest or insinuate, either expressly or by
implication, that the applicant, licensee, proprietor or vendor, who illegally
uses or possesses any device used or intended to be used for gambling
purposes, shall not be prosecuted.
§ 92-14. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person
or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute a summary offense and, upon conviction
within the magisterial district which includes the Township of Pine, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, may be committed
to the Allegheny County Jail in conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each and every day
that any machine or device is used and operated in violation hereof shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense under this chapter and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder. The penalties provided
herein shall not be the exclusive method of enforcing compliance with the
provisions of this chapter but shall be in addition to all other legal and
equitable remedies available to the Township of Pine.
§ 92-15. Additional duties of Township Manager.
The Township Manager, or his/her designee, shall have the following
additional duties and authorities with regard to the implementation and
administration of the provisions of this chapter:
Pennsylvania, or this chapter, may be deemed contraband and forfeited
in accordance with the provisions set forth in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501(d).
A. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary
to the operation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Adopt any and all forms necessary under this chapter and prescribe the
information to be given thereon.
C. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as
prescribed by this chapter.
D. Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when
reasonably necessary to the administration of this chapter.
E. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or denial of the application
submitted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 92-12 PINE CODE § 92-15
91A:852
§ 92-16. Liability.
The Township of Pine, in granting any license pursuant to this chapter, is not
rendered thereby liable for any damage or injury occurring at or resulting
from any such license activity or business establishment, and the licensee,
by accepting such license, shall save the Township of Pine harmless from
any such damage or injury.
§ 92-17. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of
Article IV of the Township of Pine's Home Rule Charter, as codified at
§ C-404 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
Chapter 93
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
F. Take all other actions and perform all other duties necessary to the
operation and enforcement of this chapter as may be designated by the
Township of Pine's Board of Supervisors.
§ 92-15 ANIMALS § 92-17
93:853

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 7-3-1995 by Ord. No. 232]
§ 93-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the applicable definitions set forth in § 102
of the Dog Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania138 and Chapter 84,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Pine, be and the same are hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though said definitions were set forth at
length herein.
§ 93-2. Enforcement.
An Animal Control Officer, as may be designated by the Township of Pine,
from time to time, together with all police officers of the Pine-Marshall-
Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force, shall be authorized to enforce the
provisions of the Dog Law139 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
provisions of this article within the Township of Pine.
§ 93-3. Cruel treatment prohibited.
No person shall cruelly treat any dog or other domestic pet in the Township
of Pine. The term "cruel treatment" shall include any beating, intentional
infliction of injury or wound, underfeeding or the abandonment of any dogs
or other domestic pets.
§ 93-4. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or other domestic pet to
permit or allow the same to run at large within the Township of Pine. All
dogs and other domestic pets shall be kept under restraint at all times,
either by a leash not to exceed eight feet in length, held by the owner or
a responsible person or his agent, or by being kept within the exclusive
premises of the owner or his agent. Violation of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed, in addition to the provisions of the Dog Law140 of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a public nuisance of the Township of Pine
when such dog or other domestic pet is not under the restraints required by
the provisions of this section.
§ 93-5. Noisemaking prohibited.
Excessive, continuous or untimely noisemaking by any dog or other
domestic pet, including but not limited to barking, howling, screeching,
yelping or baying which disturbs the quiet of any person or the community,
or molesting passersby, chasing motor vehicles or bicycles, habitual
138. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-102.
139. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 93-1 ANIMALS § 93-5
93:855
attacking of other domestic animals or trespassing on public or private
property shall all be deemed public nuisances and a violation of the
provisions of this article.
§ 93-6. Inoculation required.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog or other domestic pet in the
Township of Pine to have such inoculated against rabies and to provide,
upon request by an authorized representative of the Township of Pine, a
certificate of effective current inoculation by a veterinarian. The failure to
comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a violation of this
article.
§ 93-7. Dogs within public buildings restricted.
No dogs or other domestic pets, whether under restraint or otherwise, are
permitted within the public buildings of the Township of Pine. Any person
with defective eyesight or hearing who relies upon a dog specifically trained
to assist them with such functions shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section.
§ 93-8. Removal of excrement.
It shall be the duty of the owner (or his agent) of a dog or other domestic
pet to promptly remove such animal's excrement from any property beyond
the premises of the owner and to clean any such affected area immediately.
For the enforcement of the provisions of this section, an owner or his
agent accompanying a dog or other domestic pet under proper restraints,
as required under the provisions of this article, shall carry on his person
the materials necessary to comply with the provisions of this section. Any
owner of a dog or other domestic pet (or his agent) who fails to so promptly
remove or clean such animal's excrement or to have available materials for
this purpose shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 93-9. Abatement of noxious odors.
Insofar as the private property of the owner or his agent is concerned,
dog or other domestic pet excrement found on such property which causes
noxious odors because of the owner's or his agent's failure to dispose of or
clean such excrement from his property shall constitute a public nuisance
of the Township of Pine and a violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 93-10. Kennel licenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which operates a kennel (as such is
defined in § 84-5 of the Code of the Township of Pine) within the limits of the
Township of Pine shall secure a kennel license. The enforcement officer or
police officers of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police Force shall
periodically inspect such kennels to determine the safety and the sanitary
and health conditions of such kennel. No dog or other domestic pet shall be
permitted to remain at any kennel unless a certificate of a duly authorized
§ 93-5 PINE CODE § 93-10
93:856
veterinarian is produced indicating that such dog or other domestic pet
has been inoculated against rabies within the past three years. The Board
of Supervisors may establish rules and regulations for the operation of a
kennel within the Township of Pine. The fee for the issuance of a kennel
license shall be $100 and such may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 93-11. Conflict with other regulations.
Nothing contained in the provisions of this article shall be construed as
an abrogation of any of the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
which deal with animals and, further, the compliance with any ordinance or
statute otherwise requiring application for an animal license or registration
or the payment of a fee for the same shall not bar enforcement of the
provisions of this article.
§ 93-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is in violation of any of the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 93-10 ANIMALS § 93-12
93:857
Chapter 94
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 90.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 92.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 116.
§ 94-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — Within the limits of the Township of Pine, any
word, act or conduct which causes or tends to cause a disturbance or
breach of the peace or good order of the Township; or which causes or
tends to cause danger, annoyance or discomfiture to the inhabitants of
the Township of Pine or persons lawfully within said Township, and shall
include fighting, drunkenness, vagrancy, begging, loafing or the making
of unnecessary noise, profane or indecent language, careless or reckless
driving or any other use of vehicles by the owners or occupants thereof as
shall endanger the safety or interfere with the comfort or convenience of
any person or persons lawfully using the thoroughfares of Pine Township or
residing in said Pine Township.
§ 94-2. Declaration of unlawful offense.
All of the foregoing disorderly conduct is hereby declared an unlawful
offense.
§ 94-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $300, plus costs of prosecution for each offense.
Chapter 98
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 90. Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 93-12 PINE CODE § 98-1
94:858
§ 98-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, as principal, Clerk, agent or
servant, to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is
designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, as defined by
Pennsylvania statutes,141 without obtaining a license therefor. Such licenses
shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by the applicant.
§ 98-2. Affidavit for application.
Application to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which
is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall, in
addition to the requirements of § 98-1, be accompanied by affidavits by the
applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell such items that
such person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense.
§ 98-3. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or give items as described in § 98-1 in any form
to any male or female child under 18 years of age.
§ 98-4. Records to be kept.
Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia,
accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal
cannabis or drugs which is sold, and this record shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business.
Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name
and quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale and the licensee
or agent of the licensee's, signature. Such records shall be retained for not
less than two years.
§ 98-5. Compliance required.
The applicant shall comply with all applicable regulations of the Allegheny
County Health Department and the Police Department.
§ 98-6. Fees. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
At the time of filing the application, an application fee in an amount set
by the current Pine Township fee schedule142 shall be paid to the Township
Manager or his designated representative.
§ 98-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $300, plus costs of prosecution, for the first offense and
141. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-102.
142. Editor's Note: For the current fee schedule, see Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 98-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 98-7
98:859
succeeding offense during the same calendar year, and each day that such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 104
FIREARMS
§ 104-1. Rifles to be regulated.
§ 104-2. Use delineated.
§ 104-3. Outside or pistol range; standards.
An outside range or pistol range shall be permitted, subject to the National
Rifle Association standards or higher standards, if, in the exclusive joint
opinion of the Chief of Police and Zoning Officer, such higher standards are
in the best interest of safety for persons and property. The Chief of Police
shall determine whether the range complies with the standards, which shall
include the following, as well as the other standards:
A. No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property, use
air rifle of a caliber of .22 rimfire or greater within the Township of
Pine, except as herein provided.
B. No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property, fire
or discharge any rifle of a caliber of .22 rimfire or greater within the
Township of Pine, except as herein provided.
A. Rifles of a caliber of .22 rimfire or greater shall be deemed to be used
within the terms of this chapter if they are loaded and carried by any
person, regardless of whether or not the firearms have been, are being
or are intended to be discharged.
B. The mere act of carrying firearms at any place other than an approved
rifle range shall be sufficient under this chapter to include their use.
C. The transporting of firearms by automobile or other conveyance
through the Township, which said firearms are not loaded and are being
transported, shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
A. The range shall not exceed 100 yards in length.
B. The backstop of the range shall be a hill, clear of all objects from which
bullets might ricochet and of such size and character that a miss of the
target by the rifle used by 15 feet could not penetrate the hill backstop.
C. No part of the range shall be within 150 yards of a dwelling.
D. No part of the range shall be within 150 yards of a public highway.
E. No more than five shooters shall be permitted at one time, regardless of
the number of targets.
§ 98-7 PINE CODE § 104-3
104:860
§ 104-4. Construal.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of rifles,
firearms or other weapons by police officers in the performance of their
duties, in target practice or any other function of their employment.
§ 104-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 107
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 107-1. Administration.
The Township Manager shall be responsible for carrying out the
administrative duties set forth herein, unless otherwise specified.
§ 107-2. Receipt of proceeds.
In the event of a loss incurred subsequent to the adoption date of this
chapter as a result of fire to a structure located within the Township of Pine,
the Township Manager shall receive from the applicable insurance carrier
F. Applications, in duplicate, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, said
duplicate application to have attached thereto a plan of the territory
intended to be utilized, which plan shall show that the area meets the
requirements of Subsections C and D aforesaid.
G. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by payment of the
sum of $25.
H. The Zoning Officer and Chief of Police shall personally view the
premises upon application.
I. After consideration of the application, the duplicate application shall be
marked "Approved" or "Disapproved" by the Zoning Officer and Chief of
Police, signed, dated and one copy retained by the Zoning Officer and
the other mailed or delivered to the applicant.
A. Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction for violation thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $300, plus costs & prosecution.
B. Each and every violation of any provision of the terms of this chapter
and each and every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense under this chapter, and each such offense shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
C. The penalties provided in this section shall not be the exclusive method
of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this chapter but shall be
in addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available to Pine
Township.
§ 104-3 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 107-2
107:861
such of the proceeds of insurance policies on such fire-damaged property
as is provided for in Section 1 of Act 98 of 1992, amending Section 508,
the Insurance Company Law of 1921, 40 P.S. § 638(c), and shall hold such
proceeds as a separate escrow fund (hereinafter "fund") in accordance with
§ 107-3 of this chapter.
§ 107-3. Separate fund; disposition.
The Township Manager shall segregate the fund described in § 107-2 of this
chapter and shall use such separate fund only to pay the items set forth
in the certificate and bill provided for in § 107-6A(2) of this chapter or as
security for the total costs, if any, incurred by Pine in removing, repairing
or securing the insured, fire-damaged structure.
§ 107-4. Certification of receipt of proceeds; notification of insured.
Upon receipt from the insurer of the name and address of the insured, the
Township Manager shall certify to the insured, in writing, that Pine has
received the fund and shall notify the insured that Pine shall follow the
procedures detailed in Section 1 of Act 98 of 1992, 40 P.S. § 638(d), for use
of the fund and for the ultimate transfer of any remaining part of the fund
to the insured following repair, removal, demolition or other reasonable
disposition of the fire-damaged, insured structure.
§ 107-5. Return of fund to insured following repair.
When the Township Manager has received adequate proof that the insured,
fire-damaged structure has been repaired, removed, demolished or
otherwise reasonably disposed of, as may be applicable, the Township
Manager shall return the fund to the insured, less any delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and any costs
incurred by Pine in the repair, removal or securing of the structure.
§ 107-6. Certificate of paid or delinquent taxes.
A. The Treasurer of the Township of Pine, upon the written request of the
named insured which specifies the tax description of a fire-damaged
property and the agreed-upon date of receipt of a proof of loss of the
insurance claim, shall furnish to the named insured either of the
following (whichever is applicable):
(1) A certificate to the effect that, as of the date specified in the
request, there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or
user charges against the property and that, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate, Pine has not certified any amount as total
costs incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or securing
of a building or other structure on the property; or
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of
the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the
§ 107-2 PINE CODE § 107-6
107:862
Chapter 112
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 126.
Art. II.
§ 112-1. Dumping prohibited.
The Township of Pine does hereby prohibit the dumping of any hazardous
materials or substances upon or into properties, waterways, facilities,
streets, roads and alleys within the municipal boundaries of the Township of
Pine.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES — Any material or substance
which may have a direct or identifiable effect on persons or property
within the municipal boundaries of the Township or any such substances
or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the
Township Manager or his authorized representative, pose an unreasonable
or imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment. Such materials or substances
shall include, but are not limited to, the following: explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic/biologic agents,
flammables, corrosives, toxic materials, infectious materials or materials
listed in the hazardous substance list of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry.
date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any,
certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred by Pine for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property. Pine shall certify to the Treasurer the total amount, if any,
of such costs.
B. The cost of such certificate, payable in advance of issuance to the
Township of Pine by the requestor, shall be in the amount of $10, or as
otherwise later amended or adopted in the Township's standard fee
resolution.143
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. A144, Fees.
§ 107-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-3
112:863
§ 112-3. Authorization to clean up or abate; liability for costs;
remedies.
§ 112-4. Costs incurred by Township.
For the purposes of this chapter, costs incurred by the Township of Pine
shall include, but will not be limited to, the following actual labor costs
involving Township employees, including fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment operation, fire-extinguishing agents,
contracted labor and materials and any other costs incurred by volunteer
or municipal Fire Departments, emergency medical units and the Township
Police Department. The Township Manager will provide the person or
persons responsible for the dumping or depositing of such materials, upon
request, a detailed breakdown of the costs incurred by the Township as a
result of such cleanup operations and related activities.
§ 112-5. Severability; intent.
If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction shall hold any
provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision to any
circumstances, to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this
chapter, or the application of such provisions to other circumstances, shall
remain in full force and effect. The intention of the Township of Pine is that
the provisions of this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
A. The Township of Pine hereby authorizes and directs its employees, its
various emergency services and/or any other persons employed by the
Township for such purposes to clean up or abate, or cause to be cleaned
up or abated, the results of any hazardous materials or substances
deposited upon or into properties, waterways, facilities, streets, roads
or alleys within the municipal boundaries of the Township of Pine. Such
authorization and direction shall include, but not be limited to, such
activities as traffic control, evacuation, relocation, substance
monitoring, establishment of medical care facilities and recovering
from such persons responsible for such dumping or depositing all costs
incurred in the mitigation of such situations.
B. Any person or persons who intentionally, accidentally or negligently
caused such dumping or depositing of such materials or substances
shall be liable for all costs incurred by the Township in the cleanup or
abatement activities herein described.
C. The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to all other
remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the Township of Pine.
§ 112-3 PINE CODE § 112-5
112:864
Chapter 116
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 52.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 94.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 138.
§ 116-1. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall be applicable to all parks, open
spaces and recreation areas of the Township of Pine:
A. Hours. All parks, public open spaces and recreation areas shall be open
to the public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. local prevailing time, and
sunset, and no person or persons shall be in, on or about the above
premises during the prohibited times except those persons going to or
from a scheduled event at the parks; public open spaces; recreation
areas; the Township Building; meetings of the Board of Supervisors or
any other board or agency of the Township on Township business; on
police business; scheduled events at the Township Building; or
residents and guests of the residents of the homes within the tract.
B. Parking.
(1) Motor vehicles may not be parked within the parks or public open
spaces and recreational areas, except in designated parking areas.
(2) No vehicles shall be parked overnight without the approval of the
Township.
C. Grass areas. Grass areas must not be used for roadways, parking or for
other purposes which may injure or destroy the turf or landscaping.
D. Automobile and vehicular use.
(1) Unauthorized motor vehicles, whether licensed or unlicensed,
including motorbikes, motorcycles, minibikes, snowmobiles and allterrain
vehicles, are not permitted within the parks, open spaces or
recreational areas.
(2) All vehicles are restricted to roadways except those used for
maintenance or police work.
(3) No person shall polish, paint, grease, lubricate or repair
mechanically any vehicle or have any other work performed on it
within the confines of the Township parks, open spaces or
recreation areas, except of a minor nature and then only in cases of
emergency.
§ 112-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 116-1
112:865
(4) The Pine Township Board of Supervisors shall regulate speed,
traffic control and vehicular regulations on and about any roads,
driveways, parking areas or other areas within any of the
Township's parks. Such regulations will be prominently posted in
the parks and will be strictly enforced by the police.
E. The following activities and uses are prohibited:
(1) Camping.
(2) Hunting.
(3) Shooting.
(4) Trapping.
(5) Metal detecting.
(6) The possession or use of firearms, air rifles, spring guns, bow and
arrows (except on a defined range approved by the Police
Department, if any), slingshots, BB guns or rifles or darts.
(7) Destruction of or interference with wildlife or their feeding
grounds, nests or resting or breeding places.
(8) Open burning.
(9) Private gardens.
(10) Organized team and/or league sports except with written approval
of the Township Manager.
(11) Unprescribed drugs. Possession of unprescribed drugs is
prohibited in any park, open space or recreation area of Pine
Township. [Amended 9-18-1991 by Res. No. 381]
(12) Alcoholic beverages. The possession and consumption of alcoholic
beverages in the Township's parks shall be allowed under the
authority of a permit granted by the Township. [Added 9-18-1991
by Res. No. 381]
(13) The operation of model rockets of any type (whether powered by
solid or liquid fuel) unless in compliance with the following:
[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 336]
(a) Prior approval as an organized/group activity pursuant to a
permit authorized by action of the Township's Parks and
Recreation Commission (following its review of an appropriate
written application). Any such permit shall, as a condition of its
issuance, mandate compliance with safety requirements set by
the Parks and Recreation Commission, including but not
limited to those concerning needs for sufficient adult
supervision, provision of appropriate insurance coverage, and
availability of protection against damage or injury from fire.
§ 116-1 PINE CODE § 116-1
112:866
(14) The operation of small unmanned aircraft (either drones or
motorized model airplanes) and remote-controlled vehicles which
are powered by internal or external combustion engines. The
operation of small unmanned aircraft (either drones or motorized
model airplanes) and remote-controlled vehicles which are
powered by electric or battery motors shall also be prohibited,
unless in compliance with the following: [Added 9-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 336; amended 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 384]
(a) A motorized model airplane weighing less than four ounces,
having a maximum airspeed of 10 miles per hour, and utilized
in accordance with the basic safety precautions suggested by
its manufacturer.
(b) A motorized model airplane weighing between four ounces and
a maximum of 24 ounces, having a maximum airspeed of 40
miles per hour, and utilized in accordance with the safety rules
of the Academy of Model Aeronautics and the basic safety
precautions suggested by its manufacturer.
(c) Any motorized model airplane or drone shall not have any
sharp and/or metallic tips or moving parts; propellers shall
have soft rubber or plastic safety spinners.
(d) Operation shall not occur within close proximity to any other
persons or in or upon any field upon which other organized
activities are then taking place.
(e) Operation by minors shall occur only under the direct
supervision of his/her parent or legal guardian or other
competent adult.
(f) Responsibility for all risks associated with operation and for
provision of insurance against any liability or loss shall be
solely those of the operator (or, as applicable, his/her parents
or legal guardians).
(g) Any use of a drone for the purpose of photography shall require
advance written permission issued by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
(h) Nothing in the provisions of this Subsection E(14) shall be
construed as modifying the requirements otherwise applicable
to and imposed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
on the use or operation of small unmanned aircraft (either
drones or motorized model airplanes) in the National Airspace
System.
(i) Operation of any drone shall at all times be in accordance with
basic safety precautions suggested by its manufacturer.
F. Animal control.
§ 116-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 116-1
112:867
(1) No animals are allowed in the parks or public open spaces or
recreational areas unless attended and controlled by a leash.
(2) Dogs are not permitted on ballfields or any play areas.
(3) Horses shall be permitted on the park roadways, trails and
nonplayground grassy areas only. Horses are not permitted in any
ballfields or in picnic areas.
(4) The individual in charge of an animal entering any park or
recreational area is required to be in possession of proper
implements for the gathering and disposal of animal feces. All feces
will be collected immediately, removed from the park or
recreational area and disposed of in accordance with accepted
sanitary standards.
G. Fires.
(1) Fires may be built only in fireplaces provided or in grills brought to
the park for this purpose.
(2) All fires will be extinguished before leaving.
(3) No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar or
cigarette in any park.
(4) Campfires or fires for use in conjunction with scouting or social
activities which cannot be accommodated in existing fireplaces or
grills may be permitted upon application to and upon written
approval from the Township Manager.
H. Respect for park property.
(1) Cutting, mutilating, removing or taking away of trees, shrubs, turf,
plants, flower or other natural phenomena or the removal, defacing
or damaging of any park or recreational area property, including
but not limited to buildings, equipment, supplies or other property,
is prohibited.
(2) Buildings, fences, fountains, statuary, benches, signs or other
structures must not be injured or defaced in any way.
(3) Games, contests or sports are permitted only in areas designed for
such use and in no case shall such use be permitted in areas where
lawns or planting may be injured or where such games or contests
may be in conflict with park regulations.
(4) Defacing, littering or making unsanitary any rest rooms,
washrooms or other facilities or preventing the proper drainage of
any toilet, pipe or drain is prohibited.
(5) Moving of picnic tables or other park equipment is prohibited.
§ 116-1 PINE CODE § 116-1
112:868
§ 116-2. Use of park facilities.
(6) Any person using a Township park, with or without a permit, shall
be fully and financially responsible for any damages that person
may inflict upon park property and equipment.
I. Alcohol and drug use. No person shall be present in any Township park,
open space or recreational area while under the influence of
intoxicating beverages, drugs or other controlled substances.
J. Conduct.
(1) Disorderly conduct as defined in statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, ordinances of the Township of Pine or in the common
law, is prohibited.
(2) All use of any indecent, lewd or vulgar behavior or language is
prohibited.
K. Group activities. Group activities are prohibited in Township parks,
open spaces and recreational areas, except that the same may be
conducted only after a permit has been obtained from the Township
Manager.
L. Disposal of waste material.
(1) No person shall discard any form of waste material, paper or
rubbish except in containers supplied for that purpose.
(2) Violators will be prosecuted and subject to a fine.
M. Picnics.
(1) Picnics will be allowed only on locations provided for that purpose.
(2) Persons holding picnics shall clean up and place all wastepaper and
other refuse in receptacles provided for that purpose.
(3) Permits for use of buildings and recreation facilities may be
obtained from the Township office.
N. Peddling and soliciting. No person shall peddle or solicit, of any nature
whatsoever, within the limits of any Township park or public open space
or recreation area without the permission of the Township or such
recreation commission or department as may be designated from time
to time by the Board of Supervisors of Pine Township.
O. Amplification and sound systems. When amplifying or sound systems
are used, the maximum time permitted shall be used only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 1:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Sunday. Noise levels which disturb the peace are
not permitted.
A. Preparation of facilities for usage; security deposit.
§ 116-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 116-2
112:869
§ 116-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 116-4. Rules and regulations applicable to Pine Community
Center. [Added 2-17-2015 by Res. No. 918]
(1) Preparation of park facilities for use shall be the responsibility of
the Township or such recreation commission or department as may
be designated from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) A security deposit may be required for the use of park facilities.
B. Opening of buildings; cancellation of activities.
(1) The Township or such recreation commission, department or
individual as may be designated from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors, shall have the discretion to cancel activities due to
weather or other circumstances.
(2) Park buildings shall only be open under the direct supervision of
the Township or such recreation commission or department
designated from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Establishing and amending regulations. The Board of Supervisors of
Pine Township may, by resolution, from time to time establish additional
rules and regulations, and, if it so desires, alter, amend and supplement
the rules and regulations established herein for the operation, use and
protection of the Township parks. Such rules and regulations may
include, but shall not be limited to, regulations governing the times for
the presence of persons therein, the nature and extent of the permitted
and prohibited uses thereof and such other matters as the Board of
Supervisors may deem necessary or proper for the protection of the
parks and persons and property therein.
D. Posting of regulations. All rules and regulations established under the
authority of this chapter and established hereafter shall be posted at a
conspicuous place or places in each park to which they are applicable.
Appropriate signs may be posted to direct or warn persons with respect
to the rules and regulations and their operation.
A. Any person or other entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof before a Justice, be fined $300, plus costs
of prosecution, for each and every offense.
B. Each and every violation of any provision of the terms of this chapter
and each and every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense under this chapter, and each such offense shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
C. The penalties provided in this section shall not be the exclusive method
of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this chapter, but shall be
in addition to all other legal and equitable remedies available to Pine
Township.
§ 116-2 PINE CODE § 116-4
112:870
A. The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to
the structure identified as the "Pine Community Center" (located within
Pine Community Park), to its surrounding area and amenities, and to
functions and activities occurring within it.
B. In addition to the rules and regulations previously set forth in this
chapter, the Pine Community Center and the functions and activities
occurring within it shall also be subject to the provisions of the General
Facility Rules and Regulations attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and
incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.144
C. The following activities shall be prohibited in the Community Center:
(1) Activities (including but not limited to the sale or attempted sale of
any article whatsoever) by any person unauthorized by the
Township of Pine and acting as a peddler, solicitor, canvasser,
transient merchant, or itinerant vendor (as such terms are defined
in Chapter 120 of the Code of the Township of Pine).
(2) Activities related to the provision of services of any kind (including
but not limited to training, instruction, or assistance of any sort)
performed by persons unauthorized by the Township of Pine and
rendered for hire, for fee, or for remuneration of any type.
D. While ultimate authority rests with the Township's Board of
Supervisors, the Code of the Township of Pine (at Chapter 2, Article IV,
§§ 2-20 and 2-24) authorizes the delegation of certain authorities to the
Director of the Township's Department of Parks and Recreation,
including responsibility for the establishment and enforcement of rules
and regulations for the use and operation of municipal facilities,
services and programs. In accordance therewith, the Director of the
Township's Department of Parks and Recreation is authorized and
directed to promulgate, from time to time, such additional policies and
procedures as are deemed to be advisable for the Pine Community
Center and its operations and also for the administration, support, and
maintenance of its various programs (including membership programs),
its facilities, and its equipment. Such additional policies and procedures
shall be regularly communicated by the Director of the Township's
Department of Parks and Recreation to the Board of Supervisors, to
members of the Pine Community Center, and to the public at large,
through use of all appropriate means calculated to provide reasonable
notice thereof (e.g., direct distribution and/or public posting, and
including posting on applicable websites maintained by the Township of
Pine).
144. Editor's Note: Sard Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 116-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 116-4
112:871
Chapter 120
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 138.
Fees — See Ch. A144.
§ 120-1. Purpose. [Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 306]
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers, transient merchants and itinerant vendors who come to the
Township of Pine to sell or attempt to sell, to take orders or attempt to take
orders or to solicit contributions, pledges or subscriptions, such regulation
being in the interest of and for the protection of residents of the Township
of Pine and in furtherance of the prevention of crime and fraud and to
facilitate the privacy of the residents of the Township of Pine and further
requiring license fees to offset the cost of regulation and administration of
this chapter.
§ 120-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler,
solicitor, canvasser, transient merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in
§ 120-3 of this chapter within the Township of Pine without first obtaining a
license therefor as provided in chapter.
§ 120-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — See "solicitor."
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Pine Marshall —
Bradfordwoods Police Department or its successor.
CLERK — The Clerk of the Pine — Marshall Bradfordwoods Police
Department or its successor.
DEPARTMENT — The Pine - Marshall — Bradfordwoods Police Department
or its successor.
ITINERANT VENDOR — See "transient merchant."
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Township of Pine
or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type
of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
fish, vegetables meats or fruits, offering and exposing the same for sale
§ 116-4 PINE CODE § 120-3
120:872
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers or who, without
traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance; and
provided, further, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction
makes delivery to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a "peddler," subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall include "hawker" and
"huckster."
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person, whether a resident of the
Township of Pine or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck
or any other type of conveyance from place to place, person to person,
house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future or for subscriptions, contributions of any other
kind of support, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such person
is collecting advance payments on such sale or not, provided that such
definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another person,
firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
room, apartment, shop or any other place within the Township of Pine
for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 306]
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person, whether
as an owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the
Township of Pine or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling
and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the Township of Pine,
and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies
any building, structure, room, apartment shop or any other place within
the Township of Pine for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise, either privately or at public auction. The person so engaged
shall not be relieved from compliance with the provisions of this chapter
merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such transient business in
connection with, as a part of or in the name of, any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
§ 120-4. Inapplicability.
The terms of this chapter, as defined in § 120-3, shall not be held to include
the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles, nor to newspaper persons, nor to the acts of merchants or
their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business, nor
shall the terms of this chapter be held to include or apply to any farmer
or truck gardener who shall vend, sell or dispose of the products of the
farm or garden occupied and cultivated by him from premises occupied by
him; nor shall it apply to any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread
and bakery products or milk and milk products. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be held to prohibit any sale required by statute or by order
§ 120-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 120-4
120:873
of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale
pursuant to law.
§ 120-5. Application; fee.
§ 120-6. Investigation of applicant; records.
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Clerk a
sworn application in writing on a form to be famished, which shall give
the following information:
(1) The name and physical description of the applicant.
(2) The complete permanent home and full local address of the
applicant and, in the case of transient merchants and itinerant
vendors, the local address from which proposed sales will be made.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, the name and
address of the employee's immediate supervisor, together with
credentials establishing the exact employment relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
the license number or other means of identification.
(7) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold
or orders taken for the sale thereof and the proposed method of
delivery.
(8) A recent photograph of the applicant which shall be approximately
two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
B. At the time of filing the application, a fee as indicated in Ch. A144, Fees,
shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost of the investigation.
[Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons
§ 120-4 PINE CODE § 120-6
120:874
§ 120-7. Exempt organizations. [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
277; 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 306]
Any religious, charitable, patriotic, political, philanthropic, public interest
or community service organization, society, association or corporation, not
desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name money, donations of money or
property or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute
any item or literature, various types of tokens or merchandise for which
a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of such
organization, upon the streets, in office buildings, by house-to-house canvas
or in public places for a religious, charitable, patriotic, political,
philanthropic, public interest or community purpose shall be exempt from
the provisions of §§ 120-1, 120-3, and 120-7 of this chapter. Exempt
organizations shall be precluded from soliciting after sunset.
§ 120-8. Fees.
therefor and return said application to the Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant of the disapproval and that no license will be issued.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his approval and return said
application to the Clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee,
execute and deliver to the applicant a license for the carrying on of the
business applied for.
D. Such license shall contain the signature of the Clerk and shall show the
name, address and photograph of said licensee, the class of license
issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee
paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be
operative, as well as the license number and other identifying
description of any vehicle to be used.
E. The Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued and those
rejected.
A. Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter for the
business of peddling, canvassing or soliciting shall pay the following
fees: [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173; 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 277]
(1) Investigation of applicant: $175.
(2) License (each person, including helpers/assistants): $15 per day.
B. Every applicant to whom a license is granted under this chapter to
engage in the business of transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall
pay a fee as indicated in Ch. A144, Fees. [Amended 12-21-1988 by
Ord. No. 173]
§ 120-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 120-8
120:875
§ 120-9. Loud noises and amplifying devices.
No licensee, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a
horn, ring a bell or use any sound or amplifying device upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of Pine Township or upon
private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues,
alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
§ 120-10. Transfer of license prohibited.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 120-11. Use of streets; hours; prohibited areas.
C. None of the license fees provided for by this chapter shall be so applied
as to occasion any undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any
case, where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a
license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to
the governing body of the Township of Pine for an adjustment of the fee
so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable or unfair as to
such commerce.
A. No licensee shall have the exclusive right to any location in the public
streets or sidewalks, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location
thereon, nor shall any licensee be permitted to operate in a congested
area where such operations might impede or inconvenience the public
use of such streets or sidewalks.
B. Licensees shall be prohibited from operating before 9:00 a.m. or after
9:00 p.m., on Monday through Sunday, prevailing time. [Amended
3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 337]
C. No licensee shall engage in the business of peddling, soliciting or
canvassing upon any premises displaying a sign prohibiting such
activity.
D. No person, whether or not required to obtain a license under the
provisions of this chapter, shall peddle, canvass or solicit within the
Township of Pine without first obtaining from the Chief of Police or the
Clerk, as the case may be, a list of all residences and dwelling units
within the Township of Pine where the owner/occupant of the residence
or dwelling unit has provided written notification that they do not
desire to be visited on such premises at any time by any person
performing any peddling, canvassing or soliciting activity. No person
shall peddle, canvass or solicit at any residence or dwelling unit
designated on such list. Any such written notice from an owner/
occupant to the Township of Pine may be revoked, in writing, at any
time by such owner/occupant. The Chief of Police or the Clerk, as the
§ 120-8 PINE CODE § 120-11
120:876
§ 120-12. Exhibition of license.
§ 120-13. Records to be kept.
The Clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and a record of the
reports of violations.
§ 120-14. Revocation of license; notice.
case may be, shall maintain the aforementioned list and update it in
its entirety no less often than twice per year. In the event that the
identity of an owner/occupant changes, any written notification of the
prior owner/occupant shall not be applicable, and the new owner/
occupant shall need to provide written notification of their desire to be
designated on such list. [Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 277]
(1) The peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall pay to the Township of Pine
its standard copying charge, as otherwise required by the
provisions of the Code of the Township of Pine, for the cost of
copying and providing the aforementioned list.
(2) Any peddler, canvasser or solicitor who shall violate the provisions
of this Subsection D of § 120-11 regarding nonvisitation to certain
residences or dwelling units as designated on the aforementioned
list may have his/her license immediately suspended by the Chief of
Police pending proceedings for the revocation of same pursuant to
§ 120-14 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(3) The provisions of this Subsection D § 120-11 relating to the
prohibition of peddling, soliciting and canvassing at residences or
dwelling units designated on the aforementioned list shall not apply
to any resident of the Township of Pine.
A. Exhibition of license to citizens. It shall be the duty of any peddler,
solicitor, canvasser, transient merchant or itinerant vendor to produce
his license upon request of any resident of the Township of Pine with
whom he does or proposes to do business.
B. Exhibition of license to police. It shall be the duty of any peddler,
solicitor, canvasser, transient merchant or itinerant vendor to produce
his license upon request of any police officer of the Department.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Chief of Police after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes.
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor, peddler, canvasser or transient
merchant or itinerant vendor;
§ 120-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 120-14
120:877
§ 120-15. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Clerk in the denial of a license
as provided in § 120-6 of this chapter or in the revocation of a license as
provided in § 120-14 shall have a right to appeal to the governing body
of the Township of Pine. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
governing body of the Township of Pine within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address,
a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The governing
body of the Township of Pine shall set a time and place for hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the person aggrieved
in the same manner as provided in § 120-14 of this chapter for notice of
hearing on revocation.
§ 120-16. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the
date specified in the license.
§ 120-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 173]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fine for each
and every separate offense a sum of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 to be sued for and recovered as other fines and penalties are now by
law recoverable. Each day any person, firm or corporation engages in the
business of a peddler, solicitor, canvasser, transient merchant or itinerant
vendor in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 124
SNOW EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 138.
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Conducting his business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the general public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address, at least
seven days prior to the date set for hearing.
§ 120-14 PINE CODE § 120-17
124:878
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Pine Snow Emergency
Ordinance."
§ 124-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:
§ 124-3. Definitions; word usage.
§ 124-4. Prohibited activities.
A. To prohibit the parking of vehicles on the cartways of public roads,
streets and highways within the Township of Pine and to prevent their
interference with snow removal and deicing operations upon such
public roads, streets and highways during a snow emergency.
B. To require sidewalks within the Township of Pine to be expeditiously
cleared of snow and ice so as to facilitate safe pedestrian travel.
C. To prohibit the placing, casting, throwing or leaving of any object,
including snow and/or ice, onto the cartway of any road, street or
highway within the Township of Pine, so as to facilitate safe travel
thereon.
A. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and those in the plural
shall include the singular.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
CARTWAY — The paved traveled portion of a road, street or highway.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation, but excluding the Township of Pine.
SIDEWALK — Any concrete or asphalt pedestrian walkway, including
all structures or appurtenances necessary, desirable or incidental to the
installation and safe use of a sidewalk.
SNOW EMERGENCY — The period of time from commencement of any
snow fall or other weather condition which causes snow removal or
deicing procedures to be performed by state, county or Township forces
on any public roads, streets or highways within the Township of Pine
until four hours after the snow stops falling or until the conclusion of
such snow removal or deicing procedures, whichever shall last occur.
VEHICLE — Every device which is or may be moved or drawn upon a
road, street or highway.
§ 120-17 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 124-4
124:879
§ 124-5. Enforcement; authorized removal and storage of vehicles;
charges.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to permit to be parked any
vehicle which they own or for which they are responsible upon the
cartway of any public road, street or highway within the Township of
Pine during a snow emergency.
B. It shall be unlawful for any property owner and/or legal resident
(excluding the Township of Pine) to allow snow or ice to remain on
sidewalks fronting on or upon their property in excess of the time
period specified in this paragraph, and it shall be the responsibility of
such property owner and/or legal resident to clean or clear such
sidewalks of snow and ice within 48 hours of the end of a snow
emergency.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cast, throw or leave any
object, including snow and/or ice, onto the cartway of any public road,
street or highway within the Township of Pine.
A. Any police officer of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods Joint Police
Force who observes a violation of this chapter shall file a citation with
the office of the District Magistrate against the person responsible for
such violation. If so requested by the Township's Director of Public
Works or his designee, any such police officer shall have any vehicle
parked in violation of this chapter towed, at the owner's expense, from
the cartway to the towed vehicles compound or to an approved storage
garage.
B. Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done
only by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to
time by the Township of Pine. Every such garage shall submit
satisfactory evidence to the Township that it is bonded or has acquired
liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Township as
sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded and/or towed vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the
garagekeeper or his agent for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to the Township its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter and those
charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No
different schedule of charges shall be adopted without notice and
approval of the Township, and no different charges shall be demanded
of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded
under this chapter by any approved storage garage. The Township may
delete from its list of approved storage garages any such garage that
makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed
or impounded under this chapter.
§ 124-4 PINE CODE § 124-6
124:880
§ 124-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a summary offense and be punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $1,000 or, in default of payment of such fine, by
imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 126
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 112.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of July 7, 1980.145
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of July 1988.146
BAGS — Plastic sacks designed for solid waste with sufficient wall strength
to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top, securely tied at the top
for collection, with a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons and a loaded weight
not to exceed 35 pounds.
BIMETAL AND ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — Empty and clean food or
beverage containers constructed of steel, tin or aluminum.
CART — Thirty-five-, sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon plastic receptacle,
provided under the residential solid waste removal contract, for storage of
solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste. Carts, when full, shall not
exceed 60 pounds in weight for each 32 gallons of capacity.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
COMMUNITY EVENTS — Activities which include but are not limited to
fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events that will be
attended by 200 or more individuals per day.
145. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 124-6 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 126-1
124:881
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed to yield a humus-like product.
COMPOSTING BAG — Paper bag sold and designated for composting
purposes. A composting bag placed for residential collection shall not
exceed 40 pounds in weight.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair and demolition.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Clean and dry structural paper material with an
inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DISPOSE — Incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking
or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the
solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is
emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
DUMPSTER — Receptacle provided by a hauler for storage of solid waste,
recyclable materials or yard waste until collection.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Empty and clean bottles and jars made of clear,
green or brown glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, broken
glass, dinnerware, plate glass, automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products.
HAULER — Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation who
has been licensed by the State of Pennsylvania to collect, transport and
dispose of solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste designated as hazardous by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories and
processing plants.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any organization whose purpose is
to further public welfare, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing
homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Pine, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
PA DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PAPER — Clean and dry mixed waste paper, which includes packaging and
junk mail, office paper, newspaper and magazines. Paper does not include
paper products used for personal hygiene, paper products used for food
preparation, paper products used for cleaning, or wrapping paper.
§ 126-1 PINE CODE § 126-1
124:882
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency or any other
legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In
any provisions of this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty,
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers
and directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty and clean plastics Nos. 1 through 6.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments which are specified
by the municipality and can be recycled. Recyclable materials may include
but are not necessarily limited to glass containers, bimetal and aluminum
containers, paper, high-grade office paper, corrugated paper, plastic
containers Nos. 1 through 6, yard waste and any other items selected by
the municipality or specified in future revisions to Act 101. The recyclable
materials selected by the municipality may be revised from time to time as
deemed necessary by the municipality. All residential recyclable materials
shall be contained in the designated recycling cart.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
recyclable materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as
solid waste.
SCAVENGE — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of solid waste,
recyclable materials or yard waste placed for collection by a hauler.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste
and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial,
industrial or institutional establishments and from community activities and
any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the
Solid Waste Management Act147 from a municipal, commercial, industrial
or institutional water supply treatment plant wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials. All residential solid waste should be contained in
the designated solid waste cart or beside the cart and tagged with the
appropriate solid waste tag. All commercial, industrial or institutional solid
waste should be contained inside a designated dumpster.
SOLID WASTE TAG — Labels required under the residential hauler contract
for items not fitting in the solid waste cart.
APPLIANCE TAG — To be purchased for attachment to refrigerators,
freezers, washers, dryers, air conditioners, stoves, water heaters, trash
compactors and other items of similar weight and construction.
A.
BULKY FURNITURE/LARGE ITEM TAG — To be purchased for
attachment to waste material from a residential source, other than
construction waste, hazardous waste or tires, with a weight or volume
B.
147. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 126-1 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 126-1
124:883
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any solid waste or recyclable materials, on
a temporary basis, in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such
waste.
YARD WASTE — Plant material such as leaves, grass clippings, branches,
brush, flowers, roots, garden residues, chipped shrubbery and wood waste.
Yard waste does not include loose soils, sod, food waste, food compost,
plastics and synthetic fibers, lumber, any wood or tree limbs over four
inches in diameter, human or animal excrement, noxious weeds or soil
contaminated with hazardous substances. With the exception of holiday
trees, materials larger than four inches in diameter and four feet in length
shall not be considered yard waste and shall be cut and tied securely into
bundles. Bundles shall not be more than four feet in length, nor more than
two feet in diameter, and no more than 40 pounds in weight and shall
require a small item tag. All residential yard waste shall be contained in
the designated yard waste cart or a composting bag. Regular paper bags,
plastic bags, cardboard boxes or other receptacles may not be used to
dispose of yard waste.
§ 126-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Disposal
and Recycling Ordinance" and shall be in accordance with Act 97, the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of July 7, 1980 and Act 101,
the Pennsylvania Municipal Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of
1988.
§ 126-3. Haulers responsible for billing and collection of disposal
fees.
The municipality's contracted residential hauler and the licensed
commercial, industrial and institutional haulers shall be responsible for the
greater than that allowed for carts. Includes but is not limited to
furniture, television sets with a nineteen-inch screens or larger,
mattresses and other large items outside of the cart.
SMALL ITEM TAG — To be purchased for attachment to the neck of a
thirty-two-gallon trash bag or to an individual item outside of the solid
waste cart weighing up to 25 pounds, other than construction waste,
hazardous waste or tires. To be used for television sets with a nineteeninch
screen or smaller, floor and table lamps, bicycles, large toys and
lawn chairs. Not for disposal of recyclable materials or yard waste.
C.
VOLUME TAG — To be purchased for collection of large quantities of
bagged excess waste from clean-outs of attics, basements and garages,
provided the waste meets the definition of acceptable waste. Not for
use with major appliances, construction waste, hazardous waste, tires,
bulky item tag materials or other large items.
D.
§ 126-1 PINE CODE § 126-3
124:884
billing and collection of any fees for solid waste, recyclable materials and
yard waste disposal.
§ 126-4. Separation and collection; hauler standards and
regulations.
A. The municipality shall contract for the mandatory collection of solid
waste, recyclable materials and yard waste from individual residences
and multifamily housing properties with less than four units. All
residents shall place their solid waste, recyclable materials and yard
waste into the proper carts provided by the Township.
(1) Designated recyclable materials for mandatory residential
recycling shall be glass containers; bimetal and aluminum
containers; paper; plastic containers; and corrugated paper.
(2) Yard waste must be separated from solid waste and recyclable
materials unless it has otherwise been provided for by composting.
(3) Residential solid waste and recyclable materials shall be collected
once a week. Residential yard waste is collected April 1 through
November 30.
B. An owner, landlord, manager or agent of an owner, landlord or manager
of a multifamily housing property with more than four units or
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract for the mandatory collection of solid waste,
recyclable materials and yard waste with a properly licensed solid
waste hauler. The owner, landlord, manager or agent must establish a
recycling program for that location. The collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and storing the materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and a written explanation of the
recycling program. An owner, landlord or manager or an agent of an
owner, landlord or manager who complies with this chapter shall not be
liable for noncompliance by his or her occupants.
(1) Designated recyclable materials for mandated multifamily housing
shall be glass containers; bimetal and aluminum containers; paper;
plastic containers; and corrugated paper.
(2) Designated recyclable materials for mandated commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments and community events
shall be high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper and
such other materials as may be designated by the municipality.
(3) Yard waste must be separated from solid waste and recyclable
materials unless it has otherwise been provided for by composting.
(4) Commercial, industrial and institutional solid waste and recyclable
materials shall be collected at least once a month. Yard waste shall
be collected at least once a month between April 1 and November
§ 126-3 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 126-4
124:885
§ 126-5. Storage.
The storage of all solid waste and recyclable materials shall be practiced
so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents
and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create safety
hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
30. The municipality reserves the right to require more frequent
collection when deemed necessary.
C. All solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste collection shall be
conducted Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. unless required otherwise due to a holiday schedule or
inclement weather and with the prior approval of the municipality.
D. All haulers shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All solid waste shall be disposed at a facility designated in the
Allegheny County Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan.
(2) All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid
waste, recyclable materials and yard waste shall be operated in and
maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner; have all
governmental permits and licenses and required regulatory
approvals; and shall comply with all applicable laws and
regulations.
(3) All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid
waste, recyclable materials and yard waste shall be watertight and
suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering or the
creation of odors and other public health or safety hazards or
nuisances.
A. All solid waste shall be drained of liquid.
B. All residential solid waste shall be contained within tied bags inside the
solid waste cart or beside the cart and tagged with the applicable solid
waste tag.
C. All recyclable materials shall be clean and dry and contained inside the
recycling cart.
D. Solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste shall not extend above
the fill line or exceed the cart or dumpster capacity so that the lid is not
closed.
E. Carts and dumpsters shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
F. Carts and dumpsters shall be used and maintained so as to prevent
public health hazards safety hazards, and public nuisances.
G. Carts and dumpsters having any defect shall be reported to the hauler
and promptly repaired or replaced, as necessary.
§ 126-4 PINE CODE § 126-5
124:886
§ 126-6. Ownership and donation of recyclable materials;
unauthorized collection prohibited.
§ 126-7. Hauler reports.
H. Carts shall be placed at a collection point specified by the hauler.
Dumpsters are to be located and concealed in a manner so as to
eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create safety
hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances and, in accordance
with any applicable land development plans, approved by the
municipality.
I. With the exception of pickup days when the carts are placed out for
collection, they shall be properly stored away from the curb.
A. All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by their hauler
shall, from the time of placement at the curb, become the property of
the municipality or the contracted hauler, except as otherwise provided
by § 126-6C of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by the
generator unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside for
collection.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, other than the
municipality or agent authorized by the Board of Supervisors or other
entity responsible for providing for collection of recyclable materials, to
collect recyclable materials placed by residences, commercial,
industrial or institutional establishments, for collection by their
contracted hauler, unless such person, firm or corporation has prior
written permission from the generator to make such collection. In
violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences
or commercial, industrial and institutional establishments on one
calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable
as hereinafter provided.
C. Any residence or commercial, municipal, industrial, institutional
establishment or a community event may donate or sell recyclable
materials to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for
profit or not, provided that the receiving person, firm or corporation
shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the collection
point of a residence or commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the Board of
Supervisors or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of
recyclable materials to make such a collection.
A. The residential hauler shall provide reports as outlined in the contract
documents.
B. All haulers which have operated within the municipality must provide
an annual report before January 31 of the following year.
§ 126-5 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 126-7
124:887
§ 126-8. Recycling education program.
§ 126-9. Waste minimization.
C. The report shall document the type and weight of recyclable materials
that were collected in the municipality and recycled in the previous
calendar year.
(1) The type and weight of recyclable materials generated by an
individual establishment may be approximated based on a
representative sample of its waste.
(2) Where recyclables from several establishments are collected in the
same vehicle, an individual establishment's contribution to the load
may be apportioned.
(3) Only the weight of materials marketed for recycling purposes can
be credited to an establishment.
A. The municipality will provide continuing recycling education to all
residents through its quarterly newsletter.
B. The municipality will provide continuing recycling education to all
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments through direct
mailings every six months or as otherwise required through Act 101,
the municipal recycling program performance grant prerequisites.148
C. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments must provide
all employees with an explanation of their recycling program. The
education program should describe its features and requirements and
should include an orientation to the program upon the arrival of a new
employee or resident. Receptacles should be clearly marked with the
recycling symbol and the type of recyclable material that is to be placed
in the receptacle, and signs should be prominently displayed stating the
program requirements.
A. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments which generate
more than 2,200 pounds of municipal waste per month should also
implement a waste minimization opportunity assessment which
includes:
(1) Waste characterization, including source, generation rate,
management techniques and management costs. The assessment
should expressly consider high-grade office paper, aluminum,
corrugated paper, yard waste and any other materials generated in
significant quantities.
(2) A description of all possible waste minimization options, including
use and waste reclamation.
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.904.
§ 126-7 PINE CODE § 126-9
124:888
§ 126-10. Modifications to standards and regulations.
The municipality may modify standards and regulations in accordance with
residential hauler contract requirements or PA DEP standards.
§ 126-11. Hauler complaints.
All hauler complaints shall first be made to the hauler and, if not addressed,
then to the municipality.
§ 126-12. Prohibited activities.
(3) An evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility of each
option and a ranking of each option.
(4) An estimate of the payback period for each feasible option.
(5) A statement of which options will be implemented, including an
explanation and a timetable.
(6) Identification of the individual(s) who will be responsible for
implementing the plan.
B. The waste minimization plan should be periodically updated.
Implementation of the plan should include:
(1) Recycling or composting of materials, to the greatest extent
feasible, either privately or through a municipal recycling program.
(2) Use, to the greatest extent feasible, of products and materials
which are recyclable or made of post-consumer materials.
(3) Substitution, to the greatest extent feasible, of durable and
reusable products and materials for products that are not durable
or reusable.
(4) Appropriate education materials and signs, made available to
employees or the public to encourage participation in recycling and
waste reduction.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality
any solid waste or recyclable materials except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, any PA DEP rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 97 and Allegheny County Health
Department rules and regulations.
B. It shall be unlawful to dispose of recyclable materials with solid waste.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste, recyclable
materials or yard waste within the municipality except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, any PA DEP rules and regulations
§ 126-9 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 126-12
124:889
§ 126-13. Violations and penalties.
adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 97 and Allegheny County Health
Department rules and regulations.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste,
recyclable materials or yard waste within the municipality except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any PA DEP rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 97 and Allegheny
County Health Department rules and regulations.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any hazardous,
infectious or toxic waste, including flammable liquids, explosives,
fireworks, oxygen tanks, ammunition, paints, varnishes, photography
chemicals, insecticides, weed killers, pool chemicals, propane tanks,
solvents, auto fluids and lead acid batteries with his or her solid waste,
recyclable materials or yard waste. Information on disposal of such
items may be obtained by contacting the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful to place sharp materials, such as syringes or broken
glass, into the cart without first wrapping and securing those objects
into a hard, protective containment..
G. It shall be unlawful for any person unlicensed by PA DEP to haul,
transport, collect or remove solid waste from public or private property.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge materials from any solid
waste or recyclable material that is stored or deposited for collection
within the municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid waste
within the municipality except at an approved and permitted resource
recovery facility under Pennsylvania Act 97 and any PA DEP rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 97.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste or recyclable
material in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or
private property within the municipality except as provided in this
chapter.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall first receive
a letter of warning, by certified mail, outlining the violation and
providing a period of 30 days for correction. If the violation is not
corrected or a plan provided to the municipality for correction within 30
days, a complaint will be filed with the District Magistrate. Conviction
by the District Magistrate shall indicate guilt of a misdemeanor; which
is punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or, in
default of payment of such fine, by imprisonment for a period of not
more than 30 days, or both. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 126-12 PINE CODE § 126-13
124:890
Chapter 127
TAX ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 128.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ACT 85 — The Act of October 30, 2000, Public Law 616, No. 85, codified as
16 P.S. § 6171-B.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County or
its successor entity.
COUNTY — Allegheny County.
COUNTY COUNCIL — The elected County Council of Allegheny County.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County or
its successor entity.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the Township of Pine, Allegheny County, who is:
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including, but not
limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
B. The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter.
A single person aged 60 years or older during a calendar year in which
county and Township real property taxes are due and assessed; or
A.
Married persons if either spouse is 60 years or older during a calendar
year in which county and Township real property taxes are due and
assessed.
B.
§ 126-13 TAX ASSESSMENT § 127-1
127:891
gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the federal Social Security Act (except
Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's compensation
and the gross amount of loss of time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefit
payments) and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile, or any person who for at least five years
has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence and
domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the property
as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience; or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three
residential units, of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of March
11, 1971, Public Law 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et
seq.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine, a home rule municipality located
within Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 127-2. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers.
All eligible taxpayers in the Township of Pine who are longtime owner/
occupants shall be entitled to have the assessment on their principal
residence maintained at or limited to or appropriately reduced to the
amount determined by the Department of Property Assessment for the
calendar year under the county's similar program of property tax relief,
if the eligible taxpayer's annual household income, as defined under the
Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act, does not exceed $30,000.
§ 127-3. Participation in limitation of tax assessment program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Township of Pine may apply to
the Department of Property Assessment for certification as a participant
in the property tax assessment program authorized under this chapter. In
order to be eligible to participate in the program, the person must meet the
following conditions:
§ 127-1 PINE CODE § 127-3
127:892
§ 127-4. Rules and regulations.
The Township of Pine shall have the authority to issue rules and regulations
with respect to the administration of the limitation of property tax
assessment program established under this chapter. Such authority shall
include the ability to adopt and incorporate by reference any such pertinent
rules and regulations issued by the Department of Property Assessment.
Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable
proof of household income, proof of residence, proof of income (as defined
under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act) not exceeding
$30,000 and any other reasonable requirements and conditions as may be
necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation program.
Chapter 128
TAXATION
A. The person must be a single person aged 60 years of age or older; or be
married persons with either spouse being 60 years of age or older.
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant; and
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident; and
D. The person's household income, as defined under the Senior Citizens
Rebate and Assistance Act, does not exceed $30,000.
§ 127-3 TAX ASSESSMENT § 127-4
127:893

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-28-1967 by Ord. No. 60149]
§ 128-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather then transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"150 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V (relating
to personal income tax). Employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971.
The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.[Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No.
312]
EMPLOYEE — Any natural person domiciled in the Township of Pine or
employed therein upon whose earned income, as above defined, a tax is
imposed by this article.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. A145, Rules and Regulations for Tax on Earned Income and Net
Profits.
150. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 128-1 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-1
127:895
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — A person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Township of Pine to collect and administer
the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under section
303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971,"151 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:[Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No.
312]
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Township of Pine.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 128-2. Imposition of tax.
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held twelve months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes;
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. As a tax for general revenue purposes, 1/2 of 1% is hereby imposed on:
(1) Earned income received beginning January 1, 1968, and ending
December 31, 1968, by residents of the Township of Pine;
(2) Earned income received beginning January 1, 1968, and ending
December 31, 1968, by nonresidents of the Township of Pine for
work done or services performed or rendered in the Township of
Pine;
(3) The net profits earned beginning January 1, 1968, and ending
December 31, 1968, of businesses, professions or other activities
conducted by such residents, regardless of where the same were
earned; and,
151. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 128-1 PINE CODE § 128-2
127:896
§ 128-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
(4) The net profits earned beginning January 1, 1968, and ending
December 31, 1968, of businesses, professions or other activities
conducted in the Township of Pine by nonresidents.
B. The tax herein levied and imposed shall continue in force on a calendaryear
basis or a taxpayer-fiscal-year basis following December 31, 1968,
without annual reenactment until such time as the Supervisors of the
Township of Pine shall change the rate of tax or, by appropriate
ordinance, repeal such tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31, of
the current year, and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit and shall pay to the officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer, on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer, a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year the
final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The officer may provide by regulation for the making and filing of
adjusted declarations of estimated net profits, and for the payments
of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits
§ 128-2 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-3
127:897
§ 128-4. Filing and registration by employer required.
not previously declared or finds that he has overestimated his
anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the officer,
on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
returns shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Registration and filing of return required.
(1) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the Township of Pine,
who employs one or more persons other than domestic servants,
for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not
previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an
employer, register with the officer his name and address and such
other information as the officer may require.
§ 128-3 PINE CODE § 128-4
127:898
(2) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the Township of Pine,
who employs one or more persons other than domestic servants,
for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall deduct
at the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on
the earned income due to this employee or employees, and shall, on
or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, file a return and pay to the officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of
the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between the officer and
employer, shall show the name and social security number of each
such employee, the earned income of such employee during such
preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during the preceding
three-month period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid
with the return.
B. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority, may be required
by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 28, of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee as employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
§ 128-4 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-4
127:899
§ 128-5. Powers and duties of officer.
E. Except as otherwise provided in § 128-9 hereof, every employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by
this section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was
required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been
recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the duty of the
officer to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person or business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township of Pine. If the Supervisors shall by
resolution designate any bond previously given by the officer as
adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
this subsection.
(1) Such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance
Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in
him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties
required of him by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful
accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys and all
balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue of this
office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office
of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in right
of his office.
(3) Such bond shall be taken in the name of the Township of Pine or in
the name of the Township of Pine and Pine-Richland School District
and shall be for the use of such political subdivision or subdivisions
appointing the officer, where the same officer is appointed by the
school district and the Township, and for the use of such other
person or persons for whom money shall be collected or received,
or as his or her interest shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach
of any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the
principal on the bond. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
(4) The Township of Pine or, if a joint bond is provided to the Township
of Pine and Pine-Richland School District, either political
§ 128-4 PINE CODE § 128-5
127:900
subdivision or any person may sue upon said bond its or his own
name for its or his own use. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
(5) Such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety company
or companies bound thereon. The Township of Pine or the Township
of Pine and Pine-Richland School District, if a combined bond is
provided, shall fix the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the
maximum amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the
officer at the given time. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
(6) The Township of Pine or the Township of Pine and Pine-Richland
School District, if a combined bond is provided, may, at any time,
upon cause shown and due notice to the officer and his surety or
sureties, require or allow the substitution or the addition of a
surety company acceptable to the Township of Pine or to the
Township of Pine and Pine-Richland School District, as the case
may be, for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount,
without releasing the surety or sureties first approved from any
accrued liability or previous action on such bond. [Amended
12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
(7) The Township of Pine or the Township of Pine and Pine-Richland
School District, as the case may be, shall designate the custodian of
the bond required to be given by the officer. [Amended
12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
C. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and all payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of
this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Pine. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in
force shall be available for public inspection.
D. With the prior approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Pine, the officer shall refund, on petition of, and proof by, the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
§ 128-5 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-5
127:901
§ 128-6. Compensation and expenses. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 173]
The income tax officer shall receive such compensation for his services
and expenses as shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Pine from time to time. In the case of a single collector
established by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine and the
Board of Pine-Richland School District, such taxing jurisdictions shall share
in the compensation and expenses of a single officer according to the
proportionate share that the total annual collections for each jurisdiction
bears to the total annual collection for all political subdivisions in a single
collector district, except that with the agreement of 2/3 of all participating
political subdivisions, a different manner of sharing may be substituted.
§ 128-7. Suit for recovery of tax.
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigation as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the taxing district, as the result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law.
G. The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The officer may sue in the name of the Township of Pine for the recovery
of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
§ 128-5 PINE CODE § 128-7
127:902
§ 128-8. Interest and penalty.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 128-9. Violations and penalties,
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of an officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this
act
C. The officer may sue for the recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
that such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that
the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of
the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amounts of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of that tax imposed by this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction in Allegheny County, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $300 for each offense, and costs of prosecution.
[Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
§ 128-7 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-9
127:903
§ 128-10. Statutory authority.
This article, and the tax imposed hereunder, is adopted under and by
virtue of the authority contained in the Act of the General Assembly of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania numbered 511, approved the 31st day
of December 1965, entitled the "Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965,"152 its
supplements and amendments, the provisions of which are hereby accepted
and adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, and
where the interpretation or terms or provisions of this article are not in
accord with or in compliance with the provisions of said Act of Assembly, the
provisions of said Act of Assembly are intended to be ordained and enacted
by this article as fully as though incorporated, set forth and made part of
this article.
§ 128-11. Occupant records. [Added 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and costs of prosecution.
[Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173]
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
A. Owners, lessors and rental agents of all real estate, residences,
apartments, stores and other structures in the Township of Pine leased,
offered for lease or occupied by persons, partnerships, corporations
and other than the owners thereof shall, within 30 days of the effective
date of this article, supply to the Township Manager lists of the names
and addresses of all current lessees and occupants of real estate,
residences, apartments, stores and other structures of which they are
the owners, lessors or rental agents and shall, thereafter, supply to the
Township Manager in writing, the names and addresses of all new
lessees or occupants of such premises within 30 days of such lease or
occupancy.
B. The Township Manager shall supply the names and addresses of all
lessees and occupants of real estate obtained by him hereunder, or by
any other means, to all other officials and departments of the Township
requesting the same for the proper performance of their duties.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be subject to a
fine of not more than $300 and the costs of prosecution.
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 128-9 PINE CODE § 128-11
127:904
ARTICLE II
Volunteer Service Credit Program
[Adopted 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 381153]
§ 128-12. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — An individual who volunteers at a volunteer fire
company and has satisfied the following conditions:
APPLICATION — A form provided by the Township of Pine to a volunteer
applying for certification under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
AUTHORIZED EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — Keystone Collections
Group or the current regional earned income tax collector for the Township
of Pine.
COMMISSIONER — The State Fire Commissioner of the Commonwealth.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."154
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed under § 128-13C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
VOLUNTEER — A member (including a business member) of a volunteer fire
company.
§ 128-13. Program established; criteria; general provisions.
Completes the activities of the Volunteer Service Credit Program set
forth in § 128-13;
A.
Receives certification as an active volunteer by the Chief or his/her
designee of a volunteer fire company; and
B.
Receives approval as an active volunteer by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Pine.
C.
153. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to 1-20-2017.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 128-12 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-13
127:905
A. Establishment. The Township of Pine hereby establishes a volunteer
service credit program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in volunteer fire companies providing
invaluable services to the Township of Pine and its residents.
B. Program criteria. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
shall establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to
qualify for credits under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
(a) Fund-raising.
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response, or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of the municipality who are volunteers of the following
volunteer fire companies:
(1) Wexford Volunteer Fire Company.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
separate resolution authorized under this section, during the eligibility
period to qualify for the local earned income tax credits authorized
under § 128-14.
(1) For Tax Year 2017, the eligibility period under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program shall run from January 20, 2017, until
October 31, 2017.
(2) For Tax Year 2018, and each subsequent tax year thereafter, the
eligibility period shall run from the prior November 1 until October
31 of the year for which the tax credit will apply.
E. Recordkeeping. The Chief (or his/her designee) of each volunteer fire
company listed under Subsection C shall keep specific records of each
volunteer's activities in a service log to establish necessary credits
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall be
subject to audit/review by:
§ 128-13 PINE CODE § 128-13
127:906
(1) The Township Manager of the Township of Pine or his/her designee;
(2) The State Fire Commissioner; and
(3) The State Auditor General.
F. Volunteer application. On or before the first Monday in November of
each year, volunteers who have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification (as provided by the Township of Pine) to their Chief or
his/her designee. The Chief or his/her designee shall sign the
application, if the volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program, and shall forward said application to
the Township Manager of the Township of Pine, together with the
notarized list required by Subsection G, within the timeframe specified
herein.
G. Notarized list. On or before November 15 of each year, the Chief, or his/
her designee, shall deliver to the Township Manager of the Township of
Pine a notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that have met the
minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program and have
applied for certification pursuant to Subsection F. The Chief, or his/her
designee, shall also post a copy of the notarized eligibility list in an
accessible area of the volunteer fire company's facilities.
H. Municipal review. The Township Manager of the Township of Pine shall
review the applications for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and shall cross-reference them with the notarized eligibility
list. At the first regular meeting in December of each year, the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine shall approve or disapprove the
volunteers that appear on the notarized list submitted pursuant to
Subsection F. All applicants approved by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Pine shall then be issued an earned income tax credit
certificate by the Township Manager of the Township of Pine by no later
than December 15 of each year.
I. Appeal of denial of certification. A volunteer who is denied certification
as an active volunteer shall have the right to request a hearing before
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine within 30 days of the
denial pursuant to the provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter
B (relating to practice and procedure of local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating to judicial review of local agency
action), also known as the "Local Agency Law."155
J. Official tax credit register. The Township of Pine shall keep an official
tax credit register of all active volunteers that were issued earned
income tax credit certificates. No later than December 31 of each year,
the Township Manager of the Township of Pine shall issue updates, as
needed, of the official tax credit register to the following:
155. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 128-13 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-13
127:907
§ 128-14. Earned income tax credit.
(1) The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine;
(2) Chief of the Wexford Volunteer Fire Company; and
(3) Authorized earned income tax collector.
K. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future earned income tax credits.
The injury must have occurred while responding to, participating
in, or returning from an emergency response call with one of the
entities listed under Subsection C.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under
Subsection F stating that their injury prevents them from
performing duties to qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case,
the injured emergency responder shall be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder with a continuing qualifying
injury shall annually submit the application required under
Subsection F, along with updated documentation from a licensed
physician stating that the injury still exists and prevents them from
qualifying as an active volunteer. The injured emergency responder
shall again be deemed an active volunteer for that tax year. Such an
injured emergency responder shall only be deemed an active
volunteer for a maximum of five consecutive tax years.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Township of Pine's Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive a local earned income tax credit of up to $300 of the earned
income tax levied by the Township of Pine. When an active volunteer's
earned income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the
tax credit shall equal the individual's earned income tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may claim a tax
credit on his (or her) Township of Pine earned income tax liability when
filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the authorized
earned income tax collector.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official tax credit register issued by the Township
Manager of the Township of Pine.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified, in
writing, of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
§ 128-13 PINE CODE § 128-14
127:908
§ 128-15. Earned income tax credit appeals.
§ 128-16. Penalties for false reporting.
§ 128-17. through § 128-20. (Reserved)
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 128-15.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer pursuant to § 128-15.
A. Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 128-14 shall have a right
to appeal said decision.
B. A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of claim.
C. All appeals of decisions under § 128-14 shall follow the provisions of the
Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local Taxpayers Bill
of Rights,"156 and Chapter A145 (Attachment 1) of the Code of the
Township of Pine.
A. Any individual who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false
report in an application for certification under this article commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
B. Any individual who knowingly provides or conspires to provide false
information that is used to compile a service log under this article
commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of
$2,500.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 128-14 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-17
127:909

ARTICLE III
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 4-4-1979 by Ord. No. 114; amended in its entirety
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 347]
§ 128-21. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Mercantile Tax Ordinance."
§ 128-22. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article and unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings as defined below:
BUSINESS — Any person, individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, trust, firm, corporation, or any other entity engaged in whole
or in part in sales, by wholesale or retail, or in the restaurant industry for
profit. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
COLLECTOR — The Collector of mercantile tax for the Township of Pine
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The value of all cash, credits or property received
which is attributable to the carrying on of a business or occupation in the
Township, undiminished by any costs of doing business. A receipt generally
will be considered attributable to the Township if any part of the transaction
takes place within the Township or is directed in any part from an office or
place of business or occupation within the Township. Where a receipt in its
entirety cannot be subject to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the
provisions of the Constitution of the United States or any other provision
of law, including the exemptions listed in this article, the Collector shall
establish rules and regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation
so that only that part of such receipt which is properly attributable and
allocable to the doing of business in the Township shall be taxed hereunder.
The Collector may make such allocation with due regard to the nature of the
business concerned on the basis of millage division of the receipt according
to the number of jurisdictions in which it may be taxed, the ratio of the
value of the property or assets of the taxpayer owned and situated in the
Township to the total property or assets of the taxpayer, wherever owned
and situated, or any other method of calculation other than the foregoing,
calculated to effect a fair and proper allocation.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period of January 1 through December 31.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of the Township of Pine, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, depending upon the context.
§ 128-21 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-23
127:911
§ 128-23. Mercantile license and fee.
Any person desiring to engage in wholesale or retail sales or operation
of a restaurant shall, before commencing business, procure a mercantile
License for each occupation or business location in the Township.
Application is required only once for each occupation or business location
by the submission of a completed application for commercial registration
and the payment of a fee as indicated on that application and as specified
in Chapter A144 (Fees) of the Code of the Township of Pine. The mercantile
license is not assignable.
§ 128-24. Appointment of Collector; powers and duties.
A. The Township Board of Supervisors is authorized by a majority vote at
any public meeting to appoint a Collector and any other administrative
personnel as may be deemed necessary for the assessment and
collection of taxes imposed by this article and to set compensation for
any Collector and administrative personnel appointed. The Collector
and administrative personnel shall serve until a successor is appointed
by the Board of Supervisors. The Collector and administrative
personnel may be removed by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors at any public meeting for just cause during his or her term.
B. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his or her duty to
maintain business and tax records.
C. The Collector is charged with the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article and empowered to enforce its rules and
regulations. Anyone aggrieved by the Collector's tax determination may
request a Tax Disclosure Statement (Attachment 1)157 and file the
included Petition for Appeal and Refund.158 The Tax Disclosure
Statement sets forth the rights of taxpayers and obligations of the local
taxing authority during an audit or administrative review; the
administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer may appeal
or seek judicial review of any adverse decision of the local taxing
authority; the procedure for filing and processing refund claims and
taxpayer complaints; and enforcement procedures. The Township shall
provide information on the Tax Disclosure Statement (with such
notification to be in the form provided by Act 50 of 1998) in regard to
assessment, audit, determination, review or collection of an eligible tax
and shall make copies available to taxpayers upon request at no charge
to the taxpayer, including mailing costs.
D. The Collector is authorized to examine the records of any business in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due. Every business is directed and required
to give to the Collector the means for such examinations and
157. Editor's Note: The Tax Disclosure Statement is included at the end of this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: The Petition for Appeal and Refund is on file in the Township Offices.
§ 128-23 PINE CODE § 128-24
127:912
§ 128-25. Imposition of tax; tax rates.
Beginning with the tax year 1979, effective July 1, 1979, and annually for
tax years thereafter, the Township hereby imposes a mercantile tax in the
manner and at the rate hereinafter set forth.
§ 128-26. Tax exemption and exclusion.
investigations. Businesses failing to abide by this provision shall be
subject to the penalties of this article for each day of said failure.
E. The Collector is authorized to compel the attendance of all persons,
whether as parties or witnesses, whom they believe to have knowledge
of such receipts. Any business failing to comply with said actions of the
Collector shall be subject to the penalties of this article for each day of
said failure.
F. No deficiency assessment may be made more than five years after the
date on which such taxes should have been paid, except where a
fraudulent return or no return has been filed.
G. Any information gained by the Collector in tax collection shall be
confidential except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law.
A. Businesses operating a restaurant or place where food, drink or
refreshments are sold, whether or not the same are incidental to some
other business or occupation, at the rate of one mill or $0.001 on each
dollar of gross receipts ($1 on each $1,000 of gross receipts).
B. Wholesale vendors at the rate of 0.75 mill or $0.00075 on each dollar of
wholesale gross receipts ($0.75 on each $1,000 of gross receipts).
C. Retail vendors at the rate of one mill or $0.001 on each dollar of gross
receipts ($1 on each $1,000 of gross receipts).
A. An Application for Business Tax Exemption (Attachment 2)159 may be
submitted for the following exemptions from the imposition of
mercantile tax:
(1) Nonprofit corporations or associations qualifying for exemption
from taxation as being a purely public charity and organized for
religious, charitable or educational purposes.
(2) Agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township of Pine.
(3) Vending or disposing of articles of their own growth, production or
manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of growth,
production or manufacture within the Township.
159. Editor's Note: The Application for Business Tax Exemption is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 128-24 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-26
127:913
§ 128-27. Computation of tax liability.
(4) Minerals, timber, natural resources or processing thereof.
B. Exclusions from the imposition of mercantile tax include:
(1) Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line
where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for
which they acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, so long as
said dealers are not the parent or subsidiary organization of the
vendor or have no other affiliation or cooperative agreement with
the vendor.
(2) Receipts of that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign
commerce or to an office or place of business regularly maintained
by the taxpayer, outside the limits of the Township, and not for the
purpose of evading payment of this tax and those receipts which
the Township is prohibited from taxing by law.
(3) Alcohol sales.
(4) Sales, returns and allowances for damaged or defective goods,
provided such items have been included in gross sales.
(5) Trade discounts such as discounts deducted from the face of bills
as a medium of adjusting the list price or discounts deducted from
the face of the bill without regard to the due date of such bill.
(6) Federal and state excise taxes, provided such amounts have been
included in gross sales.
(7) Resale of goods such as merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in
or part payment for other merchandise, except to the extent that
the resale price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(8) Pennsylvania sales tax.
(9) Any employment for wage or salary.
(10) Activity upon which the power to levy such a mercantile tax is
withheld by law.
(11) Any business which is subject to the Township of Pine business
privilege tax on its entire gross receipts.
C. The burden is imposed upon any business claiming an exemption from
the payment of the tax to convince the Collector of its legal right to such
exemption or exclusion.
D. The filing of a business gross receipts tax return on or before April 15 of
each year remains a requirement, with the business recertifying its
exemption conditions on that tax return.
§ 128-26 PINE CODE § 128-27
127:914
A. A business in operation in the Township for at least one full year prior to
the beginning of the tax year shall compute the tax liability on the
annual gross receipts transacted during the preceding year. The
business gross receipts tax return must be filed on or before April 15
and shall include a supporting schedule of page one of federal forms
1040, 1065, 1120, 1120S or Schedules C, E, F or K-1. The business
gross receipts tax return must be completed and filed, but no tax
payment is due if the total gross receipts are less than $10,000.
B. A business in operation in the Township for less than one full year prior
to the beginning of the tax year shall compute the tax liability on the
average monthly gross receipts transacted during the preceding year
multiplied by 12. The business gross receipts tax return must be filed on
or before April 15. The business gross receipts tax return must be
completed and filed, but no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts
are estimated to be less than $10,000.
C. A business beginning operation in the current calendar year shall
compute the annual tax liability on the gross receipts transacted during
the first full calendar month of engaging in business multiplied by the
number of months remaining in the calendar year. The business gross
receipts tax return must be filed within 40 days from the date of
commencing business. The business gross receipts tax return must be
completed and filed, but no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts
are estimated to be less than $10,000.
D. A temporary, seasonal or itinerant business shall compute tax liability
on the actual gross receipts while in operation. The business gross
receipts tax return must be filed within 40 days of completing business.
The business gross receipts tax return must be completed and filed, but
no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts are less than $10,000.
E. A business which discontinues or relocates out of the Township after
having paid the mercantile tax for that calendar year shall be entitled to
receive a refund of the pro rata amount of the tax paid, based upon the
discontinuation or relocation date. Such refund must be made by filing
an amended business gross receipts tax return within one year of the
original filing with the discontinuation or relocation date noted. In the
event that the business discontinues or relocates before payment of the
tax becomes due for such tax year, the tax should be apportioned for
such tax year by dividing gross receipts of the preceding full calendar
year by 12 and then multiplying that number by the number of months
in business during that current tax year. The business gross receipts tax
return should have the supporting tax document of the preceding year
attached with the discontinuation or relocation date noted. The
business gross receipts tax return must be completed and filed, but no
tax payment is due if the total gross receipts are estimated to be less
than $10,000.
§ 128-27 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-28
127:915
§ 128-28. Completion of return.
The business gross receipts tax return must include all required information
and must be properly executed by the responsible party.
§ 128-29. Deadline for filing of return.
The business gross receipts tax return must be filed on or before April 15
for that current year of January 1 through December 31. Extensions are not
granted, regardless of if a federal income tax extension has been applied for
or granted. If the gross receipts of the prior year are known, but the federal
tax return has not yet been filed, the business gross receipts tax return must
be filed on or before April 15, with tax payment, and a copy of the federal
application for extension of time to file a return attached. The supporting
documentation for the business gross receipts tax return must be sent at
the time the federal tax return is filed. If the gross receipts of the prior
year are unknown, the business gross receipts tax return must be filed on
or before April 15, with tax payment calculated using the preceding year's
gross receipts. An amended business gross receipts tax return must then be
filed, with supporting documentation, when the federal tax return is filed.
Payment of any additional tax is due with the amended return, including
penalty and interest on the amount of unpaid tax to the date of payment.
Refunds will be made by the Township if the actual gross receipts are less
than the tax paid with the original filing.
§ 128-30. Payment of tax at time of filing return.
Tax payment, as indicated on the completed business gross receipts tax
return, must be made with the filing of that return, including applicable
payment and interest.
§ 128-31. Supporting documentation.
Supporting schedules and/or documents shall be attached to the business
gross receipts tax return if the business has been in operation in the
Township for at least one full year. Verification shall be provided through
attachment of page one of federal forms 1040, 1065, 1120, 1120S or
Schedules C, E, F or K-1.
§ 128-32. Payment under protest; refunds.
A. The Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment of tax under
protest where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount. If judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Township has
been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the
taxpayer.
B. Refunds may be requested by written claim to the Collector within
three years of payment. Interest on the refund shall be paid at the same
rate and in the same manner as required pursuant to § 806 of the Act of
April 9, 1929, P.L. 343, No. 176.160
§ 128-28 PINE CODE § 128-33
127:916
§ 128-33. Suit for recovery of tax.
§ 128-33.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever fails or refuses to procure a mercantile license; or whoever fails
or refuses to file a business gross receipts tax return; or makes any false or
untrue statement on the business gross receipts tax return; or who refuses
to permit inspection of the records of any business in his or her custody
or control and whoever violates any other provision of this article shall,
upon conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300 plus costs of prosecution for each offense. This shall be in
addition to any other remedies available to the Township.
A. The Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article. No deficiency assessment may be made more than five
years after the date on which such taxes should have been paid, except
where a fraudulent return or no return has been filed.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
0.83% and penalty at the rate of 1% of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected.
C. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the business is
also liable for all collection costs, including attorneys' fees, and all court
costs incurred by the Township and applicable interest and penalties.
160. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 806 et seq.
§ 128-33 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-33.1
127:917

ARTICLE IV
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 4-4-1979 by Ord. No. 115; amended in its entirety
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 347]
§ 128-34. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Business Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 128-35. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article and unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings as defined below:
BUSINESS — Any person, individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, trust, firm, corporation, or any other entity engaged in whole or
in part in any trade or commercial activity, in the renting of real estate, or
in the providing of professional services or other services or sales for profit
in the Township or receiving income from stock dividends or capital gains
from sale of stock. A profession or vocation or any rendering of personal
services in any capacity, except as an employee of another. The occurrence
of a transaction or business event within the Township or operation of a
place of business within the Township shall be evidence of existence of a
business. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the term "business" shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
COLLECTOR — The Collector of business privilege tax for the Township of
Pine, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The value of all cash, credits or property received
which is attributable to the carrying on of a business or occupation in the
Township, undiminished by any costs of doing business. A receipt generally
will be considered attributable to the Township if any part of the transaction
takes place within the Township or is directed in any part from an office or
place of business within the Township. Where a receipt in its entirety cannot
be subject to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of
the Constitution of the United States or any other provision of law, including
the exemptions within this article, the Collector shall establish rules and
regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part
of such receipt which is properly attributable and allocable to the doing of
business in the Township shall be taxed hereunder. The Collector may make
such allocation with due regard to the nature of the business concerned
on the basis of millage division of the receipt according to the number of
jurisdictions in which it may be taxed, the ratio of the value of the property
or assets of the taxpayer owned and situated in the Township to the total
property or assets of the taxpayer, wherever owned and situated, or any
other method or methods of calculation other than the foregoing, calculated
to effect a fair and proper allocation.
SERVICE — Any act benefiting in a financial compensation.
§ 128-34 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-35
127:919
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period of January 1 to December 31.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of the Township of Pine, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, depending upon the context.
§ 128-36. Business privilege license and fee.
Any person desiring to engage in a service providing business shall, before
commencing business, procure a business privilege license for each
occupation or business location in the Township. Application is required
once only for each occupation or business location by the submission of a
completed application for commercial registration and the payment of a fee
as indicated on that application and as set forth in Chapter A144 (Fees)
of the Code of the Township of Pine. The business privilege license is not
assignable.
§ 128-37. Appointment of Collector; powers and duties.
A. The Township Board of Supervisors is authorized by majority vote at
any public meeting to appoint a Collector and any other administrative
personnel as may be deemed necessary for the assessment and
collection of taxes imposed by this article and to set compensation for
any Collector and administrative personnel appointed. The Collector
and administrative personnel shall serve until a successor is appointed
by the Board of Supervisors. The Collector and administrative
personnel may be removed by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors at any public meeting for just cause during his or her term.
B. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the fees, taxes,
penalties and interest imposed by this article. It shall also be his or her
duty to maintain business and tax records.
C. The Collector is charged with the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article and empowered to enforce its rules and
regulations. Anyone aggrieved by the Collector's tax determination may
request a Tax Disclosure Statement (Attachment 1)161 and file the
included Petition for Appeal and Refund.162 The Tax Disclosure
Statement sets forth the rights of taxpayers and obligations of the local
taxing authority during an audit or administrative review; the
administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer may appeal
or seek judicial review of any adverse decision of the local taxing
authority; the procedure for filing and processing refund claims and
taxpayer complaints; and enforcement procedures. The Township shall
provide information on the Tax Disclosure Statement (with such
notification to be in the form provided by Act 50 of 1998) in regard to
assessment, audit, determination, review or collection of an eligible tax
161. Editor's Note: The Tax Disclosure Statement is included at the end of this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: The Petition for Appeal and Refund is on file in the Township offices.
§ 128-35 PINE CODE § 128-37
127:920
§ 128-38. Imposition of tax; tax rates.
§ 128-39. Tax exemption and exclusion.
and shall make copies available to taxpayers upon request at no charge
to the taxpayer, including mailing costs.
D. The Collector is authorized to examine the records of any business in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due. Every business is required to give to the
Collector the means for such examinations and investigations.
Businesses failing to abide by this provision shall be subject to the
penalties of this article for each day of said failure.
E. The Collector is authorized to compel the attendance of all persons,
whether as parties or witnesses, whom they believe to have knowledge
of such receipts. Any business failing to comply with said actions of the
Collector shall be subject to the penalties of this article for each day of
said failure.
F. No deficiency assessment may be made more than five years after the
date on which such taxes should have been paid, except where a
fraudulent return or no return has been filed.
G. Any information gained by the Collector in tax collection shall be
confidential except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law.
A. Beginning with the tax year 1979, effective July 1, 1979, and annually
on tax years thereafter, the Township imposes a business privilege tax
in the manner and at the rate hereinafter set forth.
B. Every business engaging in a service providing occupation or business
in the Township shall pay a business privilege tax for the year 1979,
effective July 1, 1979, and annually thereafter at the rate of two mill or
$0.002 on each dollar of gross receipts ($2 on each $1,000 of gross
receipts).
A. An Application for Business Tax Exemption (Attachment 2)163 may be
submitted for the following exemptions from the imposition of business
privilege tax:
(1) Nonprofit corporations or associations qualifying for exemption
from taxation as being a purely public charity and organized for
religious, charitable or educational purposes.
(2) Agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township of Pine.
163. Editor's Note: The Application for Business Tax Exemption is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 128-37 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-39
127:921
(3) Utility service of any person or company whose rates and services
are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or the rendering of such service.
(4) Vending or disposing of articles of their own growth, production or
manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of growth,
production or manufacture within the Township.
(5) Minerals, timber, natural resources or processing thereof.
(6) Transportation, loading, unloading, dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products or by-products of farm products, minerals,
timber, natural resources and by-products of manufacture.
(7) Any person or company engaged in the construction of or
improvements to residential dwellings.
(8) Charges for admissions to motion-picture theaters.
B. Exclusions from the imposition of business privilege tax:
(1) In the case of financial business, the cost of securities and other
property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed and
moneys or credits or loans and shall also exclude deposits.
(2) In the case of a broker, commissions paid to another broker on
account of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or
cleared in conjunction with such other broker.
(3) Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line
where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for
which they acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, so long as
said dealers are not the parent or subsidiary organization of the
vendor or have no other affiliation or cooperative arrangement with
the vendor.
(4) Receipts of that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign
commerce or to an office or place of business regularly maintained
by the taxpayer outside the limits of the Township and not for the
purpose of evading payment of this tax and those receipts which
the Township is prohibited from taxing by law.
(5) Receipts by subcontractors when the tax is collectable from the
general or prime contractor from whom the subcontractor obtained
the contract.
(6) Pennsylvania sales tax.
(7) Any employment for wage or salary.
(8) Activity upon which the power to levy such a business privilege tax
is withheld by law.
§ 128-39 PINE CODE § 128-39
127:922
§ 128-40. Computation of tax liability.
(9) Any business which is subject to the Township of Pine mercantile
tax on its entire gross receipts.
C. The burden is imposed upon any business claiming an exemption from
the payment of the tax to convince the Collector of its legal right to such
exemption or exclusion.
D. The filing of a business gross receipts tax return on or before April 15 of
each year remains a requirement, with the business recertifying its
exemption conditions in that tax year.
A. A business in operation in the Township for at least one full year prior to
the beginning of the tax year shall compute the tax liability on the
annual gross receipts transacted during the preceding year. The
business gross receipts tax return must be filed on or before April 15
and shall include a supporting schedule of page one of federal forms
1040, 1065, 1120, 1120S or Schedules C, E, F or K-1. The business
gross receipts tax return must be completed and filed, but no tax
payment is due if the total gross receipts are less than $10,000.
B. A business in operation in the Township for less than one full year prior
to the beginning of the tax year shall compute the tax liability on the
average monthly gross receipts transacted during the preceding year
multiplied by 12. The business gross receipts tax return must be filed on
or before April 15. The business gross receipts tax return must be
completed and filed, but no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts
are estimated to be less than $10,000.
C. A business beginning operation in the current calendar year shall
compute the annual tax liability on the gross receipts transacted during
the first full calendar month of engaging in business multiplied by the
number of months remaining in the calendar year. The business gross
receipts tax return must be filed within 40 days from the date of
commencing business. The business gross receipts tax return must be
completed and filed, but no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts
are estimated to be less than $10,000.
D. A temporary, seasonal or itinerant business shall compute tax liability
on the actual gross receipts while in operation. The business gross
receipts tax return must be filed within 40 days from the date of
completing business. The tax return must be completed and filed, but
no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts are less than $10,000.
E. A business which discontinues or relocates out of the Township of Pine
after having paid the business privilege tax for that calendar year shall
be entitled to receive a refund of the pro rata amount of the tax paid,
based upon the discontinuation or relocation date. Such refund must be
requested by filing an amended business gross receipts tax return
within one year of the original filing with the discontinuation or
§ 128-39 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-40
127:923
§ 128-41. Completion of return.
The business gross receipts tax return must include all required information
and must be properly executed by the responsible party.
§ 128-42. Deadline for filing of return.
The business gross receipts tax return must be filed on or before April 15
for that current year of January 1 through December 31. Extensions are not
granted, regardless of if a federal income tax extension has been applied for
or granted. If the gross receipts of the prior year are known, but the federal
tax return has not yet been filed, the business gross receipts tax return must
be filed on or before April 15, with tax payment, and a copy of the federal
application for extension of time to file a return attached. The supporting
documentation for the business gross receipts tax return must be sent at
the time the federal tax return is filed. If the gross receipts of the prior
year are unknown, the business gross receipts tax return must be filed on
or before April 15, with tax payment, calculated using the preceding year's
gross receipts. An amended business gross receipts tax return must then be
filed, with supporting documentation, when the federal tax return is filed.
Payment of any additional tax is due with the amended return, including
penalty and interest on the amount of unpaid tax to the date of payment.
Refunds will be made by the Township if the actual gross receipts are less
than the tax paid with the original filing.
§ 128-43. Payment of tax at time of filing return.
Tax payment, as indicated on the completed business gross receipts tax
return, must be made with the filing of that return, including applicable
payment and interest.
§ 128-44. Supporting documentation.
Supporting schedules and/or documents shall be attached to the business
gross receipts tax return if the business has been in operation in the
Township for at least one full year. Verification shall be provided through
attachment of page one of federal forms 1040, 1065, 1120, 1120S or
Schedules C, E, F or K-1.
relocation date noted. In the event that the business discontinues or
relocates before payment of the tax becomes due for such tax year, the
tax should be apportioned for such tax year by dividing gross receipts
of the preceding full calendar year by 12 and then multiplying that
number by the number of months in business during that current tax
year. The business gross receipts tax return should have the supporting
tax document of the preceding year attached with the discontinuation
or relocation date noted. The tax return must be completed and filed
but no tax payment is due if the total gross receipts are estimated to be
less than $10,000.
§ 128-40 PINE CODE § 128-44.1
127:924
§ 128-44.1. Payment under protest; refunds.
§ 128-44.2. Suit for recovery of tax.
§ 128-44.3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever fails or refuses to procure a business privilege license; or whoever
fails or refuses to file a business gross receipts tax return; or makes any
false or untrue statement on the business gross receipts tax return; or who
refuses to permit inspection of the records of any business in his or her
custody or control; and whoever violates any other provision of this article
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $300 plus costs of prosecution for each offense. This shall
be in addition to any other remedies available to the Township.
§ 128-44.4. Occupant records.
Owners, lessors and rental agents of all real estate in the Township shall
annually supply the Township with the names and addresses of all current
occupants, in writing, and of new occupants within 30 days of lease or
occupancy.
A. The Collector is authorized to accept payment of business privilege tax
under protest where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount. If
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the
Township has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer.
B. Refunds may be requested by written claim to the Collector within
three years of payment. Interest on the refund shall be paid at the same
rate and in the same manner as required pursuant to § 806 of the Act of
April 9, 1929, P.L. 343, No. 176.164
A. The Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article. No deficiency assessment may be made more than five
years after the date on which such taxes should have been paid, except
where a fraudulent return or no return has been filed.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
0.83% and penalty at the rate of 1% of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected.
C. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the business is
also liable for all collection costs, including attorneys' fees, and all
courts costs incurred by the Township and applicable interest and
penalties.
164. Editor's Note: See P.S. § 806 et seq.
§ 128-44.1 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-44.4
127:925

ARTICLE V
Penalty and Interest on Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 320165]
§ 128-45. Penalty imposed.
Any taxpayer who fails to pay the tax on real property within the Township
of Pine for a period of four months after the date of the tax notice shall
have added to the tax due, as a penalty, the maximum sum to be allowed by
the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as now or hereafter
provided by law.
§ 128-46. Lien and interest.
A. The penalty imposed by § 128-45 hereof shall be added to the tax due
and shall become a lien upon real estate to the extent provided by law.
B. Interest, at the maximum permissible rate allowed by the Legislature of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (as now or hereafter provided by
law) shall be added to the tax due subsequent to the lien upon the real
estate.
165. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Penalty on Delinquent Real
Estate Taxes, adopted 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. 132.
§ 128-45 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-46
127:927

ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-17-1986 by Ord. No. 149]
§ 128-47. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Pine
Township."
§ 128-48. Statutory authorization.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Pine
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 128-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons,
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
declaration acquisition required to be presented for recording under this
article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business' or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 128-47 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-49
127:929
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by wholeblood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Pine Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 128-49 PINE CODE § 128-49
127:930
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years, but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B above, the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 128-49 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-50
127:931
§ 128-50. Imposition of tax; interest on unpaid tax. [Amended
2-3-1992 by Ord. No. 197]
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay to the Township of Pine, pursuant to the authority of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.
§ 6901 et seq., for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable to the Township of Pine at
the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or
within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of
becoming an acquired company. It is the intent of this subsection that
the entire burden of the one-percent tax imposed by the Township of
Pine, pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Local Tax Enabling
Act, by this subsection on a person or transfer shall not exceed the
limitations prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by Pine Township in this
subsection, under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, shall,
during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become
effective without any action on the part of Pine Township; provided,
however, that Pine Township and any other political subdivision which
impose such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead
of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they
will impose, respectively, different rates, the total of which shall not
exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
B. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall (in
addition to the tax imposed by Subsection A of this section) also be
subject to pay to the Township of Pine, pursuant to the authority of the
Home Rule Charter for the Township of Pine and the Pennsylvania
Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law,166 for and in respect to the
transaction or any part thereof, an additional tax at the rate of 1/2% of
the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax
shall be payable solely to the Township of Pine at the earlier of the time
the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of
acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an
acquired company. It is the intent of this subsection that the additional
tax of 1/2% imposed herein be and is imposed pursuant to the authority
granted to the Township of Pine by the Home Rule Charter for the
Township of Pine and the Pennsylvania Home Rule Charter and
166. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 11601 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 901 et seq.
§ 128-50 PINE CODE § 128-50
127:932
§ 128-51. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 128-52. Excluded transactions.
Optional Plans Law and, as such, is in addition to the tax set forth in
Subsection A of this section and is not subject to any of the limitations
set forth either in Subsection A of this section or in the Local Tax
Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq.
C. The payment of the Township of Pine of the taxes imposed by
Subsections A and B of this section shall be evidenced by the affixing of
an official stamp or writing by the Recorder wherein the date of the
payment of the taxes, the amount thereof and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 128-50 of this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Pine Township is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
§ 128-50 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-52
127:933
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where it is reasonably determined that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
§ 128-52 PINE CODE § 128-52
127:934
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has, as its
primary purpose, preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 128-52 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-53
127:935
§ 128-53. Fully taxable documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 128-52 of this article, documents which
make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate
between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of
this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 128-54. Acquired company.
§ 128-55. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 128-53 PINE CODE § 128-55
127:936
§ 128-56. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a it shall presumed that a right or option to
renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee
is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
§ 128-57. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 128-58. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1988 (P.L
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Pine
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Pine Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Pine Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of
the county, together with a report containing the information as is
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
§ 128-55 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-58
127:937
§ 128-59. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 128-60. Civil penalties.
§ 128-61. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of Pine Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens
Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 128-58 PINE CODE § 128-62
127:938
§ 128-62. Recovery of tax.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 128-63. Enforcement; collection of tax.
The deed transfer tax Collector is charged with enforcement and collection
of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations
for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
§ 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 128-62 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-63
127:939

ARTICLE VII
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 346167]
§ 128-64. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 128-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings prescribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, persons, public or private agency, association
and/or corporate entity designated by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Pine to collect the tax and to carry out and administer the
provisions of this article.
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts or any other income.
EARNED INCOME and NET PROFITS — Shall have the same meaning as
those terms are given in § 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965
(53 P.S. § 6313168), as amended.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Township
and employing one or more employees engaged in any occupation, other
than domestic servants.
EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE — An exemption certificate substantially in the
form of the uniform certificate prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed, which exemption certificate has
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the Township for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
LOCAL SERVICES — Emergency services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; and property tax relief through
167. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. VII, Occupational Privilege Tax,
adopted 2-20-1991 by Ord. No. 189, as amended. This ordinance also provided that former
§ 128-72, Mailing of notices; payment of schedule, be redesignated as § 128-82.
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 128-64 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-65
127:941
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F.169
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which any
compensation is received or charged.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this article.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine.
§ 128-66. Levy of tax.
§ 128-67. Exemptions.
The tax levied by § 128-66 shall not be imposed upon the following persons:
A. For local services purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege of
engaging in an occupation within the Township. Each natural person
who exercises such privilege for any length of time in any year shall be
assessed and shall pay the tax in the amount equal to the pro-rata share
of the annual amount of $52 in accordance with the provisions of this
article, subject to the exemptions set forth in § 128-67 of this article.
B. Any tax validly imposed by any school district on the privilege of
engaging in an occupation within the Township in accordance with Act
7 of 2007 shall be deducted from the amount of the tax imposed by this
article.
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans Administration or its successor to be a total, onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of the armed
forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy
Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast
Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
C. Any natural person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township during the taxable year is less than
$12,000.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 128-65 PINE CODE § 128-68
127:942
§ 128-68. Duty of employers to collect.
A. Every employer shall, within 15 days after the effective date of this
article or within 15 days of first becoming an employer thereafter,
register with the Collector the employer's name, address and such
other information as the Collector may require.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time during any payroll
period of an employer during the calendar year, each employer shall
deduct a pro-rata share of the tax from compensation payable to the
taxpayer with respect to such payroll period. The pro-rata share of the
tax assessed on a taxpayer for a payroll period shall be determined by
dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of
payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For
purposes of determining the pro-rata share of the tax, an employer shall
round down the amount of tax deducted for each payroll period to the
nearest 1/100 of a dollar. Each employer shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Collector and pay the Collector the full amount of all
such taxes deducted during a calendar quarter within 30 days after the
end of the calendar quarter.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year shall, within 15 days after discontinuing
business or ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove required and
pay the tax to the Collector.
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section or who fails to pay
such tax to the Collector, shall be liable for such tax in full as though the
tax had originally been levied against such employer. No employer shall
be liable for failure to deduct the tax if the failure to deduct the tax
arises from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to the
employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed.
E. The employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate
records concerning the employees in the cases described in Subsection
E(1) and (2) below.
(1) In the case of concurrent employment, if the employee provides a
recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of the tax deducted, and a statement from the employee
that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer
and that the employee will notify other employers of a change in
the principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence.
(2) In the case of an employee claiming the exemption set forth at
§ 128-67C, if the employee has provided an exemption certificate to
the employer, the Collector has not otherwise instructed the
§ 128-68 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-68
127:943
§ 128-69. Self-employed individuals.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is
not collected under § 128-68 of this article, shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Collector and shall pay a pro-rata share of the tax directly
employer, the employer has not received notification from the
person who claimed the exemption or from the Collector that the
person has received earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, and the employer has not paid to
the person earned income within the Township in an amount equal
to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year.
(3) The employer shall file with the Collector a copy of each exemption
certificate, including attachments, received by the employer no
later than the end of the first payroll period as to which the
employee claims the exemption set forth at § 128-67C.
(4) If a person has claimed the exemption under § 128-67C for a given
calendar year from the tax but either the employer has received
notification from the person who claimed the exemption or from the
Collector that the person has received earned income and net
profits from all sources within the Township equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or the
employer has paid to the person earned income within the
Township in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, then the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year and the employer shall withhold
from the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification described above or for the first payroll period after
payments described above have been made, a lump sum equal to
the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the
exemption claimed by the person, plus the per-payroll amount due
for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll
period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall
be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this
§ 128-68E(4) is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the
person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due and
the Collector may pursue collection under this article.
(5) Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with an exemption certificate form at the time of
hiring.
(6) A person seeking exemption from the tax under § 128-67C must
annually file an exemption certificate with the Collector.
§ 128-68 PINE CODE § 128-69
127:944
to the Collector within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The
pro-rata share of the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall
be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by
four.
§ 128-70. Nonresidents subject to tax.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Township, be subject to the tax and the provisions of
this article.
§ 128-71. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
§ 128-72. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for nonpayment.
The Collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all tax, interest, costs, fines
and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any reason any tax
is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount of
unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of unpaid
tax for each month or fraction of month during which the tax remains
unpaid, shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought for the
recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the costs
of collection (including but not limited to attorneys' fees), as well as for
interest and penalties. The Collector may accept payment under protest of
the tax claimed by the Township in any case where any person disputes the
Township's claim for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter
decides that there has been overpayment to the Collector, the Collector
shall refund the amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under
protest.
A. The Collector, on behalf of the Township, shall collect and receive the
tax, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and shall
maintain records showing interest, fines and penalties imposed by this
article and shall maintain records showing the amounts received and
the dates such amounts were received.
B. The Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of this article,
including, but not limited to, requirements for collection through
employers, requirements for evidence and records, and provisions for
the examination and correction of returns.
C. The Collector and agents designated by the Collector may examine the
records of any employer or supposed employer or of any taxpayer or
supposed taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or verify the
accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed employer and
every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the Collector and any
agent designated by the Collector all means, facilities and opportunity
for the examinations hereby authorized.
§ 128-69 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-73
127:945
§ 128-73. Situs of tax for individuals engaged in more than one
occupation or employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 128-74. Violations and penalties.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the
priority of claim to collect the tax shall be in the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. Any person, firm or corporation or entity who violates a provision of this
article or who fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a civil penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $300 for each violation, plus costs and
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement
proceedings. The civil enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by
complaint or by such other means as may be provided by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.170
B. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation is found to exist or for each section of this article found to have
been violated. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this
article shall be paid to the Township's Treasurer.
C. The Township may also commence appropriate actions in equity, at law
or other, to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this
article.
D. The initial determination of a violation of this article and the service of
notice of violation are hereby delegated to the Township Manager, the
Collector and their designees and to any other officer or agent that the
Township Manager or the Board of Supervisors of the Township shall
deem appropriate.
170. Editor's Note: See Pa.R.C.P. No. 51 et seq.
§ 128-73 PINE CODE § 128-75
127:946
§ 128-75. Refunds.
Any person who has overpaid the tax may obtain a refund by making a
written application for a refund to the Collector no later than one year after
payment of the tax or three years after the due date for payment of the tax,
whichever is later, and satisfactorily proves to the Collector an entitlement
to the refund. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days
after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax to the Collector
for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. A refund shall be
provided only for an amount overpaid in a calendar year that exceeds $1.
§ 128-76. Collector to provide receipt.
The Collector shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment of the tax upon
request by the taxpayer.
§ 128-77. Applicability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the Township under the Constitution of the United States and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 128-78. Administrative appeals.
Any taxpayer may file a petition, in the form and under the requirements of
the Township of Pine Tax Disclosure Statement,171 to appeal the assessment,
determination or refund of tax. The Township shall prepare, utilize and
distribute a tax Disclosure Statement, in the form set forth in Attachment 1
of Chapter 128 of the Code of the Township of Pine, the provisions of which
are hereby incorporated herein by reference into this article, which shall,
in simple and nontechnical terms, set forth: the rights of taxpayers and
obligations of the local taxing authority during an audit or administrative
review; the administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer
may appeal or seek judicial review of any adverse decision of the local
taxing authority; the procedure for filing and processing refund claims
and taxpayer complaints; and enforcement procedures. The local taxing
authority shall notify (with such notification to be in the form provided by
Act 50 of 1998) any taxpayer contacted regarding the assessment, audit,
determination, review or collection of an eligible tax of the availability of
such Tax Disclosure Statement and shall make copies available to taxpayers
upon request at no charge to the taxpayer, including mailing costs.
§ 128-79. Effective, duration.
This article shall continue in force from year to year without annual
reenactment.
171. Editor's Note: See Pa.R.C.P. No. 51 et seq.
§ 128-75 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-80
127:947
§ 128-80. Use of funds restricted.
The Township's use of the funds derived from the tax shall be limited to local
services, and no less than 25% of such funds shall be used for emergency
services, all as required by Act 7 of 2007.
§ 128-81. Repealer.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an
occupational privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for
calendar year 2008 and for all prior calendar years, as the same exists prior
to the date of enactment of the provisions of this article.
§ 128-80 PINE CODE § 128-81
127:948
ARTICLE VIII
Real Estate Tax Collection Period
[Adopted 1-17-1994 by Ord. No. 218]
§ 128-82. Mailing of notices; payment schedule.
The Township's Real Estate Tax Collector shall mail the Township's real
estate notices to all affected taxpayers within 30 days of his/her receipt of
the tax duplicates or April 1 of each year, whichever date shall be later. Said
real estate tax notices shall provide that the Township's real estate tax shall
be payable at discount until May 31 of each year and payable at the face
amount of the tax until July 31 of each year, with appropriate interest and
penalty being assessed after July 31 of each year.
§ 128-82 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-82
127:949

ARTICLE IX
Homestead/Farmstead Exclusion
[Adopted 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 386]
§ 128-83. Preamble.
The provisions set forth in the preamble to this ordinance are incorporated
by reference in their entirety herein.172
§ 128-84. Definitions.
The definitions of the terms "homestead," "homestead property,"
"farmstead," and "farmstead property" as contained in 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8401
and 8581 are incorporated by reference in their entirety herein. All other
terms and provisions set forth in this article shall be construed in
accordance with the provisions of Act 50.
§ 128-85. Homestead exclusion.
There is hereby created and established an Act 50 homestead exclusion for
all eligible properties within the Township of Pine in order to exclude a
certain amount of the assessed value of any qualifying homestead property
within the Township from Township real estate taxation. The amount of this
homestead property exclusion may be set from time to time by resolution
of the Township's Board of Supervisors, and any such resolution shall then
establish an amount of the assessed value of any homestead property in
the Township which shall be excluded from Township real estate taxation.
Following an adoption of any such initial resolution, and in the absence
of any subsequently adopted resolution, the amount of assessed value of
any homestead property therein specified to be excluded from Township
real estate taxation shall remain unchanged from year to year for the time
period specified in § 128-88 of this article as the duration for the homestead
exclusion program.
§ 128-86. Farmstead exclusion.
There is hereby created and established an Act 50 farmstead exclusion for
all eligible properties within the Township of Pine in order to exclude a
certain amount of the assessed value of any qualifying farmstead property
within the Township from Township real estate taxation. The amount of this
farmstead property exclusion may be set from time to time by resolution
of the Township's Board of Supervisors, and any such resolution shall then
establish an amount of the assessed value of any farmstead property in
the Township which shall be excluded from Township real estate taxation.
Following an adoption of any such initial resolution, and in the absence
of any thereafter subsequently adopted resolution, the amount of assessed
value of any farmstead property therein specified to be excluded from
Township real estate taxation shall remain unchanged from year to year for
172. Editor's Note: See the full copy of Ord. No. 386, on file in the Township offices.
§ 128-83 TAX ASSESSMENT § 128-86
127:951
the time period specified in § 128-88 of this article as the duration for the
farmstead exclusion program. The exclusion for farmstead property shall be
in addition to any exclusion for homestead property for which the dwelling
on the farmstead may qualify.
§ 128-87. Application for exclusion.
To apply for either a Township homestead exclusion or farmstead exclusion,
an interested person shall submit satisfactory proof, by way of a tax bill or
homestead/farmstead exclusion notice issued by Allegheny County, to the
Township Manager's Office. The Township may rely solely upon the Office of
Property Assessments of Allegheny County for any other matter concerning
to the administration of matters pertaining to eligibility of properties for
a homestead and/or farmstead exclusion. The Township Manager shall
cooperate with the Office of Property Assessments of Allegheny County in
the administration of matters pertaining to the homestead exclusion and
farmstead exclusion established by this article and is authorized to issue
regulations with respect to such administration and to the implementation
of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that such regulations
comply with the aforesaid Act 50.
§ 128-88. When effective.
The homestead exclusion and farmstead exclusion established hereby shall
apply beginning with the 2019 Township real estate tax year and remain
in effect for only such year; at the end of such period, in the absence
of adoption of a further ordinance or resolution to amend the provisions
hereof, the homestead exclusion and farmstead exclusion established herein
shall cease and the authority for same automatically expire.173
§ 128-89. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in
full force and effect; and to this end, the provisions of this article are hereby
declared to be severable.
173. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 1030, adopted 10-21-2019, extended the homestead
exclusion and the farmstead exclusion to apply to the 2020 tax year, and further stated
that the exclusion shall not continue unless a subsequent resolution is adopted for
additional year exclusions.
§ 128-86 PINE CODE § 128-89
127:952
Chapter 134
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 138.
§ 134-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Pine
Abandoned or Junked Motor Vehicle Ordinance."
§ 134-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which:
INOPERABLE — As applied to a motor vehicle under this chapter:
Is inoperable and is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or
public property for more than 48 hours;
A.
Has remained illegally on a public street, road, highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours;
B.
Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or
person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
C.
Is inoperable and has been stored or kept outside and not enclosed
within a building on any private property for more than 30 days;
provided, however, that an inoperable motor vehicle held or stored
upon the property of a person engaged in the business of servicing,
repairing, storing or disposing of inoperable motor vehicles in
conformity with the Zoning Laws of the Township of Pine shall not be
considered an "abandoned or junked motor vehicle" for the purpose
of this chapter as long as it is screened from view from the abutting
properties; or
D.
Is stored or kept in such a manner as to cause loud noises or offensive
odors or attract vermin or is otherwise a detriment to the environment
or danger to those who may be in close proximity or a nuisance in any
other manner.
E.
A motor vehicle that does not have a current registration plate and a
current inspection sticker; or
A.
A motor vehicle that does not have the required number of wheels or
tires, does not have one or more of its doors or windows, does not have
B.
§ 128-89 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 134-2
134:953
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon private land, public
highways, streets or roads, which is self-propelled, except by human power
alone, or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle.
PERSON — Any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind. When used in any provision
prescribing a fine or penalty, the word "person," as applied to partnerships,
shall mean the partners thereof, and as applied to a firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind, shall mean the officers
thereof.
§ 134-3. Storing or keeping to be nuisance.
The storing or keeping of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle, as defined
herein, by any person within the Township of Pine is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 134-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
Any person who places an abandoned or junked motor vehicle on any public
or private property or who permits an abandoned or junked motor vehicle to
be stored or kept outside and not enclosed within a building on his property,
and who fails to remove the same within 10 days after receiving written
notice to do so from a police officer of the Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods
Police Department or its successor shall be guilty of violating this chapter
and, upon summary conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed a maximum of $300 plus costs of prosecution for each offense. Each
calendar day in which an abandoned junked motor vehicle is stored or kept
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 134-5. Township to institute legal proceeding.
In addition to all other remedies or penalties, the Township of Pine may
institute legal proceedings in a court of law or in equity to obtain damages
and equitable relief from the offense herein defined as a nuisance.
Chapter 138
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Acceptance of private roads — See Ch. 65.
Rights-of-way — See Ch. 66.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Transportation Improvements Program — See
Ch. 80.
Abandonment or junked vehicles — See Ch.
134.
an engine or does not have a battery or lacks any other part which is
necessary to self-propel it.
§ 134-2 PINE CODE § 134-5
134:954
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 138-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Pine Township Traffic
Control Ordinance."
§ 138-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 138-3. Appointment and authorization of Chief of Police and
Township Director of Public Works as special commission.
[Amended 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(b)(2), the Board of
Supervisors hereby appoints and authorizes the Chief of Police and the
Township Director of Public Works to act as a special commission for the
purpose of recommending changes and additions to the traffic regulations
of the Township, conducting engineering and traffic investigations, as
required by law, and obtaining advance approval from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation for such regulations, as required by law. The
Chief of Police and Township Director of Public Works shall report such
recommendations, investigations and approvals periodically, as necessary,
to the Board of Supervisors, which may adopt such regulations as the
permanent traffic control regulations of the Township. The Board of
Supervisors shall periodically review all resolutions and traffic regulations
as necessary and shall adopt an ordinance or resolution of the Township to
incorporate such new traffic regulations as the Board of Supervisors deems
appropriate.
A. All words herein shall have the same meanings as prescribed in the
Motor Vehicle Code174 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which is
effective August 1, 1984, or which may hereafter be amended or
reenacted, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
POLICE — The Northern Regional Police Force, its successors or state
police or any other authorized police officer.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of the Township of Pine, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, depending upon the context.
174. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 138-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-4
134:955
§ 138-4. Standards for adopting applicable ordinances. [Amended
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
All ordinances shall be adopted in accordance with the applicable
authorizing legislation and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book. A
copy of all ordinances and amendments thereto pertaining to traffic control
shall be transmitted by the Township Manager to the Police Department
and the Township Director of Public Works. The Police Department shall
maintain for public inspection copies of all traffic control ordinances and
amendments thereto.
§ 138-5. Erection of traffic control signs. [Amended 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Signs publicizing the traffic control restrictions and regulations shall be
erected by the Department of Public Works at appropriate places within the
Township. No traffic control restriction or regulation shall become effective
until five days after an appropriate sign has been placed in the affected area
which is restricted or regulated. Where signs are prescribed and regulated
by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, the signs shall be erected in
conformity with it. Otherwise, signs shall be conclusively presumed to be in
regular form and properly placed.
§ 138-6. Authorization for use of speed-detecting devices.
Police are hereby authorized to use all devices approved by any agency
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine the speed of vehicles,
including but not limited to, Vascar Plus and Excessive Speed Prevention
(ESP), for enforcement of any aspect of the Motor Vehicle Code. This
authorization shall include any timing devices authorized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania subsequent to the date of this chapter for
use by local police forces.
§ 138-4 PINE CODE § 138-6
134:956
ARTICLE II
Police Chief
§ 138-7. Powers.
The Police Chief shall have the following powers:
A. To restrict and regulate traffic control temporarily in times of
emergency, in case of accident, fire, flood, storm, civil disturbance or
any other emergency; establish parking and traffic regulations separate
from those provided in this chapter for a period not to exceed 24 hours
unless authority is granted for additional, specifically defined periods of
time (as necessitated due to the continuance of the emergency) by the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors or other duly authorized
Supervisor acting in the Chairman's absence or stead. [Amended
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
B. To prohibit pedestrians or vehicles temporarily from entering certain
defined limited areas.
C. To establish detours, one-way traffic or other appropriate regulations or
restrictions to meet the needs created by the emergency situation. Such
temporary regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department in
the same manner as permanent regulations.
§ 138-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-7
134:957

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 138-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No.
173]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any amendments
subsequent hereto shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine and costs of
prosecution in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.175
175. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 138-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-8
134:959

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Regulations
§ 138-9. Stop intersections.
Stop signs within the Township shall be located as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Abbacy Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Alder Drive
Abbacy Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Alder Drive
Alder Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
South Alder Drive
Alder Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
West Pearce Mill Road
American Way [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North South Chapel Drive
Ardmore Street South Manor Road
Arlo Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
East Pearce Mill Road
Ashford Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
Northeast Fountain Hills Drive
Aspen Road [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
East Perry Highway (south)
(Route 19)
Aviara Place [Added 2-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 288]
West Bay Hill Drive
Avonlea Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
North Tierra Vista Drive
Babcock Boulevard [Added
2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
North Route 910
Babcock Boulevard [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Babcock Boulevard [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
South Mars-Valencia Road
Babcock Boulevard [Added
2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
South Route 910
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:961
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Bakerstown Road [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Balsa Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
North Alder Drive
Baur Drive [Added 5-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 231]
West English Road
Bay Hill Drive [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
North/South Pinehurst Drive
Bay Hill Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
North West Grove Drive
Bay Hill Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Pinehurst Lane
Beaver Court [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Warrendale Road
Black Oak Court [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
West Oak Park Drive
Blue Heron Drive [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
North Wexford Bayne Road
Blue Heron Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Eagle Court
Bonnie View Drive West Limerick Road
Bonnie View Drive [Added
2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
East/West Rosscommon Road
Boyd Lane [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
East Old State Road
Bradford Drive [Added 7-2-2001
by Ord. No. 292]
East/West Stonewood Drive
Bradford Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Swinderman Road
Bradford Way [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
South Manor Road
Braisly Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Pearce Mill Road
Brennan Road North Manor Road
Brennan Road South Wexford Bayne Road
Briar Hill Court [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
South Tanglewood Drive
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:962
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Brierley Lane [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Bakerstown Road
Bristlecone Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East White Pine Drive
Bristle Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Balsa Drive
Broadmore Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Rosecliff Drive
Broadmore Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Shelley Lane
Broadway Street [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Bradford Drive
Broadway Street [Repealed
12-18-1991 by Ord. No. 195]
Brooker Drive [Repealed
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Brookside Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
Southeast Lloydmont Drive
Brookside Drive [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North/South Manor Road
Brookstone Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North Brooktree Road (north)
Brookstone Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Brooktree Road (south)
Brooktree Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Brooktree Road
Brown Road East/South McKinney Road
Brown Road [Repealed 5-3-1999
by Ord. No. 267]
Buckwheat Drive Southeast Logan Road
Camp Trees Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Tammarack Drive
Cedar Wood Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast English Farm Drive
Cedar Wood Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Pine Wood Drive
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:963
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chadborne Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southeast Fountain Hills Drive
Chapel Hill Court [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
West Parkview Drive
Chester Lane [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Manor Road
Christopher Wren Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Wallace Road Extension
Church Road [Repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Church Road North/South Wexford Bayne Road and
Wexford Road
Church Road South Route 19
Cloverdale Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North Cloverdale Drive
Cloverdale Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Bradford Drive (2 places)
Clover Lane [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Southeast Timothy Road
Colony Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
West Karrington Drive
Condor Lane [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
West Treesdale Drive
Conrad Drive [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Warrendale Road
Conifer Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Christopher Wren Drive
Connemara Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Minnock Drive
Copperleaf Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Wallace Road Extension
Davison Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
North Twin Oaks Drive
Davison Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246;
amended 11-3-1997 by Ord.
No. 256]
Southeast Fox Meadow Drive
Dean Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Warrendale Road
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:964
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Dean Road [Repealed 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
Deering Bay Court [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
East Bay Hill Drive
Deer Path Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Babcock Boulevard
Dennis Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
Southwest Gibsonia Road (Route
910)
Devon Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
Northeast Karrington Drive
Douglas Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Alder Drive (2 locations)
Downieville Road [Repealed
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Drake Drive [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
North English Road
Drake Drive [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
South Oakhaven Drive
Drury Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
East Heather Hill Drive
Durrow Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Minnock Drive
Eagle Court [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
South Egret Drive
East Ridge Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
Northeast Warrendale Road
East Wild Cherry Drive [Added
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
West Franklin Road
Eastwood Street [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Broadway
Eddie Lewis Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Eddie Lewis Drive
Eddie Lewis Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Village Club Drive
Egret Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
East Blue Heron Drive
Egret Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
West Blue Heron Drive
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:965
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Emerald Fields Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Mt. Pleasant Road
Emerald Fields Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Murrin Court
Emmett Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Lyndhurst Circle
Emmett Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West English Road
Enders Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Pearce Mill Road
English Farm Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast English Road
English Road North Graham Road
English Road West Wallace Road
Essex Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
East Karrington Drive
Fairgate Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Village Club Drive
Fairgate Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Towne Centre Boulevard
Fair Oaks Street West Glendale Street
Fair Vista Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Northwest Fox Meadow Drive
Fairway Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North South Lake Drive
Falcon Court [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
South Condor Lane
Fawn Drive North Pikemont Drive
Fawn Drive South Broadway Street
Fernwood Drive South Manor Road
Fieldview Drive West Route 19
Fountain Hills Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Fountain Hills Drive
Foxford Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
Southwest Karrington Drive
Fox Hollow Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Old State Road
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:966
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Fox Meadow Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South English Road
Fox Meadow Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southeast Fox Meadow Drive
(2-way at Y)
Fox Ridge Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Warrendale Road
Franklin Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Warrendale Road
Freeport Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Franklin Road
Gander Drive [Added 5-3-1999
by Ord. No. 267]
West Oakhaven Drive
Garber Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Brookside Drive
Garden Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Garden Way
Garden Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Village Place
Garden Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Garden Way
Garden Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Village Run Road
Garden Way [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Garden Court
Garden Way [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Park Plaza East
Garden Way [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Garden Court
Garden Way [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Village Club Drive
Gateway Avenue [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Route 19
Gateway Avenue (except right
turns) [Added 5-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 231; amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Pikemont Drive
Georgetowne Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Wallace Road
Gibsonia Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Babcock Boulevard
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:967
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Glendale Street [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North/South Manor Road
Glendale Street [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Mayfield Road
Graham Road [Amended
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Pearce Mill Road
Graham Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Warrendale Road
Grandview Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Salem Heights Drive
Gran Sosso Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Babcock Boulevard
Greenwood Drive [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
North Rabold Drive
Greenwood Drive [Amended
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
North/South Windwood Drive
Grubbs Road [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North McKinney Road
Haefner Drive South Twin Oak Drive
Harrison Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Stonecrest Court
Harrison Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Stonecrest Court
Harvest Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West English Road
Heather Hill Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Karrington Drive (2
places)
Heights Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
North Heights Drive (north of
cemetery)
Heights Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231; amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Northwest Wexford Road
Heights Drive [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
South Heights Drive (south of
cemetery)
High Oak Drive [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Manor Road
High Oak Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
South Mayfield Road
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:968
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Hill Haven Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Hill Road
Hill Road [Added 5-3-1999 by
Ord. No. 267]
North Oakhaven Drive
Hill Road [Added 11-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 256]
North/South Spruce Haven Drive/
Mohawk Lane
Hill Road [Added 2-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 162; amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Wexford Road
Honeybee Drive [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
North Rabold Drive
Hufhand Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Bradford Drive
Isleworth Way [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Pinehurst Lane
Irwin Road North Wexford Road
Ivy Drive [Amended 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
East Babcock Boulevard
Ivy Drive [Added 7-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 292]
North/South Tierra Vista Drive
Jack Pine Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North White Pine Drive
Jackson Road East Babcock Boulevard
Jurecko Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Pinkerton Road
Karrastyn Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North Colony Court
Karrington Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North Gibsonia Road (Route
910)
Karrington Drive [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
North/South Colony Court
Karrington Drive [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
North/South Essex Court
Karrington Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Babcock Boulevard
Kestler Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West/West Village Club Drive
Kilclare Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Minnock Drive
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:969
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Kildee Drive [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
West McKinney Road
Killarney Drive North Wexford Bayne Road
Knoll Lane [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
South Old Babcock Boulevard
Lace Bark Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North White Pine Drive
Lake Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
South Brooker Drive
Lake Drive West Route 19
Lang Court [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
West Logan Road
Langdon Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Logan Drive
Langdon Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East/West Summer Place
Laurel Hill Street [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Manor Road
Lavelle Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Franklin Road
Limerick Road North Wexford Bayne Road
Limerick Road [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast MacBeth Place
Limerick Road North/South Bonnie View Drive
Limerick Road [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest MacBeth Place
Lloydmont Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North/South Potomac/Nathan Courts
Lloydmont Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
Southeast Wexford-Bayne Road
Loblolly Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Pinecrest Court
Loblolly Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Redbud Court
Logan Road East Babcock Boulevard
Logan Road [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
East Pinyon Drive
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:970
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Logan Road West Pearce Mill Road
Logan Road [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
West Pinyon Drive
Lyndhurst Circle [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Emmett Road
Lyndhurst Circle [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Wexford Road
MacBeth Place [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Limerick Road
MacBeth Place [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Northeast Killarney Drive
MacCutcheon Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North MacFadden Drive
MacFadden Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Oak Park Drive
Macintosh Drive [Added
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
West Franklin Road
MacLeod Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Babcock Boulevard
MacMillen Way [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North MacFadden Drive
MacMillen Way [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Macleod Drive
Magnolia Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Balsa Drive
Manor Road [Repealed 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Manor Road [Added 2-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 288]
East/West Brennan Road
Manor Road [Added 7-2-1990 by
Ord. No. 184]
East/West Mayfield Road
Maple Drive [Amended 2-1-1988
by Ord. No. 162]
East Rosscommon Road
Maple Drive East Route 19
Maple Drive [Added 2-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 162]
Northwest Rosscommon Road
Maplewood Drive [Added
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
West Greenwood Drive
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:971
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Market Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East/West Unnamed parking lot
lane
Market Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Towne Centre Boulevard
Marrwood Drive East Wallace Road
Mars Road [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
South Warrendale Road
Mars-Valencia Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Babcock Boulevard
Mars-Valencia Road Ext. [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Mars-Valencia Road
Mayfield Road [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
North Manor Road
McCandless Place Northeast Killarney Drive
McKinney Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Brown Road
McKinney Road South [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Southeast Kummer Road
Meadow Brook Avenue West Broadway Street
Miller Drive [Added 2-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 288]
South Tanglewood Drive
Minnock Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Mt. Pleasant Road
Minnock Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Franklin Road
Misty Valley Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Babcock Boulevard
Mohawk Lane [Added 11-3-1997
by Ord. No. 256; amended
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
East Hill Road
Montgomery Drive South Twin Oak Drive
Morelli Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Pearce Mill Road
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Emerald Fields Drive
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Franklin Road
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Minnock Drive
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:972
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East South Ridge Drive
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Emerald Fields Drive
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
West
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Franklin Road
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Minnock Drive
Mt. Pleasant Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West South Ridge Drive
Mulkerrin Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Tullamore Trail
Murrin Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Pinkerton Road
Myrtle Court [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
West Ivy Drive
Nathan Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
West Lloydmont Drive
Nicolas Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Swinderman Road
Northbrook Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Babcock Boulevard
North Chapel Drive [Repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Chapel Drive [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
North Pine Circle [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Babcock Boulevard
North Wind Court [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
East Logan Road
Oakhaven Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
East Drake Drive
Oakhaven Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Hill Road
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:973
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Oak Park Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
Southeast Warrendale Road
Oak Ridge Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Tamarack Drive
Old Babcock Road West Babcock Boulevard
Old Perry Highway [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Route 19
Old Perry Highway [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
West Bradford Road
Old State Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Babcock Boulevard
Old State Road North/South Bakerstown Road
Old State Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Gibsonia Road
Osprey Court [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Blue Heron Drive
Oxford Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
South Willowcrest Drive
Palomino Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Babcock Boulevard
Park Plaza [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Village Place (southern)
Park Plaza [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Garden Way
Park Plaza [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Village Place (southern)
Park Plaza [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Village Place (northern)
Park Plaza [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Village Run Road
Park Plaza East [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Village Place
Parkview Drive [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
North Wexford Road
Parkview Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
South Salem Heights Drive
Patrick's Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Minnock Drive
Patsy Drive West Old State Road
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:974
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pearce Mill Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Warrendale Road
Pearce Mill Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Peregrine Court [Added
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
West Condor Lane
Pikemont Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Gateway Avenue
Pine Cone Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Oakhaven Drive
Pine Hollow Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Wallace Road
Pinehurst Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East/West Bay Hill Drive
Pine Meadow Drive (connector)
[Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
South Wallace Road Extension
Pine Park Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Pearce Mill Road
Pine Park Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
West Warrendale Road
Pine View Drive Northwest Brown Road
Pine Wood Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North English Farm Drive
Pine Wood Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Cedar Wood Drive
Pine Wood Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Cedar Wood Drive
Pinkerton Road [Amended
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
East Warrendale Road
Pinkerton Road [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Scarlet Circle
Pinnacle Court [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Rabold Drive
Pinyon Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Logan Road
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:975
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pinyon Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Pinecrest Court
Pleasant Ridge Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Golden Grove Drive
Pleasant Ridge Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Southwest Mt. Pleasant Road
Ponderosa Court [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
North/South Ivy Drive
Ponderosa Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South White Pine Drive
Potomac Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Lloydmont Drive
Quail Court [Added 5-3-1999 by
Ord. No. 267; repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Rabold Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
East Greenwood Drive
Rabold Drive [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
West Warrendale Road
Raptor Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Egret Drive
Redbud Court [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Pinecrest Court
Red Tail Lane [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
West Treesdale Drive
Reynolds Road North Wexford Road
Richard Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Brown Road
Rolling Green Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
East Wexford Plaza Drive
Rosecliff Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Fairgate Drive
Rosecliff Drive [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
West Fairgate Drive
Rosscommon Road [Added
2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
North Bonnie View Drive
Rosscommon Road South Maple Drive
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:976
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Route 910 [Added 5-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 231; repealed
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Salem Heights Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Northwest Heights Drive
Salem Lane [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
East Parkview Drive
Scarlet Circle [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
East Pinkerton Road
Scotch Pine Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East White Pine Drive
Shadow Glen Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Christopher Wren Drive
Shady Lane [Added 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 370]
West Brennan Road
Shelley Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Rosecliff Drive
Shelley Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Fairgate Drive
Silver Oak Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North South Lake Drive
Silver Pines Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Babcock Boulevard
Silver Ridge Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Silver Pines Drive
Simmons Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
North Old State Road
Skylark Drive East Babcock Boulevard
Snowberry Lane [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Babcock Boulevard
South Chapel Drive [Amended
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Wexford Road
South Chapel Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West American Way
South Lake Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East South Lake Drive
South Lake Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
North Warrendale Road
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:977
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
South Lake Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256;
amended 2-5-2001 by Ord. No.
288]
North/South Tree Line Drive
Southridge Drive [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 323]
South Mt. Pleasant Road
Spring House Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Old State Road
Spruce Haven Drive West Hill Road
St. James Court [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
South Tierra Vista Drive
Stirling Lane [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Mars Valencia Road
Stonecrest Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Clover Lane
Stonehaven Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southeast Karrington Drive
Stonewood Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
North Bradford Drive
Stonewood Drive [Added
7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 292]
North/South Stonewood East Drive
Stonewood East Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
East Stonewood Drive
Stonewood East Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
West Perry Highway
Summer Place [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
North Logan Road
Summer Place [Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 323]
South Langdon Drive
Summit Circle [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South Heights Drive
Swinderman Road [Amended
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Swinderman Road [Amended
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
West Route 19
Tanglewood Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
North Tanglewood Drive (north
of park)
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:978
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Tanglewood Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
South Tanglewood Drive (south
of Park)
Tanglewood Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
South Wallace Road
Terrywood Lane [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
South Bakerstown Road
Tierra Vista Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
East/West Ivy Drive
Tierra Vista Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Northeast Babcock Boulevard
Timothy Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Logan Road
Tor Circle [Added 5-15-1995 by
Ord. No. 231]
East Heights Drive
Towne Centre Boulevard [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East Village Club Drive
Towne Centre Boulevard [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East/West Market Lane
Towne Centre Boulevard [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
East/West Unnamed parking lot
lane
Towne Centre Boulevard [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Route 19
Tree Line Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256;
amended 2-5-2001 by Ord. No.
288]
East/West South Lake Drive
Tree Line Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
West Pearce Mill Road
Treesdale Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
South Warrendale Road
Trillium Court [Added 5-15-1995
by Ord. No. 231]
East Pinkerton Road
Tullamore Trail [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Minnock Drive
Twin Oak Drive West Wallace Road
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:979
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Village Club Drive [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267;
repealed 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Village Club Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Village Run Road
Village Club Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Village Run Road
Village Club Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
South Wexford Bayne Road
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
East Park Plaza
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Garden Court
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Northeast Park Plaza
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
South Village Club Drive
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Garden Court
Village Place [Added 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Southeast Village Club Drive
Wallace Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Warrendale Road
Wallace Road [Repealed
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 267]
Washington Street [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southeast Cloverdale Drive
Washington Street [Added
12-18-1991 by Ord. No. 195]
West Broadway Street
Washington Street [Repealed
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Belmere Road [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West Pikemont Drive
Westergreen Lane [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North Maple Drive
West Grove Circle [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South West Grove Drive
West Grove Court [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southwest West Grove Drive
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-9
134:980
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
West Grove Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
East Treesdale Drive
West Grove Lane [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southwest West Grove Trace
West Grove Place [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Northeast West Grove Drive
West Grove Trace [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Southeast West Grove Drive
West Grove Trace [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Mars Road
West Grove Way [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South West Grove Drive
West Wildcherry Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Northwest Franklin Road
Wexford Plaza Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
North Brooker Drive
Wexford Plaza Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
North/South Rolling Green Drive
Wexford Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Babcock Boulevard
Wexford Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Church Road
Wexford-Bayne Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
East Church Road
Whetherburn Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
East/West/
South
Whetherburn Drive
(northern fork and
southern fork)
Whetherburn Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
South Lyndhurst Circle
Whippoorwill Hill Road
[Amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
West Old State Road
White Pine Drive [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
North/South Jack Pine Court
White Pine Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231;
amended 10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
South Wexford Road
White Pine Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
South White Pine Drive
§ 138-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-9
134:981
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Wild Cherry Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
East Franklin Road
Wild Cherry Court [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
West East Wild Cherry Drive
Willet Drive [Added 9-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 323]
West Blue Heron Drive
Willow Creek Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
North Fairway Drive
Willowcrest Drive [Added
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
West Karrington Drive
Windwood Drive [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
West Warrendale Road
Wood Haven Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256;
amended 5-3-1999 by Ord. No.
267]
East Hill Road
Wynfield Court [Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
North Wynstone Drive
Wynstone Drive [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 288]
East English Road
Wynstone Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 256]
South Whetherburn Drive
§ 138-10. Yield intersections. [Amended 2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162;
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
Yield signs within the Township shall be located as follows:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Timothy Road Northwest Buckwheat Drive
§ 138-11. Through streets. [Amended 2-1-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
No through-street signs within the Township shall be located as follows:
Street At Intersection of
Bonnie View Drive Route 19
Irwin Road [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Wexford Road
Jackson Road [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
Babcock Boulevard
§ 138-9 PINE CODE § 138-11
134:982
Street At Intersection of
Limerick Road [Amended 10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 246]
Wexford-Bayne Road
Logan Road [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Babcock Boulevard
Logan Road [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
370]
Pearce Mill Road
MacLeod Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
Babcock Boulevard
Maple Drive Route 19
Oak Park Drive [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
Warrendale Road
§ 138-12. Parking prohibited.
Parking is hereby prohibited on the following locations in the Township:
A. Any Township park from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., prevailing time.
[Amended 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
B. The cartway of any Township street, drive or road in any manner which
impedes free flow of traffic or hinders ingress or egress of fire, police or
other emergency vehicles.
C. Along any Township street, drive or road where no-parking signs are
posted.
D. Within 24 hours after a snowfall or parking in any manner or at any
times which interfere in any manner with the Township's winter road
maintenance program, on any street, drive, road or highway within the
Township.
E. No parking or stopping on the berm of Route 19 where no-parking or
no-stopping signs are posted.
F. Babcock Boulevard, Buckwheat Drive, Clover Lane, Logan Road,
Timothy Road, and Warrendale Road, only between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any Friday night in September, October, and
November on which the athletic stadium located at the Pine-Richland
High School Complex is being utilized for football games. [Added
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 297]
G. At all times upon the surface of a sidewalk located along any public
street, drive, road, or highway in the Township of Pine, regardless of
whether "no parking" signs are posted along such public street, drive,
road, or highway. It shall also be prohibited to park any motor vehicle
upon the surface of any public, pedestrian trail at all times. [Added
9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 305]
§ 138-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-12
134:983
§ 138-12.1. Placement or storage of materials or equipment
prohibited. [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
No placement or storage of materials or equipment of any kind (including
but not limited to construction vehicles, whether motorized or
nonmotorized, or related equipment) which impedes the flow of traffic
or hinders ingress or egress in any manner shall be permitted upon any
Township street, drive, or road.
§ 138-13. Speed limits.
The following speed limits on the roads designated shall be the maximum
which vehicles shall be permitted to travel:
H. At all times upon the following designated fire lanes in the below-stated
locations: [Added 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
Location Fire Lane Designation
Oxford Athletic Club Along Village Club Drive; along main
entrance; along all drive aisles, and all
areas not specifically delineated as parking
spaces
Pine Richland High
School
Along sidewalk at main entrance of school
and at the administration entrance and
entire access road that enters the campus
Pine Richland Middle
School
Along sidewalk of main entrance of school
and at the administration entrance and
entire access road that enters the campus
Pine Tree Shops Front road along storefronts and entire
rear access area
Wexford Elementary
School
Along sidewalk of main entrance area, and
along bus side parking lot beside sidewalk
Wexford Plaza Along west side in front of stores; along
north side of building; and along the east
side at the rear of the stores
Wexford Volunteer Fire
Company (11041 Babcock
Boulevard)
In front of both garage doors, including
concrete pad area
Wexford Volunteer Fire
Company (228 North
Chapel Drive)
In front of both building side garage doors,
including concrete pad area and along
entire access road travel lanes
§ 138-12 PINE CODE § 138-13
134:984
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All streets, drives and
roads
25 All recorded residential plans
Babcock Boulevard
[Added 2-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 162]
35 From the dividing line between
Pine Township and McCandless
Township to the dividing line
between Pine Township and
Valencia Borough
Bonnie View Drive 25 From the intersection with Route
19 to the intersection with
Limerick Road
Broadway Street 25 From the intersection with
Washington Street to the
intersection with Meadcrest
Street
Brown Road
[Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
25 From its intersection with Route
19 to where it joins Kummer
Road
Brown Road [Added
12-4-1995 by Ord.
No. 240
15 Designated school zone area (by
signage), from its intersection
with McKinney Road to a point
300 feet west of school property
on Mondays through Fridays,
8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Church Road 25 From its intersection with Route
19, north, to the intersection with
Route 19, south
Dean Road [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
25 From the intersection with
Warrendale Road to the Pine
Township line
Emmet Road [Repealed 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246]
Emmett Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
25 From the intersection with
Lyndhurst Circle to the
intersection with English Road
English Road 25 From the intersection with
Wallace Road to the intersection
with Graham Road
Gibsonia Road 35 From the Richland Township line
to Babcock Boulevard
Killarney Drive 25 From the intersection with
Wexford Bayne Road to where it
joins Limerick Road
§ 138-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-13
134:985
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Limerick Road 25 From the intersection with
Wexford Bayne Road to where it
joins Killarney Drive
Logan Road [Added
12-4-1995 by Ord.
No. 240]
15 Designated school zone area (by
signage), from its intersection
with Timothy Road to its
intersection with Babcock
Boulevard on Mondays through
Fridays, 7:15 a.m. to 2:45 p.m.
Lyndhurst Circle
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
25 From the intersection with
Wexford Road into the
development known as North
Park Manor
Manor Road 25 From the intersection with Route
19 to the intersection with
Brennan Road
Maple Drive 25 From the intersection with Route
19 to the end of Maple Drive
McKinney Road 25 From the intersection with Brown
Road to the intersection with
Kumer Road
Mt. Pleasant Road 25 From the intersection with
Franklin Road to the intersection
with Dean Road
North Pine Circle
Drive
25 From the intersection with
Babcock Boulevard, south, to
where it joins Babcock
Boulevard, north
Old Babcock Boulevard 25 From the intersection with
Babcock Boulevard to the
McCandless Township line
Pearce Mill Road
[Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
45 From Wexford Road north to the
intersection with Warrendale
Road
Roscommon Road 25 From the intersection with
Bonnie View Drive to the
intersection with Maple Drive
Route 19 [Amended
5-4-1987 by Ord. No.
155; 2-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 162]
40 From the dividing line between
Pine Township and Marshall
Township to the intersection of
Route 19 and Route 910
§ 138-13 PINE CODE § 138-13
134:986
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Route 19 [Added
5-4-1987 by Ord. No.
155]
35 From the intersection of Route 19
and Route 910 to the southern
Township line
Twin Oak Drive 25 From the intersection with
Wallace Road, north, to the
intersection with Wallace Road,
south
Wexford Road
[Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 246]
35 From Babcock Boulevard west to
the intersection with Church
Road
Wexford-Bayne Road
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 246]
35 From the intersection with
Church Road and Wexford Road
west to the Marshall Township
line
§ 138-14. Weight limits. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 331]
A. All roads, drives, streets and places designated as official Township
roads, excepting those specifically designated in Subsection B of this
§ 138-14, shall be limited to vehicles having a maximum total weight,
including any load carried by the vehicle, of five tons (10,000 pounds).
School busses, emergency vehicles, and vehicles making local pickups
and deliveries shall be exempt from the maximum weight limit imposed
in this Subsection A of § 138-14; provided, however, that in the case of
overweight vehicles making local pickups and deliveries, such vehicles
shall be exempt only when utilizing a course of travel that results in the
shortest available route upon roads restricted by the maximum weight
limit imposed herein. The Township of Pine shall not refuse to issue a
permit for use of its roads by vehicles in excess of the within stated
weight limit if there is no reasonable alternate route (defined as a route
which meets the criteria therefore as established in regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation relating to traffic and
engineering studies) available.
B. The below-named Township roads (or below specified portions thereof)
shall be limited to vehicles having a total weight, including any load
carried by the vehicle, as specified herein below:
§ 138-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-14
134:987
Road
Area of Vehicle Weight
Restriction
Maximum
Vehicle Weight
Dean Road Entire length 3 tons (6,000
pounds)
English Road From its intersection with
Wallace Road to its intersection
with Wyndstone Drive
3 tons (6,000
pounds)
Logan Road Entire length 3 tons (6,000
pounds)
McKinney Road From its intersection with
Brown Road to its intersection
with Kummer Road
3 tons (6,000
pounds)
Mt. Pleasant
Road
From its intersection with
South Ridge Drive to its
intersection with Dean Road
3 tons (6,000
pounds)
Mt. Pleasant
Road
From its intersection with
Franklin Road to its
intersection with South Ridge
Drive
12 tons (24,000
pounds)
Old State Road Entire length 3 tons (6,000
pounds)
C. The Township of Pine and/or its police are hereby authorized to use all
weight measurement devices approved by any agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine the weight of vehicles.
D. Signs publicizing the vehicle weight limitations specified in Subsection
B of this § 138-14 shall hereafter be erected and maintained within 25
feet of each end of the portion of roadway so restricted. In the case of
any restriction which does not begin or end at an intersection with an
unrestricted road, an advance informational sign shall be placed at the
intersection nearest each end of the restricted portion of such road.
E. School busses, emergency vehicles and vehicles making local pickups
and deliveries shall be exempt from the maximum weight limits
imposed herein; provided, however, that in the case of overweight
vehicles making local pickups and deliveries, such vehicles shall be
exempt only when utilizing a course of travel that results in the shortest
available route upon roads restricted by the maximum weight limit
imposed herein.
F. The Township of Pine shall not refuse to issue a permit for use of the
roads specified in Subsection B of this § 138-14 by vehicles in excess of
the respective, above-stated weight limits if there is no reasonable
alternate route (defined as a route which meets the criteria therefor as
established in regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation relating to traffic and engineering studies) available.
§ 138-14 PINE CODE § 138-15
134:988
§ 138-15. U-turns.
U-turns are not permitted on any highway, street or roadway in Pine
Township where "no U-turn" signs are posted.
§ 138-16. Electronic signal control system. [Added 4-3-1989 by Ord.
No. 175]
All new traffic signals installed within the Township shall be equipped with
an electronic signal control system for use in emergency situations. Such
a system shall be designed to permit emergency vehicles to electronically
change the traffic signals to permit safe passage through signalized
intersections. Unauthorized use of this system, or use in other than
emergency situations, will constitute a violation of this chapter, and
violators will be subject to the violations and penalties provisions of § 138-8
of this chapter.
§ 138-17. Turns prohibited. [Added 5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 231]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle traveling upon the
below, first-named road, in the direction or directions and during the times
hereby indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn at the
intersection with the below, second-named road, as hereinbelow specified:
Name
of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection of
Aspen Road
[Repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
Church Road
[Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288;
repealed 6-2-2014
by Ord. No. 370]
Church Road
[Added 2-5-2001
by Ord. No. 288]
North Right (onto
southbound
S.R. 19)
All Manor Road/
Church Road/
S.R. 19
Limerick Road
[Amended
10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 246]
North Left All Wexford-Bayne
Road
Manor Road [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 288; repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
§ 138-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED § 138-17
134:989
Name
of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection of
Manor Road [Added
2-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 288; repealed
6-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 370]
Wexford-Bayne Road
[Amended
10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 246]
East Right Between
4:00 p.m.
and 7:00
p.m. only
Limerick Road
§ 138-18. School Zones. [Added 12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 240]
The below-described portions of the following roads shall be designated and
conspicuously posted with appropriate signs as "school zones" with a speed
limit of 15 miles per hour during the times below indicated:
Name of
Street Hours/Days Location
Brown Road 8:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From its intersection with
McKinney Road to a point 300
feet west of the school
property
Logan Road 7:15 a.m. to 2:45
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From its intersection with
Timothy Road to its
intersection with Babcock
Boulevard
§ 138-19. Official Road Map. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 246;
amended 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 370]
All currently existing roads, streets, avenues, highways, drives, lanes, ways,
and alleys within the Township of Pine, whether public or private, are
located, identified, named, and shown on the hereinafter referenced map,
which map is incorporated in and made a part of this chapter. Such map,
dated March 1, 2014 (or any subsequently revised edition thereof), is
hereby designated as the Township of Pine's "Official Road Map." The
Official Road Map and all the notations, references and other information
shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and
effect as if the Official Road Map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. The
original of such Official Road Map is property attested and is on file in the
office of the Township Manager.
§ 138-17 PINE CODE § 138-19
134:990
Chapter 140
WARRANTLESS ARRESTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 94.
§ 140-1. Guidelines established.
The following guidelines are established as the policy of the Joint Police
Force of the Township of Pine, the Township of Marshall and the Borough of
Bradfordwoods.
§ 140-2. Procedure following arrest.
Any officer making an arrest under these guidelines shall also follow those
procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and,
in particular, Rule 71, said Rule currently providing as follows:
A. Pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, effective January 17, 1996, a police
officer shall, upon view, have the right to arrest, without a warrant,
upon probable cause, when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the
personal security of any person or endangers public or private property.
B. If a police officer of the Joint Police Force of Township of Pine, the
Township of Marshall and the Borough of Bradfordwoods have probable
cause to believe that there is a violation of one of the four offenses listed
below, that the defendant's conduct is ongoing, that the conduct
constituting the crime is based upon the police officer's view of the
conduct, and if the conduct imperils the personal security of any person
or endangers public or private property, the officer shall have the right
to arrest a defendant without a warrant.
C. These guidelines shall only apply to the following summary offenses
pursuant to Title 18 Pa.C.S.A.:
(1) Section 5503, Disorderly conduct.
(2) Section 5505, Public drunkenness.
(3) Section 5507, Obstructing highways and other public passages.
(4) Section 6308, Purchase, consumption, possession or transportation
of liquor or malt or brewed beverages.
A. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the defendant
shall be either released from custody pursuant to Subsection B or taken
before the proper issuing authority under Subsection C; and
B. Release from custody.
§ 138-19 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 140-2
140:991
§ 140-3. Amendment of statute.
The municipalities recognize that Rule 71 and 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 may be
amended from time to time. It is the intention of the municipalities that
the police officers follow the terms of the rule or statute that is currently
in effect as of the date of the arrest, whether or not the guidelines have
formally been amended to comply with any rule or statute changes.
(1) When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
arresting officer may, when the officer deems it appropriate,
promptly release the defendant from custody when the following
conditions have been met:
(a) The defendant is a resident of the Commonwealth;
(b) The defendant poses no threat of immediate physical harm to
any other person or to himself or herself;
(c) The arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
the defendant will appear as required; and
(d) The defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing
authority.
(2) A citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of release
and, thereafter, the case shall proceed in accordance with
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedural Rules 55 to 59 as if the
proceedings had been instituted by issuing a citation to the
defendant.
C. When a defendant has not been released from custody under
Subsection B, the defendant shall be taken, without unnecessary delay,
before the issuing authority, where a citation shall be filed against the
defendant. The defendant shall be given an immediate trial unless:
(1) The commonwealth is not ready to proceed, or the defendant
requests a postponement, and, in either event, the defendant shall
be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the
new date and hour fixed for trial; or
(2) The defendant's criminal records must be ascertained before trial,
as specifically required by statute, for purposes of grading the
offense charged, in which event the defendant shall be given the
opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the new date
and hour fixed for trial, which shall be after the issuing authority's
receipt of the required information.
§ 140-2 PINE CODE § 140-3
140:992
Chapter 141
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ 140-3 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 140-3
140:993

ARTICLE I
Water District No. 1
[Adopted 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 163]
§ 141-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the authority conferred upon the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Pine by Section 1609 of the Second Class Township Code, Act
of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended, (53 P.S. § 66609176), the Wexford
Acres Water District No. 1 is hereby created by the Township of Pine for
the purpose of entering into contracts, installing waterlines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said waterlines.
§ 141-2. District area designated. [Amended 5-2-1988 by Ord. No.
164; 9-6-1988 by Ord. No. 169]
The geographical area to be constituted the Wexford Acres Water District
No. 1 shall include those certain properties along Limerick Road in the
Township of Pine, designated as Lots 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27 and a portion of Lot 21 of the Wexford Acres Plan of Lots, as recorded in
Plan Book Volume 43, page 141, on September 20, 1948, in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. That portion of Lot 21
to be included within the Wexford Acres Water District No. 1 shall include
that parcel of property now or formerly of Joseph A. and Elizabeth S. Voll, as
conveyed to them by deed dated April 25, 1961, recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, at Deed Book Volume
4013, pages 45-48. A plan of the geographical area to be included within the
Wexford Acres Water District No. 1 shall also be on file at the Pine Township
Municipal Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal office
hours.
§ 141-3. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine are hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the Wexford Acres Water District No. 1, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor and the assessment of abutting
property owners in accordance with law, by means of an assessment
ordinance or by proceedings before the Board of Viewers of Allegheny
County.
§ 141-4. (Reserved)177
176. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67611.
177. Editor's Note: Former § 141-4, Connection of waterlines, was repealed 5-2-1958 by Ord.
No. 164.
§ 141-1 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-4
140:995

ARTICLE II
Mayfield Road Water District
[Adopted 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 174]
§ 141-5. Creation.
Pursuant to a petition filed by citizens and taxpayers owning property in
the Mayfield Road area of the Township, and acting upon the authority
conferred upon the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine by Section
1609 of the Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1,1933, P.L. 103, as
amended, (53 P.S. § 66609178), the Mayfield Road Water District is hereby
created by the Township of Pine for the purpose of entering into contracts,
installing waterlines and making assessments upon the property owners
abutting the said waterlines.
§ 141-6. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted the Mayfield Road Water District
shall include those properties located along Mayfield Road, Glendale Street,
Laurel Hill Street and High Oak Drive, Township of Pine, as designated
on Appendix 1, attached hereto and made a part hereof.179 A plan of the
geographic area to be included within the Mayfield Road Water District
shall also be on file at the Pine Township Municipal Building and may be
viewed and inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-7. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized
to do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including
the installation of waterlines within the Mayfield Road Water District, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor, and the assessment of abutting
property owners in accordance with law.
§ 141-8. Assessment of costs.
The costs of the construction of the waterline are legally chargeable upon
the properties benefited, improved or accommodated thereby, and such
properties will be assessed at a rate not to exceed 100% of the cost of said
waterline project.
178. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67611.
179. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township and may be examined there during
regular business hours.
§ 141-5 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-8
140:997

ARTICLE III
Conrad Drive Water District
[Adopted 4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 202]
§ 141-9. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition180 filed by citizens and taxpayers owning property
fronting upon Conrad Drive in the Township of Pine and acting upon the
authority conferred upon the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
by Section 1609 of the Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended (53
P.S. § 66609181), the Conrad Drive Water District is hereby created by the
Township of Pine for the purpose of entering into construction contracts,
installing waterlines and making assessments upon the property owners
abutting said waterlines and benefiting therefrom.
§ 141-10. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted the Conrad Drive Water District shall
include those properties (16 lots) fronting on Conrad Drive in the Township
of Pine, as designated by their lot and block number taken from Allegheny
County real estate tax records and as set forth in Appendix 2, attached
hereto and made a part hereof.182 A plan of the geographic area to be
included within the Conrad Drive Water District shall also be on file at the
Pine Township Municipal Building and may be viewed and inspected during
normal office hours.
§ 141-11. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including but
not limited to the installation of waterlines within the Conrad Drive Water
District, the entering into necessary contracts therefor and the assessment
of abutting property owners in accordance with law.
§ 141-12. Assessment of costs; statutory authority.
The costs of the construction and engineering of the waterline are legally
chargeable upon the properties accommodated, improved or benefited
thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed in accordance with the
Assessment of Benefit Rule, at a rate not to exceed 100% of the total cost of
said waterline project.
§ 141-13. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
180. Editor's Note: Said petition is on file in the Township offices.
181. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67611.
182. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-9 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-13
140:999
§ 141-14. Payment; late penalty.
All such above assessments shall be payable forthwith to the Township
Manager. Any owner of property so assessed shall have the additional
option of paying the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with an
annual interest rate of 6% paid in the following manner:
A. Whenever the construction of the waterlines within the Conrad Drive
Water District has been completed and approved by the Pine Township
Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs of the
construction of the waterline project, the Supervisors shall petition the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County for the appointment of
Viewers to assess each property accommodated, improved or benefited
by the construction of said waterline.
B. The Viewers so appointed shall assess the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited by the construction of the waterline; provided,
however, that the aggregate of such assessments shall not exceed the
total construction and engineering costs of the waterline project.
C. Upon the filing of the Report of Viewers with the Court of Common
Pleas in accordance with Section 511 of the Eminent Domain Code,183
assessment bills based upon such report shall be prepared by the
Township and signed by the Chairman and attested by the Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors.
D. After 30 days have expired from the date of filing of the report of the
Board of Viewers with the Court of Common Pleas, the Township shall
serve the assessment bills upon the owner or owners of such properties
who have not filed timely exceptions to such report, by certified mail,
return receipt requested. If such owner or owners cannot be found
within the Township, said notice may be served upon any agent or party
in possession of the premises, or posted on the most public part of the
assessed premises.
A. The first installment shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the
assessment bill, and each of the two remaining annual installments,
with interest thereon, shall be payable on the same day and month of
each of the two succeeding years.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner or owners to exercise such
installment option shall be filed, in writing, with the Township Manager
no later than at the time payment of the first such installment is due.
C. A municipal lien shall be duly filed by the Township of Pine, in
accordance with applicable law, against the affected properties and
owner for the amount of the remaining installments of the assessment,
which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as the installments are duly
paid in accordance with these provisions: Upon default on the payment
183. Editor's Note: See 26 P.S. § 1-511.
§ 141-13 PINE CODE § 141-14
140:1000
§ 141-15. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment within 30 days from receipt of the assessment bill,
the Township shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with applicable law,
against the affected properties and owner, also claiming interest thereon
at the rate of 6% per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of
such assessment bill. The Township Manager shall certify to the Township
Solicitor all unpaid assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file
municipal claims against the property or properties and owner or owners
upon which such assessments shall have been made. The Township Solicitor
shall thereupon proceed to collect the assessment under the general law
relating to the collection of municipal claims, including, if so directed by the
Township, the filing and prosecution of civil suits.
of a current installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against
such installment, and, upon default in the payment of more than one
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid
balance.
§ 141-14 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-15
140:1001

ARTICLE IV
Patsy and Dennis Drives Water District
[Adopted 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 205]
§ 141-16. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
property fronting upon Patsy Drive and Dennis Drive in the Township of
Pine and acting upon the authority conferred by law upon the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine, the Patsy and Dennis Drives Water
District is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the purpose of
entering into construction contracts, installing waterlines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said waterlines and
benefiting therefrom, said assessments to be in equal shares.
§ 141-17. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted the Patsy and Dennis Drives Water
District shall include those properties (11 lots) fronting on Patsy Drive and
upon Dennis Drive in the Township of Pine, as designated by their lot and
block number taken from Allegheny County real estate tax records and as
set forth on Appendix 2,184 attached hereto and made a part hereof. A plan
of the geographic area to be included within the Patsy and Dennis Drives
Water District shall also be on file at the Pine Township Municipal Building
and may be viewed and inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-18. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including but not
limited to the installation of waterlines within the Patsy and Dennis Drives
Water District, the entering into necessary contracts therefor and the equal
assessment of abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions
of the taxpayers' petition (Appendix 1185) and applicable law.
§ 141-19. Assessment of costs; notice.
The costs of the construction and engineering of the waterline are legally
chargeable upon the properties accommodated, improved or benefited
thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at a rate not to exceed
100% of the total cost (construction and engineering) of said waterline
project, with each such property being assessed in an equal amount as per
the agreement of the petitioners as set forth in their petition (Appendix 1
hereto).186
184. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
185. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
186. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-16 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-20
140:1003
§ 141-20. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-21. Payment; late penalty.
All such above assessments shall be payable forthwith to the Township
Manager. Any owner of property so assessed shall have the additional
option of paying the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with an
annual interest rate of 6% paid in the following manner:
A. Whenever the construction of the waterlines within the Patsy and
Dennis Drives Water District has been completed and approved by the
Pine Township Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for
costs of the construction of the waterline project, the Supervisors shall
assess the properties accommodated, improved or benefited by the
construction of the waterline for the construction and engineering costs
there of; provided, however, that the aggregate of such assessments
shall not exceed the total construction and engineering costs of the
waterline project and the properties shall be assessed equally in
accordance with the agreement of the petitioners as set forth in their
petition (attached hereto as Appendix 1).187
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
A. The first installment shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the
assessment bill, and each of the two remaining annual installments,
with interest thereon, shall be payable on the same day and month of
each of the two succeeding years.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner or owners to exercise such
installment option shall be filed, in writing, with the Township Manager,
no later than at the time payment of the first such installment is due.
C. A municipal lien shall be duly filed by the Township of Pine, in
accordance with applicable law, against the affected properties and
owner for the amount of the remaining installments of the assessment,
which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as the installments are duly
paid in accordance with these provisions: Upon default on the payment
of a current installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such
installment, and, upon default in the payment of more than one
187. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-20 PINE CODE § 141-21
140:1004
§ 141-22. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment within 30 days from receipt of the assessment bill,
the Township shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with applicable law,
against the affected properties and owner, also claiming interest thereon
at the rate of 6% per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of
such assessment bill. The Township Manager shall certify to the Township
Solicitor all unpaid assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file
municipal claims against the property or properties and owner or owners
upon which such assessments shall have been made. The Township Solicitor
shall thereupon proceed to collect the assessment under the general law
relating to the collecting of municipal claims, including, if so directed by the
Township, the filing and prosecution of civil suits.
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid
balance.
§ 141-21 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-22
140:1005

ARTICLE V
Northwood Farms Water District
[Adopted 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 222]
§ 141-23. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain property fronting upon Buckwheat Drive, Logan Road, Timothy
Road and Clover Lane in the Township of Pine, and acting upon the
authority conferred by applicable law, the Northwood Farms Water District
is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the purpose of entering into
contracts, installing public waterlines and making assessments upon the
property owners abutting said public waterlines. A copy of said petition is
attached hereto, incorporated herein and made a part hereof as Appendix
1.188
§ 141-24. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Northwood Farms Water
District shall include those properties fronting on Buckwheat Drive, Logan
Road, Timothy Road and Clover Lane, as designated and shown on the
plan designated as Appendix 2,189 attached hereto, incorporated herein and
made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic area to be included within the
Northwood Farms Water District shall also be on file at the Township of Pine
Municipal Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal office
hours.
§ 141-25. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the Northwood Farms Water District, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor and the assessment of abutting
property owners in accordance with law.
§ 141-26. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed
in accordance with the assessment of benefit rule, at a rate not to exceed
100% of the total such costs of said waterline project.
§ 141-27. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
188. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
189. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-23 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-27
140:1007
§ 141-28. Payment; installment option; late penalty.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township Manager. Any owner of property so assessed shall
have, at his or her option, the choice of paying the assessment in three
equal, annual installments, with the accrual of annual interest at the rate of
6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline has been completed and
approved by the Township Engineer and West View has presented its
final bill for costs of the construction of the waterline project, the
Supervisors shall petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County for the appointment of Viewers to assess each property
accommodated, improved or benefited by the construction of such
waterline.
B. The Viewers so appointed shall assess the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited by the construction of the waterline; provided,
however, that the aggregate of such assessments shall not exceed the
total construction, engineering and legal costs of the waterline project.
C. Upon the filing of the report of the Viewers with the Court of Common
Pleas, in accordance with Section 511 of the Eminent Domain Code,190
assessment bills based upon such report shall be prepared by the
Township and signed by the Chairman and attested by the Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors.
D. After 30 days have expired from the date of filing of the report of the
Board of Viewers with the Court of Common Pleas, the Township shall
serve the assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all such
properties who have not filed timely exceptions to such report, by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If such owner or owners cannot
be found within the Township, said notice may be served upon any
agent or a party in possession of the premises or posted on the most
public part of the assessed premises.
A. The first installment shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the
assessment bill, and each annual installment with interest thereon shall
be payable on the same day and month of each succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
190. Editor's Note: See 26 P.S. § 1-511.
§ 141-27 PINE CODE § 141-28
140:1008
§ 141-29. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within 30 days from receipt of the assessment
bill, the Township shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section
1612 of the Second Class Township Code,191 also claiming interest thereon
at the rate of 6% per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of
such assessment bill. The Township Manager shall certify to the Township
Solicitor all unpaid assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file
municipal claims against the property or properties upon which such
assessments shall have been made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon
proceed to collect the assessment under the general law relating to the
collection of municipal claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the
filing and prosecution of civil suits.
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
191. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 66612 was repealed by P.L. 350, No. 60. See now 53 P.S. § 67602 et
seq.
§ 141-28 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-29
140:1009

ARTICLE VI
Warrendale-Bakerstown Road at Brierly Road Water District
[Adopted 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 234]
§ 141-30. Creation.
Pursuant to the petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain property fronting upon Warrendale-Bakerstown Road and Brierly
Road in the Township of Pine and acting upon the authority conferred by
applicable law, the Warrendale-Bakerstown Road and Brierly Road Water
District is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the purpose of
entering into contracts, installing public waterlines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said public waterlines. A
copy of the said petition is attached hereto, incorporated herein and made
a part hereof as Appendix 1.192
§ 141-31. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Warrendale-Bakerstown Road
and Brierly Road Water District shall include those certain properties
fronting on Warrendale-Bakerstown Road and Brierly Road, as designated
and shown on the plan designated as Appendix 2,193 attached hereto,
incorporated herein and made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic
area to be included within the Warrendale-Bakerstown Road and Brierly
Road Water District shall also be on file at the Township of Pine Municipal
Building and may be viewed and inspected there during normal office hours.
§ 141-32. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized
to do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including
the installation of waterlines within the Warrendale-Bakerstown Road and
Brierly Road Water District, the entering into necessary contracts therefor
and the assessment of abutting property owners benefited thereby in
accordance with law.
§ 141-33. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the associated engineering and legal costs of
the waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed
in accordance with the assessment of benefit rule, at a rate not to exceed
100% of the total such costs of said waterline project.
§ 141-34. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
192. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
193. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-30 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-34
140:1011
§ 141-35. Payment; lien.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township Manager. Any owner of property so assessed shall
have, at his or her option, the choice of paying the assessment in three
equal, annual installments, with the accrual of annual interest at the rate of
6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline has been completed and
approved by the Township Engineer and West View has presented its
final bill for costs of the construction of the waterline project, the
Supervisors shall petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County for the appointment of viewers to assess each property
accommodated, improved or benefited by the construction of such
waterline.
B. The viewers so appointed shall assess the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited by the construction of the waterline; provided,
however, that the aggregate of such assessments shall not exceed the
total construction, engineering and legal costs of the waterline project.
C. Upon the filing of the Report of Viewers with the Court of Common
Pleas, in accordance with Section 511 of the Eminent Domain Code,194
assessment bills based upon such report shall be prepared by the
Township and signed by the Chairman and attested by the Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors.
D. After 30 days have expired from the date of filing of the report of the
Board of Viewers with the Court of Common Pleas, the Township shall
serve the assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all such
properties who have not filed timely exceptions to such report, by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If such owner or owners cannot
be found within the Township, said notice may be served upon any
agent or a party in possession of the premises or posted on the most
public part of the assessed premises.
A. The first installment shall be paid within 30 days from receipt of the
assessment bill and each annual installment with interest thereon shall
be payable on the same day and month of each succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at one time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
194. Editor's Note: See 26 P.S. § 1-511.
§ 141-34 PINE CODE § 141-35
140:1012
§ 141-36. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within 30 days from receipt of the assessment
bill, the Township shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section
1612 of the Second Class Township Code,195 also claiming interest thereon
at the rate of 6% per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of
such assessment bill. The Township Manager shall certify to the Township
Solicitor all unpaid assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file
municipal claims against the property or properties upon which such
assessments shall have been made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon
proceed to collect the assessment under the general law relating to the
collection of municipal claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the
filing and prosecution of civil suits.
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
195. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 66612 was repealed by P.L. 350, No. 60. See now 53 P.S. § 67602 et
seq.
§ 141-35 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-36
140:1013

ARTICLE VII
Old State Road Water District
[Adopted 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 141-37. Creation.
Pursuant to the petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain property fronting upon Old State Road in the Township of Pine,
and acting upon the authority conferred by applicable law, the Old State
Road Water District is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the
purpose of entering into contracts, installing public waterlines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said public waterlines.
The assessments shall be upon the petitioning property owners in equal
shares in proportion to the total costs as per the agreement in their petition
(Appendix 1 hereto196) or, failing such agreement, pursuant to the
proportion of each property's frontage upon the waterlines constructed with
the water district as set forth in § 141-42 hereof. A copy of said petition is
attached hereto, incorporated herein and made a part hereof as Appendix
1.197
§ 141-38. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Old State Road Water District
shall include those properties fronting on Old State Road, as designated
and shown on the plan designated as Appendix 2,198 attached hereto,
incorporated herein and made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic area
to be included within the Old State Road Water District shall also be on
file at the Township of Pine Municipal Building and may be viewed and
inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-39. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized
to do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including
the installation of waterlines within the Old State Road Water District, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor and the assessment of abutting
property owners in accordance with the provisions of the taxpayers' and
citizens' Petition and/or applicable law.
§ 141-40. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at
a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said waterline project,
with each such property being assessed in an equal amount in proportion
196. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
197. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
198. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-37 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-40
140:1015
to such total costs as per the agreement of the Petitioners as set forth in
their Petition (attached hereto as Appendix 1).199 In the event of the failure
of such agreement, then such assessments shall be in accordance to the
proportion of each property's frontage upon the waterlines constructed with
the water district as set forth in § 141-42 hereof.
§ 141-41. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-42. Assessments upon failure of agreement.
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline within the Old State Road
Water District has been completed and approved by the Township
Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs of the
construction of such waterline project, the supervisors shall assess the
properties accommodated, improved or benefited by the construction of
the waterline for the construction, engineering and legal costs thereof;
provided, however, that the aggregate of such assessments shall not
exceed the total construction, engineering and legal costs of the
waterline project and the properties shall be assessed equally in
proportion to such total costs in accordance with the agreement of the
petitioners as set forth in their petition (attached hereto as Appendix
1).200
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent: or party in possession of the
premises or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
A. In the event of the failure of the agreement of Petitioners for equal
assessments, then, in such event, assessments against abutting
property owners shall be made in proportion to each lot or piece of
land's frontage abutting on the waterlines constructed within the Old
State Road Water District, allowing for an equitable reduction in the
case of corner properties or unusually shaped properties or properties
abutting on more than one water main as allowed by Section 2612 of
the Second Class Township Code (53 P.S. § 67612). The aggregate of
such assessments shall not exceed the total construction, engineering
and legal costs of the waterline project.
B. Assessment bills based upon the formula for calculation set forth in this
section shall be prepared by the Township, signed by the Chairman and
199. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
200. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-40 PINE CODE § 141-42
140:1016
§ 141-43. Determination of assessment; appeal; assessment stayed.
Each lot or piece of ground abutting on the waterlines constructed within
the Old State Road Water District shall be assessed a portion of the total
costs thereof in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the
charge upon each lot or piece of ground shall be determined by the
Township's Board of Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The owner or
owners of each such property shall be notified of such assessment, provided
with a copy of this article and any additional ordinance or resolution
establishing the assessment and advised of their rights to petition the Court
of Common Pleas within three months of the levying of such assessments
to challenge such assessment and to request the appointment of a panel
of viewers to assess benefits to the properties involved pursuant to Section
2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code. Such notification
shall be made by the Township, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or, if such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the premises
or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises. Upon the
filing of any petition with the Court of Common Pleas challenging the
assessments and requesting the appointment of viewers to assess benefits,
the assessments made by the Township's Board of Supervisors and any
proceedings relating thereto shall be stayed pending disposition of such
petition by the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with Section 2613 (53
P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code.
§ 141-44. Payment; lien.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors and shall be
served upon the owner or owners of such property or properties in the
manner set forth in § 141-41 of this article.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed, in writing, with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
§ 141-42 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-44
140:1017
§ 141-45. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code,201 also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys,
fees.
and, upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a
penalty of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
201. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67614.
§ 141-44 PINE CODE § 141-45
140:1018
ARTICLE VIII
Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane Water District
[Adopted 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 260]
§ 141-46. Creation.
Pursuant to the petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain property fronting upon Fieldview Drive and Richard Lane in the
Township of Pine, and acting upon the authority conferred by applicable
law, the Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane Water District is hereby created by
the Township of Pine for the purpose of entering into contracts, installing
public waterlines and making assessments upon the property owners
abutting said public waterlines. The assessments shall be upon the
benefited property owners in equal shares in proportion to the total costs
(including engineering, legal, and construction) thereof. A copy of said
petition is attached hereto, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof as
Appendix 1.202
§ 141-47. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane
Water District shall include those properties fronting on Fieldview Drive
and Richard Lane and benefited by said waterline construction, as
designated and shown on the plan designated as Appendix 2,203 attached
hereto, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof. A plan of the
geographic area to be included within the Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane
Water District shall also be on file at the Township of Pine Municipal
Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-48. Installation of waterlines.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane Water
District, the entering into necessary contracts therefor, and the assessment
of abutting, benefited property owners in accordance with the provisions of
the taxpayers' and citizens' petition and/or applicable law.
§ 141-49. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at
a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said waterline project,
with each such property being assessed in an equal amount in proportion to
such total costs.
202. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
203. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-46 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-50
140:1019
§ 141-50. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-51. Determination of assessment; appeal; assessment stayed.
Each lot or piece of ground abutting on the waterlines constructed within
the Fieldview Drive/Richard Lane Water District shall be assessed an equal
portion of the total costs thereof in accordance with the provisions of this
article, and the charge upon each lot or piece of ground shall be determined
by the Township's Board of Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The
owner or owners of each such property shall be notified of such assessment,
provided with a copy of this article and any additional ordinance or
resolution establishing the assessment, and advised of their rights to
petition the Court of Common Pleas within three months of the levying
of such assessments to challenge such assessment and to request the
appointment of a panel of viewers to assess benefits to the properties
involved pursuant to Section 2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class
Township Code. Such notification shall be made by the Township by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or, if such owner or owners cannot be found
within the Township, said notice may be served upon any agent or party in
possession of the premises or posted on the most public part of the assessed
premises. Upon the filing of any petition with the Court of Common Pleas
challenging the assessments and requesting the appointment of viewers
to assess benefits, the assessments made by the Township's Board of
Supervisors and any proceedings relating thereto shall be stayed pending
disposition of such petition by the Court of Common Pleas in accordance
with Section 2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code.
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline within the Fieldview Drive/
Richard Lane Water District has been completed and approved by the
Township Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs
of the construction of such waterline project, the Supervisors shall
assess the properties accommodated, improved or benefited by the
construction of the waterline for the construction, engineering and
legal costs thereof; provided, however, that the aggregate of such
assessments shall not exceed the total construction, engineering and
legal costs of the waterline project and the properties shall be assessed
equally in proportion to such total costs.
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises, or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
§ 141-50 PINE CODE § 141-52
140:1020
§ 141-52. Payment; lien.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
§ 141-53. Unpaid costs to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code,204 also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
204. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67614.
§ 141-52 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-53
140:1021

ARTICLE IX
South Chapel Drive Water District
[Adopted 12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 286]
§ 141-54. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain properties fronting upon South Chapel Drive in the Township of
Pine, and acting upon the authority conferred by applicable law, the South
Chapel Drive Water District is hereby created by the Township of Pine
for the purpose of entering into contracts, installing public waterlines and
making assessments upon the property owners abutting said public
waterlines. The assessments shall be upon the benefited property owners
in equal shares in proportion to the total costs (including engineering,
legal and construction) thereof. A copy of said petition is attached hereto,
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as Appendix 1.205
§ 141-55. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the South Chapel Drive Water
District shall include those properties fronting on South Chapel Drive and
benefited by said waterline construction, as designated and shown on the
plan designated as Appendix 2,206 attached hereto, incorporated herein and
made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic area to be included within the
South Chapel Drive Water District shall also be on file at the Township of
Pine Municipal Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal
office hours.
§ 141-56. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the South Chapel Drive Water District, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor and the assessment of abutting,
benefited property owners in accordance with the provisions of the
taxpayers' and citizens' petition and/or applicable law.
§ 141-57. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at
a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said waterline project,
with each such property being assessed in an equal amount in proportion to
such total costs.
205. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
206. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-54 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-58
140:1023
§ 141-58. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-59. Determination of assessment; notice; appeals.
Each lot or piece of ground abutting on the waterlines constructed within
the South Chapel Drive Water District shall be assessed an equal portion
of the total costs thereof in accordance with the provisions of this article,
and the charge upon each lot or piece of ground shall be determined by the
Township's Board of Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The owner or
owners of each such property shall be notified of such assessment, provided
with a copy of this article and any additional ordinance or resolution
establishing the assessment and advised of their rights to petition the Court
of Common Pleas within three months of the levying of such assessments
to challenge such assessment and to request the appointment of a panel
of viewers to assess benefits to the properties involved pursuant to Section
2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code. Such notification
shall be made by the Township by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or, if such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the premises
or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises. Upon the
filing of any petition with the Court of Common Pleas challenging the
assessments and requesting the appointment of viewers to assess benefits,
the assessments made by the Township's Board of Supervisors and any
proceedings relating thereto shall be stayed pending disposition of such
petition by the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with Section 2613 (53
P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code.
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline within the South Chapel
Drive Water District has been completed and approved by the Township
Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs of the
construction of such waterline project, the Supervisors shall assess the
properties accommodated, improved or benefited by the construction of
the waterline for the construction, engineering and legal costs thereof;
provided, however, that the aggregate of such assessments shall not
exceed the total construction, engineering and legal costs of the
waterline project, and the properties shall be assessed equally in
proportion to such total costs.
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises, or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
§ 141-58 PINE CODE § 141-60
140:1024
§ 141-60. Payment; lien; late penalty.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
§ 141-61. Unpaid assessments to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code,207 also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
207. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 67614.
§ 141-60 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-61
140:1025

ARTICLE X
Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive, and Limerick Road Water
District
[Adopted 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 311]
§ 141-62. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain properties fronting upon Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive,
and Limerick Road in the Township of Pine, and acting upon the authority
conferred by applicable law, the Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive,
and Limerick Road Water District is hereby created by the Township of
Pine for the purpose of entering into contracts, installing public waterlines
and making assessments upon the property owners abutting said public
waterlines. The assessments shall be upon the benefited property owners
in equal shares in proportion to the total costs (including engineering,
legal, and construction) thereof. A copy of said petition is attached hereto,
incorporated herein, and made a part hereof as Appendix 1.208
§ 141-63. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Rosscommon Road, Bonnie
View Drive, and Limerick Road Water District shall include those properties
fronting on Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive, and Limerick Road and
benefited by said waterline construction, as designated and shown on the
plan designated as Appendix 2,209 attached hereto, incorporated herein, and
made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic area to be included within the
Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive, and Limerick Road Water District
shall also be on file at the Township of Pine Municipal Building and may be
viewed and inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-64. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive,
and Limerick Road Water District, the entering into necessary contracts
therefor, and the assessment of abutting, benefited property owners in
accordance with the provisions of the taxpayers' and citizens' petition and/
or applicable law.
§ 141-65. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at
a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said waterline project,
208. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
209. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-62 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-65
140:1027
with each such property being assessed in an equal amount in proportion to
such total costs.
§ 141-66. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-67. Determination of assessment; notice; appeals.
Each lot or piece of ground abutting on the waterlines constructed within
the Rosscommon Road, Bonnie View Drive, and Limerick Road Water
District shall be assessed an equal portion of the total costs thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and the charge upon each
lot or piece of ground shall be determined by the Township's Board of
Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The owner or owners of each such
property shall be notified of such assessment, provided with a copy of
this article and any additional ordinance or resolution establishing the
assessment, and advised of their rights to petition the Court of Common
Pleas within three months of the levying of such assessments to challenge
such assessment and to request the appointment of a panel of viewers to
assess benefits to the properties involved pursuant to Section 2613 (53 P.S.
§ 67613) of the Second Class Township Code. Such notification shall be
made by the Township by certified mail, return receipt requested, or, if such
owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said notice may be
served upon any agent or party in possession of the premises or posted
on the most public part of the assessed premises. Upon the filing of any
petition with the Court of Common Pleas challenging the assessments and
requesting the appointment of viewers to assess benefits, the assessments
made by the Township's Board of Supervisors and any proceedings relating
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline within the Rosscommon
Road, Bonnie View Drive, and Limerick Road Water District has been
completed and approved by the Township Engineer and West View has
presented its final bill for costs of the construction of such waterline
project, the Supervisors shall assess the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited by the construction of the waterline for the
construction, engineering and legal costs thereof; provided, however,
that the aggregate of such assessments shall not exceed the total
construction, engineering and legal costs of the waterline project and
the properties shall be assessed equally in proportion to such total
costs.
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of its Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises, or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
§ 141-65 PINE CODE § 141-67
140:1028
thereto shall be stayed pending disposition of such petition by the Court
of Common Pleas in accordance with Section 2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the
Second Class Township Code.
§ 141-68. Payment; lien; late payment.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
§ 141-69. Unpaid assessments to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code, also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
§ 141-67 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-69
140:1029

ARTICLE XI
Wood Haven Drive Water District
[Adopted 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 326]
§ 141-70. Creation.
Pursuant to said petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning
certain properties fronting upon Wood Haven Drive in the Township of Pine,
and acting upon the authority conferred by applicable law, the Wood Haven
Drive Water District is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the
purpose of entering into contracts, installing public waterlines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said public waterlines. The
assessments shall be upon the benefited property owners in equal shares in
proportion to the total costs (including engineering, legal, and construction)
thereof. A copy of said petition is attached hereto, incorporated herein, and
made a part hereof as Appendix 1.210
§ 141-71. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Wood Haven Drive Water
District shall include those properties fronting on Wood Haven Drive (or
having a right of access thereto) and/or improved, accommodated, or
benefited by said waterline construction, as designated and shown on the
plan designated as Appendix 2,211 attached hereto, incorporated herein, and
made a part hereof. A plan of the geographic area to be included within the
Wood Haven Drive Water District shall also be on file at the Township of
Pine Municipal Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal
office hours.
§ 141-72. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized to
do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including the
installation of waterlines within the Wood Haven Drive Water District, the
entering into necessary contracts therefor, and the assessment of abutting
and/or accommodated, improved or benefited properties and their owners
in accordance with the provisions of the taxpayers' and citizens' petition
and/or applicable law.
§ 141-73. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and the engineering and legal costs of the
waterlines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed at
a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said waterline project,
with each such property being assessed in an equal amount in proportion to
such total costs.
210. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
211. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-70 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-74
140:1031
§ 141-74. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting and/or benefited, accommodated, or
improved property owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-75. Determination of assessment; notice; appeals.
Each lot or piece of ground abutting on or benefited, accommodated or
improved by the waterlines constructed within the Wood Haven Drive Water
District shall be assessed an equal portion of the total costs thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and the charge upon each
lot or piece of ground shall be determined by the Township's Board of
Supervisors by ordinance or resolution. The owner or owners of each such
property shall be notified of such assessment, provided with a copy of this
article, and provided with copies of any additional ordinance or resolution
establishing the assessment. Such notification shall include advisement of
the rights of owners whose property valuation (as assessed for taxable
purposes within the water district) amounts to 50% of the total property
valuation so assessed or owners representing 50% of the parcels within the
water district to petition (pursuant to the statutory limitations contained in
Section 2613 of the Second Class Township Code) the Court of Common
Pleas within three months of the levying of such assessments to challenge
them and to request the appointment of viewers to assess benefits to
the properties involved pursuant to the aforementioned statute. Such
notification shall be made by the Township by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or, if such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township,
said notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises. Upon
the filing of a valid petition with the Court of Common Pleas, which satisfies
the minimum requirements for same set forth in Section 2613 (53 P.S.
A. Whenever the construction of the waterline within the Wood Haven
Drive Water District has been completed and approved by the Township
Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs of the
construction of such waterline project, the Supervisors shall assess the
properties abutting and/or accommodated, improved or benefited by
the construction of the waterline for the construction, engineering and
legal costs thereof; provided, however, that the aggregate of such
assessments shall not exceed the total construction, engineering and
legal costs of the waterline project and the properties shall be assessed
equally in proportion to such total costs.
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If such owner or owners cannot be found within the Township, said
notice may be served upon any agent or party in possession of the
premises, or posted on the most public part of the assessed premises.
§ 141-74 PINE CODE § 141-75
140:1032
§ 67613) of the Second Class Township Code, and which challenges the
assessments and requests the appointment of viewers to assess benefits,
the assessments made by the Township's Board of Supervisors and any
proceedings relating thereto shall be stayed pending disposition of such
petition by the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with the provisions of
the aforementioned statute.
§ 141-76. Payment; lien; late payment.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
§ 141-77. Unpaid assessments to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code,212 also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment,
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67612.
§ 141-75 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-77
140:1033

ARTICLE XII
Skylark Drive Water District
[Adopted 11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 388]
§ 141-78. Creation.
Pursuant to a petition filed by certain citizens and taxpayers owning certain
properties fronting upon Skylark Drive in the Township of Pine, and acting
upon the authority conferred by applicable law, the Skylark Drive Water
District is hereby created by the Township of Pine for the purpose of
entering into contracts, installing public main water lines and making
assessments upon the property owners abutting said public main water
lines. The assessments shall be upon each of the benefited lots or pieces
of ground in proportion to its frontage abutting on the water mains as
related to the total installation costs (including engineering, legal, and
construction) thereof. A copy of said petition is attached hereto,
incorporated herein, and made a part hereof as Appendix 1.213
§ 141-79. District area designated.
The geographic area to be constituted as the Skylark Drive Water District
shall include those properties fronting on Skylark Drive (or having a right of
access thereto) and/or improved, accommodated, or benefited by said main
water line construction, as designated and shown on the plan designated
as Appendix 2, attached hereto, incorporated herein, and made a part
hereof.214 A plan of the geographic area to be included within the Skylark
Drive Water District shall also be on file at the Township of Pine Municipal
Building and may be viewed and inspected during normal office hours.
§ 141-80. Authority of Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is hereby authorized
to do all acts necessary to carry out the terms of this article, including
installing or having installed main water lines within the Skylark Drive
Water District, the entering into necessary contracts therefor, and the
assessment of abutting and/or accommodated, improved or benefited
properties and their owners in accordance with the provisions of the
taxpayers' and citizens' petition and/or applicable law.
§ 141-81. Assessment of costs.
The costs of construction and also the engineering and legal costs of the
main water lines are legally chargeable upon the properties accommodated,
improved or benefited thereby, and such properties are hereby assessed
at a rate not to exceed 100% of the total such costs of said water line
project, with each such lot or piece of ground being assessed in proportion
to its frontage upon the water mains as related to such total costs. Such
213. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file in the Township offices.
214. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 141-78 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-81
140:1035
assessments shall allow for equitable reductions, as may be deemed to be
necessary, for corner properties, unusually shaped properties, or properties
abutting on more than one main, as the case may be.
§ 141-82. Procedure for assessment.
Assessments against abutting and/or benefited, accommodated, or
improved properties and their owners shall be made as follows:
§ 141-83. Determination of assessment; notice; appeals.
A. Whenever the construction of the water line within the Skylark Drive
Water District has been completed and approved by the Township
Engineer and West View has presented its final bill for costs of the
construction of such water line project, the Supervisors shall assess
each lot or piece of ground abutting and/or accommodated, improved or
benefited by the construction of the water line for the construction,
engineering and legal costs thereof; provided, however, that the
aggregate of such assessments shall not exceed the total construction,
engineering and legal costs of the water line project, and each of the
properties shall be assessed in proportion to its frontage abutting on
the water mains in relation to such total costs. Such assessments shall
allow for equitable reductions, as may be deemed to be necessary, for
corner properties, unusually shaped properties, or properties abutting
on more than one main, as the case may be.
B. Assessment bills based upon the procedure set forth in Subsection A of
this section shall be prepared by the Township of Pine and signed by the
Chairman and attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township shall forthwith serve the assessment bills upon the owner
or owners of each such lot or piece of ground by certified mail, return
receipt requested. If such owner or owners cannot be found within the
Township, said notice may be served upon any agent or party in
possession of the premises, or posted on the most-public part of the
assessed property.
A. Each lot or piece of ground abutting on or benefited, accommodated or
improved by the water lines constructed within the Skylark Drive Water
District shall be assessed a portion of the total costs thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and the charge upon each
lot or piece of ground shall be determined by the Township's Board of
Supervisors by ordinance or resolution.
B. The owner or owners of each such property shall be notified of such
assessment, provided with a copy of this article, and provided with
copies of any additional ordinance or resolution establishing the
assessment. Such notification shall include advisement of the rights of
owners whose property valuation (as assessed for taxable purposes
within the water district) amounts to 50% of the total property
valuation so assessed, or owners representing 50% of the parcels within
§ 141-81 PINE CODE § 141-83
140:1036
§ 141-84. Payment; lien; late payment.
Payment of all such above-described assessments shall be made payable
forthwith to the Township of Pine through its Township Manager. Any owner
of property so assessed shall have, at his or her option, the choice of paying
the assessment in three equal, annual installments, with the accrual of
annual interest at the rate of 6% per annum, paid in the following manner:
§ 141-85. Unpaid assessments to become lien; collection.
If any owner has not elected to pay by installments, and refuses or neglects
to pay such assessment in full within the time period set forth herein or
as provided by law following issuance of the assessment bill, the Township
shall file a municipal lien, in accordance with Section 1612 of the Second
Class Township Code, also claiming interest thereon at the rate of 6%
the water district, to file a petition (pursuant to the statutory limitations
contained in Section 2613 of the Second Class Township Code) in
the Court of Common Pleas within three months of the levying of
such assessments to challenge them and to request the appointment
of viewers to assess benefits to the properties involved pursuant to
the aforementioned statute. Such notification shall be made by the
Township by certified mail, return receipt requested, or, if such owner
or owners cannot be found within the Township, said notice may be
served upon any agent or party in possession of the premises or posted
on the most-public part of the assessed properties.
C. Upon the filing of a valid petition with the Court of Common Pleas,
which satisfies the minimum requirements for same set forth in Section
2613 (53 P.S. § 67613) of the Second Class Township Code, and which
challenges the assessments and requests the appointment of viewers to
assess benefits, the assessments made by the Township's Board of
Supervisors and any proceedings relating thereto shall be stayed
pending disposition of such petition by the Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned statute.
A. The first installment shall be due and payable within 60 days from
mailing of the assessment bill, and each annual installment with
interest thereon shall be payable on the same day and month of each
succeeding year.
B. Any notice of intention by the owner to exercise such installment option
shall be filed in writing with the Township Manager at the time of the
paying of the first installment.
C. A lien shall be duly filed in accordance with applicable law, for the
amount of the assessment, which lien shall not be prosecuted so long as
installments are duly paid. Upon default on the payment of a current
installment, a penalty of 5% shall be charged against such installment;
and upon default in the payment of more than one installment, a penalty
of 5% shall be charged on the entire unpaid balance.
§ 141-83 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 141-85
140:1037
per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of such assessment bill.
The Township Manager shall certify to the Township Solicitor all unpaid
assessments, and the Township Solicitor shall file municipal claims against
the property or properties upon which such assessments shall have been
made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect the
assessment under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Township, the filing and prosecution
of civil suits. If such civil suits are filed and prosecuted, the Township shall
assert a claim therein for costs of prosecution and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
§ 141-85 PINE CODE § 141-85
140:1038
Chapter 142
WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Attorney Fees — See Ch. 3. Water — See Ch. 141.
§ 142-1. Policies established.
It is resolved by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine that
its policies and procedures for the creation of water districts and for the
payment, assessment and collection of the costs and expenses of
construction of certain of the improvements related thereto shall include,
but not be limited to, the following.
§ 142-2. Statutory authority.
Except as otherwise may be provided herein, the Township of Pine shall
proceed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Second Class
Township Code (Article XXVI; 53 P.S. § 67601 et seq.).
§ 142-3. Request for establishment.
Upon the request, by written petition, of property owners representing at
least 51% of the property valuation (as such is assessed for real estate
tax purposes) of a defined area, the Board of Supervisors may provide
access to public water for the properties within such area through the
construction/extension of public main water lines and creation of a water
district therefor.
§ 142-4. Creation by ordinance.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish any water district by enactment of
an ordinance therefor.
§ 142-5. Dedication of right-of-way by owner.
Each property owner within a water district may be required to dedicate,
free of cost, a public right-of-way through such property to facilitate
installation of the main water line.
§ 142-6. Contract for construction or extension of water line.
The Board of Supervisors may authorize West View Water authority, in
accordance with such authority's established procedures, to bid and to
award the contract for the construction and/or extension of the main water
line to provide public water service to the water district. Alternatively, the
Board of Supervisors may elect to directly bid and award the contract and
§ 141-85 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § 142-6
142:1039
to construct such main water line pursuant to the established procedures of
the Township of Pine.
§ 142-7. Payment of costs and expenses.
§ 142-8. Connection to water line not required.
Property owners abutting on the main water line shall not be required by
the Township of Pine to connect thereto.
§ 142-9. Action by Board of Supervisors.
Petitions filed with the Township of Pine for creation of a water district and
the construction/extension of a main water line will be considered and acted
upon in the sole discretion of the Township's Board of Supervisors, and such
creation and construction shall be contingent upon the Township having
appropriate funds and/or financing available to it, as such is determined by
the Township's Board of Supervisors.
A. The Township of Pine shall make the initial payment of all necessary
costs and expenses for the main water line's construction, including
engineering and legal fees, but excluding any service connection fees
and/or construction of service lines for individual properties.
B. All property owners within the water district shall be thereafter
assessed by the Township of Pine for all such costs and expenses
previously paid by the Township in connection therewith by the use of
one of the two following methods:
(1) By proportion of a property's frontage abutting on the main water
line (allowing for an equitable reduction for corner properties or
those that are unusually shaped); or
(2) By an equal assessment on all properties abutting on the main
water line in proportion to the total costs and expenses paid by the
Township of Pine.
C. Any owner of property so assessed by the Township of Pine shall have
the choice, within 60 days from receipt of the assessment bill, of
thereafter paying the assessment immediately in full or, alternatively,
by payment in three equal, annual installments with interest applied at
the rate of 6% per annum.
D. A municipal lien shall be filed by the Township of Pine against all
properties within the water district for which the assessments are not
immediately paid in full in the amount of said assessment.
E. Any additional costs attributable solely to providing water service to
individual properties (i.e., service line, service connection fee, etc.) will
be paid directly by the property owner and shall not be the
responsibility of the Township of Pine.
§ 142-6 PINE CODE § 142-10
142:1040
§ 142-10. Attorneys fees.
Attorneys' fees incurred on all accounts referred to the Township's Solicitor
for enforcement and collection shall, if not collected in due course with
the debt as by voluntary agreement, be included in all claims (including
liens) filed on behalf of the Township of Pine in the course of enforcement,
including (if accrued before liening) in any claim originally filed with the
Prothonotary and in accordance with Ordinance No. 281 of the Township of
Pine.215
Appendix
Chapter A144
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 62.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 91.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 92.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 98.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 120.
Taxation — See Ch. 128.
§ A144-1. Fee schedule adopted; definitions; method of payment.
[Amended 5-6-1996 by Res. No. 506; 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 350;
amended in its entirety 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 363]
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, County of Allegheny,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereby adopts the fee schedule as
follows.
B. Wherever in this fee schedule the term “the actual costs incurred by the
Township” shall be utilized, it shall be defined as the actual costs and
expenses incurred by the Township of Pine concerning its processing of
applications for approval or for licensure of any type and, with regard to
applications or plans related to land development, subdivision of land,
or zoning of land, shall include (but not be limited to) costs incurred in
mailing and in publicly advertising notifications regarding same and
shall also include those costs incurred in connection with (but not
limited to) the following activities or other similar services, as
performed by the Township’s Engineer, Solicitor or its other
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Attorney Fees.
§ 142-10 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-1
142:1041
§ A144-2. Excavations and grading. [Amended 5-6-1996 by Res. No.
506; 5-21-2001 by Res. No. 628]
Application/review fees for Chapter 48, Excavations and Grading, are as
follows:
professional consultants, as billed to the Township at their normal rate
as charged to the Township for such services:
(1) Plan or application review;
(2) Report preparation and attendance time (including travel to and
from) at meetings (or parts thereof) at which such plans,
applications or reports are reviewed or considered;
(3) Research or information review; and
(4) Inspections.
C. Actual costs and expenses incurred by the Township which are required
to be paid or reimbursed by the applicant pursuant to the terms of this
fee schedule or other provision of the Code of the Township of Pine shall
be timely provided to the applicant by itemized documentation of the
same and such costs and expenses shall be paid/reimbursed by the
applicant within 30 days of the applicant’s receipt of such
documentation.
D. Any payment/reimbursement tendered to the Township pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter A144 and which is made by a check that is
subsequently dishonored, returned, or refused for payment for any
reason (including but not limited to nonsufficient funds) shall subject
the payor to the imposition by the Township of an additional charge of
$20 in connection therewith.
A. Grading, filling and excavations:
(1) Zero to 4.99 acres: $200;
(2) Five or more acres: $300;
(3) Plus payment by applicant of all the actual costs incurred by the
Township in connection therewith as such actual costs are specified
in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
B. Application/review fees for construction of retaining walls are as
follows: Permit fee calculated in accordance with the provisions for
issuance of building permits and the Building Permit Fee Table, as are
set forth in Subsection A of § A144-7 of the Code of the Township of
Pine, plus payment by the applicant of all actual costs incurred by the
Township in connection therewith (as such actual costs are specified in
§ A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine). [Added 2-21-2012 by
Res. No. 857]
§ A144-1 PINE CODE § A144-3
142:1042
§ A144-3. Mobile homes and mobile home parks.
Fees for Chapter 62, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, are as follows:
§ A144-4. (Reserved)216
§ A144-5. Streets and sidewalks. [Amended 5-6-1996 by Res. No.
506; 5-21-2001 by Res. No. 628]
Application/review fees for Chapter 72, Streets and Sidewalks, are as
follows:
§ A144-6. Subdivision of land. [Amended 5-18-1988 by Res. No. 319;
5-6-1996 by Res. No. 506; 12-6-1999 by Res. No. 589; 5-21-2001 by
Res. No. 628]
Application/review fees for Chapter 78, Subdivision and Land Development,
are as follows:
A. Mobile home park permit:
(1) Plan review: $50 per unit, or the actual costs incurred by the
Township, whichever is greater.
(2) Occupancy permit: $25 per unit, or the actual costs incurred by the
Township, whichever is greater.
(3) Quarterly inspections: $50 minimum, or $2 per unit, whichever is
greater.
A. Driveway road entry permit: $10 for each driveway, plus payment by
applicant of all the actual costs incurred by the Township in connection
therewith as such actual costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of
the Township of Pine.
B. Road right-of-way fee: $75, plus payment by applicant of all the actual
costs incurred by the Township in connection therewith as such actual
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
C. Application/review fees for Chapter 66, Rights-of-Way (for activities
regulated by Township of Pine Ordinance No. 290), are as follows:
(1) Application for right-of-way permit: $500.
(2) Application for renewal of existing right-of-way permit: $300.
(3) Application for construction permit: $200.
A. Two-lot subdivision: $400*.
B. Preliminary and final subdivision:
216. Editor's Note: Former § A144-4, Sewers, was repealed 5-6-1996 by Res. No. 506.
§ A144-3 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-6
142:1043
(1) One thousand dollars*, plus additional fees as follows:
Lots/Units Fee per Lot/Unit
0 to 60 $50
61 to 150 $40
151 or more $30
(2) Bond release: actual costs incurred by the Township, as such actual
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(3) Revised master/final plan: $1,000.
(4) Application for reapproval of previously approved plan because of
failure to record plan in a timely fashion: $250.
NOTE: *Plus actual costs incurred by the Township for application/
plan review (e.g., engineering, environmental, legal, planning,
etc.) by any of its professional consultants, as such actual costs are
specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine, which
shall be paid by applicant.
C. Actual costs incurred by the Township for application/plan review (e.g.,
engineering, environmental, legal, planning, etc.) by any of its
professional consultants, as such actual costs are specified in § A144-1
of the Code of the Township of Pine, shall be paid by the applicant.
D. Street, sanitary and storm sewer inspection: actual costs incurred by
the Township, as such actual costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code
of the Township of Pine.
E. Planned residential development.
(1) Basic application fee: $1,000*, plus additional fees as follows:
Lots/Units Fee per Lot/Unit
0 to 60 $50
61 to 150 $40
151 or more $30
(2) Bond release: actual costs incurred by the Township, as such actual
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(3) Revised master/final plan: $750.
(4) Application for reapproval of previously approved plan because of
failure to record plan in a timely fashion: $200.
§ A144-6 PINE CODE § A144-6
142:1044
§ A144-6.1. Land development. [Added 5-6-1996 by Res. No. 506;
amended 5-21-2001 by Res. No. 628]
Application/review fees for the land development regulations contained
within Chapter 78 of the Code of the Township of Pine are as follows:
NOTE: *Plus actual costs incurred by the Township for application/
plan review (e.g., engineering, environmental, legal, planning,
etc.) by any of its professional consultants, as such actual costs are
specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine, which
shall be paid by applicant.
F. Upon initial submission of any application under this section, the
Township may, in its discretion, require that the applicant shall deposit
with the Township a monetary amount sufficient to defray the
Township's estimate of the costs of review of the application/plans by its
professional consultants. The Township shall deduct from this initial
deposit the actual costs incurred by the Township, as they accrue. The
applicant shall receive an itemization of such deductions by the
Township. If, at any time during the progression of an application, it is
determined by the Township that the remaining deposit balance
available is or will be inadequate to fully cover anticipated remaining
review costs, the applicant will be notified that an additional deposit is
required and the amount thereof, and such additional deposit shall be
promptly required to be posted by the applicant. At the completion of
the application/plan review, any moneys remaining on deposit (after all
costs incurred by the Township are deducted) shall be promptly
returned to the applicant.
G. Copy of subdivision and land development regulations: $25.
A. Change of use application: $200.
B. Master Plan application: $700, plus $75 per acre (or fraction thereof)
for sites in excess of two acres.
C. Land development application: $800, plus $75 per acre (or fraction
thereof) for sites in excess of two acres.
D. Building addition application: $500.
E. Revised land development application: $750.
F. Actual costs incurred by the Township for application/plan review (e.g.,
engineering, environmental, legal, planning, etc.) by any of its
professional consultants, as such actual costs are specified in § A144-1
of the Code of the Township of Pine, shall be paid by the applicant.
G. Upon initial submission of any application under this section, the
Township may, in its discretion, require that the applicant shall deposit
with the Township a monetary amount sufficient to defray the
Township's estimate of the costs of review of the application/plans by its
§ A144-6 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-6.1
142:1045
§ A144-7. Zoning. [Amended 5-18-1988 by Res. No. 319; 12-2-1991
by Res. No. 388; 3-16-1992 by Res. No. 397; 5-6-1996 by Res. No.
506; 12-6-1999 by Res. No. 589; 5-21-2001 by Res. No. 628;
2-21-2012 by Res. No. 857]
Fees for Chapter 84, Zoning, are as follows:
professional consultants. The Township shall deduct from this initial
deposit the actual costs incurred by the Township, as they accrue.
The applicant shall receive an itemization of such deductions by the
Township. If, at any time during the progression of an application,
it is determined by the Township that the remaining deposit balance
available is or will be inadequate to fully cover anticipated remaining
review costs, the applicant will be notified that an additional deposit
is required and the amount thereof, and such additional deposit shall
be promptly required to be posted by the applicant. At the completion
of the application/plan review, any moneys remaining on deposit (after
all costs incurred by the Township are deducted) shall be promptly
returned to the applicant.
A. Building permits.
(1) The valuation of structures shall be determined by the current
Building Valuation Data Report provided by International Code
Council (ICC) or the builder's estimate, whichever is greater. The
cost of a building permit shall be determined by the Building Permit
Fee Table as set forth below:
Building Permit Fee Table
Total Building
Valuation Fee
$1 to $500 $40
$501 to $2,000 $40 for the first $500, plus $2.50 per each
additional $100 in value or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000
$2,001 to $25,000 $75 for the first $2,000, plus $10.50 for each
additional $1,000 in value or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000
$25,001 to $50,000 $300 for the first $25,000, plus $7.50 for
each additional $1,000 in value or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000
$50,001 to
$100,000
$480 for the first $50,000, plus $5 for each
additional $1,000 in value or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000
$100,001 to
$500,000
$730 for the first $100,000, plus $3.75 for
each additional $1,000 in value or fraction
thereof, to and including $500,000
§ A144-6.1 PINE CODE § A144-7
142:1046
Building Permit Fee Table
Total Building
Valuation Fee
$500,001 and
greater
$2,195 for the first $500,000, plus $2.50 for
each additional $1,000 in value or fraction
thereof.
(2) All commercial building permit applications submitted to the
Township shall be accompanied by a completed application for a
Knox Box Rapid Entry System for the proposed building and a
check, payable to Knox Company, for the cost of same as such is set
by the Knox Company. Installation of such system shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance of an occupancy permit by the
Township.
B. Occupancy permits.
(1) Commercial: $50.
(2) Residential: no charge (included in building permit fee).
C. Signs: $75 per approved sign.
D. Variances and appeals.
(1) Residential: $125 and actual costs incurred by the Township, as
such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of
Pine.
(2) Others: $250 and actual costs incurred by the Township, as such
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
E. Special exceptions and conditional uses.
(1) Residential: $25 and actual costs incurred by the Township, as such
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
(2) Others: $200 and actual costs incurred by the Township of Pine, as
such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of
Pine.
F. Swimming pool, accessory structures and deck permits: refer to
Building Permit Fee Table.
G. Rezoning: $1,000 and actual costs incurred by the Township, as such
costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
H. Letter of lien: any actual cost or expense incurred by the Township of
Pine, as charged to it for preparation by its appointed or designated
agent, collector, or other representative for tax matters.
§ A144-7 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-7
142:1047
I. Letter of tax certification: any actual cost or expense incurred by the
Township of Pine, as charged to it for preparation by its appointed or
designated agent, collector, or other representative for tax matters.
J. Zoning certification: $50.
K. Copy of Zoning Ordinance: $60.
L. Zoning or road map: $2.
M. Filing fee for request for curative amendment: $1,000 and actual costs
incurred by the Township, as such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the
Code of the Township of Pine.
N. Logging or timber harvesting: $100 plus $3 per acre of land proposed
to be logged or harvested and actual costs incurred by the Township, as
such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
O. Demolition permit: $50 and actual costs incurred by the Township, as
such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
P. Recreation/health/safety fee: $300 per dwelling unit, to be paid at time
of building permit issuance.
Q. Transportation impact fee:
(1) Five hundred forty seven and eighty-six hundredths dollars, where
applicable, pursuant to provisions of Chapter 80 of the Code of the
Township of Pine and Township of Pine Ordinance No. 210 (for
developments for which applications for final approval filed
previous to August 7, 2000).
(2) Nine hundred forty-eight and two hundredths dollars, where
applicable, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 80 of the Code of
the Township of Pine and Township of Pine Ordinance No. 283 (for
developments for which applications for final approval filed
between August 7, 2000 and April 4, 2011).
(3) One thousand three hundred dollars, where applicable, pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 80 of the Code of the Township of Pine
and Township of Pine Ordinance No. 358 (for developments for
which applications for final approval filed subsequent to April 4,
2011).
R. Fire prevention permits and fees for the various required fire
prevention permits shall be set as specified below: [Amended
1-20-2015 by Res. No. 915]
(1) Fire sprinkler system (plan review, inspections and acceptance
testing):
(a) Twenty heads or less: $75.
(b) One hundred fifty heads or less: $150.
§ A144-7 PINE CODE § A144-7
142:1048
§ A144-7.1. Alarm devices. [Added 9-20-1989 by Ord. No. 178;
amended 5-6-1996 by Res. No. 506; 5-21-2001 by Res. No. 628]
Fees for Chapter 91, Alarm Devices, are as follows:
(c) Four hundred heads or less: $300.
(d) Over 401 heads: $350.
(2) Commercial fire alarm system (plan review, inspections and
acceptance testing): $75.
(3) Commercial kitchen fire suppression system (plan review,
inspections and acceptance testing): $75.
(4) Other alternative fire suppression systems installation: $75.
(5) All other fire prevention construction permits as set forth in
§ 105.7, "Required Construction Permits," of the 2009 (or later,
current) edition of the International Code Council's International
Fire Code: no fee.
(6) Recreational fire permit: no fee.
(7) All required fire prevention operational permits as set forth in
§ 105.6, "Required Operational Permits," of the 2009 (or later,
current) edition of the International Code Council's International
Fire Code: no fee.
(8) Private fire hydrants: Owners of private fire hydrants must apply
for an annual operational permit. Hydrant maintenance and
inspection records must be submitted with the permit application.
There is no fee for this annual operational permit.
S. Miscellaneous/general: any actual costs incurred by the Township (as
such costs are specified in § A144-1 of the Code of the Township of Pine)
in connection with its activities related to the various subjects of this
§ A144-7 (and which are not otherwise specified herein) shall also be
added to the amount of the respective fees for same set forth herein.
A. Residential alarm system permit: no fee. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Res.
No. 703]
B. Police false alarm. [Amended 4-1-2003 by Res. No. 671]
(1) First false alarm from an alarm system, each calendar year: $50 or
proof of yearly maintenance contract in effect.
(2) Second false alarm, each calendar year: $50.
(3) Third false alarm, each calendar year: $75.
(4) Fourth false alarm, each calendar year: $100.
§ A144-7 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-7.1
142:1049
§ A144-8. Amusement devices.
Fees for Chapter 92, Amusement Devices, are as follows:
Device
Fee
(each device)
Shuffleboard $70
Pinball machine $100
Electronic/computer game $100
Pool table/billiard $70
Bowling machine $70
Jukebox $25
Electronic game or machine not
specifically mentioned above
$100
§ A144-9. Drug paraphernalia.
Fees for Chapter 98, Drug Paraphernalia, are as follows:
§ A144-10. Peddling and soliciting. [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 277]
Fees for Chapter 120, Peddling and Soliciting, are as follows:
(5) Each false alarm in excess of four, each calendar year: the amount
of the charge assessed for the immediately preceding false alarm
during that calendar year, plus an additional $25.
C. Fire false alarm.
(1) First false alarm from an alarm system, each calendar year: $100 or
proof of yearly maintenance contract in effect.
(2) First false alarm from an alarm device each calendar year: $100 or
proof, acceptable to the Township of Pine, and submitted within 30
days from the date of notification, as described in § 91-3B of the
Code of the Township of Pine, of the repair or replacement of the
alarm device from which the false alarm originated.
(3) All other false alarms, each calendar year: $300 per false alarm.
A. Application fee: $150.
A. Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter for the
business of peddling, canvassing or soliciting shall pay the following
fees: [Amended 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 173; 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 277]
(1) Investigation of applicant: $175.
§ A144-7.1 PINE CODE § A144-10
142:1050
§ A144-11. Taxation. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Res. No. 857;
1-20-2015 by Res. No. 915]
Fees for Chapter 128, Taxation, are as follows:
§ A144-12. Designation of Open Records Officer; public records
policy; fees for access and/or copying. [Added 12-6-1999 by Res. No.
589; amended 10-21-2002 by Res. No. 656; 11-17-2008 by Res. No.
782]
(2) License (each person, including helpers/assistants): $15 per day.
A. Mercantile and business privilege license:
(1) Registration of business is required only once for each applicant at
each location;
(2) No fee due at time of registration;
(3) Annual fee of $10 for license renewal, paid with business tax
return;
(4) Businesses with an approved exemption from paying mercantile
and business privilege tax are still subject to the license renewal
fee.
B. Any actual costs incurred by the Township in connection with its actions
undertaken concerning the issuance of mercantile licenses or business
privilege licenses.
A. The Township Manager of the Township of Pine is hereby appointed as
the Township's Open Records Officer and shall fulfill all of the duties
and responsibilities set forth under Pennsylvania's Right-to-Know Law,
as amended, 65 P.S. §§ 67.101 et seq. The Township Manager may
designate another individual employee of the Township to serve as
alternate Open Records Officer in circumstances which the Township
Manager may specify (including but not limited to the unavailability of
the Township Manager to so serve). In such event, such alternate Open
Records Officer shall have the same duties and responsibilities set forth
herein and the identity and contact information of such alternate Open
Records Officer shall also be posted as herein required.
B. On or before January 1, 2009, the following information shall be posted
at the Municipal Building of the Township of Pine, at a place open and
visible to the public, and shall also be posted on the Township of Pine's
official website: (http://twp.pine.pa.us):
(1) Contact information for the Open Records Officer.
(2) Contact information for the Office of Open Records or other
applicable appeals officer.
§ A144-10 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1051
(3) A form which may be used to file a request for public records. Such
form may be one developed by the Township for its optional
individual use (and which shall be in compliance with the
requirements for same as set forth in Pennsylvania's Right-to-Know
Law,217 as amended) and/or may be one established for general use
by Pennsylvania's Office of Open Records. A request for public
records which utilizes a form established for same by
Pennsylvania's Office of Open Records shall be accepted (for
purposes of review and response thereto) by the Township.
(4) Any regulations, policies and procedures of the Township of Pine as
adopted by it relating to Pennsylvania's Right-to-Know Law,218 as
amended.
C. The following text, consisting of 14 enumerated subsections (and their
subsections), shall constitute the policy of the Township of Pine
regarding public records (including exempted records).
(1) Purpose. The Township of Pine recognizes the importance of public
records as the record of the Township's actions and the repository
of information about the Township. The public has the right to
access and procure copies of public records, with certain
exceptions, subject to law, Township policy and administrative
regulations.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
FINANCIAL RECORD — Any account, voucher or contract dealing
with the receipt or disbursement of funds or acquisition, use or
disposal of services, supplies, materials, equipment or property;
the salary or other payments or expenses paid to an officer or
employee, including the individual's name and title; and a financial
audit report, excluding the audit's underlying work papers.
PUBLIC RECORD — A record, including a financial record, that is
not protected by a defined privilege or is not exempt from being
disclosed under one of the exemptions in Pennsylvania's Right-to-
Know Law,219 as amended, or under other federal or state law or
regulation, or judicial decree or order.
RECORD — Any recorded information, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, that documents a transaction or activity of the
Township and that is created, received or retained pursuant to
law or in connection with a transaction, business or activity of the
Township. The term includes a document; paper; letter; map; book;
tape; photograph; film or sound recording; information stored or
217. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
218. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
219. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1052
maintained electronically; and a data-processed or imageprocessed
document.
RESPONSE — Granting of access to a record or the Township's
written notice to a requester granting, denying or partially
granting and partially denying access to a requested record.
REQUESTER — A legal resident of the United States, or an agency,
who requests access to a record.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pine.
(3) Authority. The Township of Pine shall make the Township's public
records available for access and duplication to a requester, in
accordance with law, Township policy and administrative
regulations.
(4) Responsibilities of Open Records Officer.
(a) The Township's Open Records Officer shall be responsible to:
[1] Receive written requests for access to records submitted
to the Township.
[2] Review and respond to written requests in accordance
with law, Township policy and administrative regulations.
[3] Direct requests to other appropriate individuals in the
Township or in another agency.
[4] Track the Township's progress in responding to requests.
[5] Issue interim and final responses to submitted requests.
[6] Maintain a log of all record requests and their disposition.
[7] Ensure that the Township's staff is trained to perform
assigned job functions relative to requests for access to
records.
(b) Upon receiving a request for access to a record, the Open
Records Officer shall:
[1] Note the date of receipt on the written request.
[2] Compute and note on the written request the day on which
the five-business-day period for response will expire.
[3] Maintain an electronic or paper copy of the written
request, including all documents submitted with the
request, until the request has been fulfilled.
[4] If the written request is denied, maintain the written
request for 30 calendar days or, if an appeal is filed, until a
final determination is issued or the appeal is deemed
denied.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1053
(5) Guidelines.
(a) Requesters may access and procure copies of the public
records of the Township during the regular, established
business hours of the Township's administrative offices.
(b) A requester's right of access does not include the right to
remove a record from the control or supervision of the Open
Records Officer.
(c) The Township shall not limit the number of records requested.
(d) When responding to a request for access, the Township is not
required to create a record that does not exist nor to compile,
maintain, format or organize a record in a manner which the
Township does not currently use.
(e) Information shall be made available to individuals with
disabilities in an appropriate format, upon request and with
sufficient advance notice.
(f) The Township shall post the following information at its main
administrative office and on the Township's website:
[1] Contact information for the Open Records Officer.
[2] Contact information for Pennsylvania's Office of Open
Records.
[3] Copies of this policy and any administrative regulations
and procedures governing requests for access to the
Township's public records.
(6) Request for access.
(a) A written request for access to a public record shall be
submitted in writing and addressed to the Township's Open
Records Officer. Such written request for access shall be
submitted either on a form for same developed by the
Township for its optional individual use (and which shall be in
compliance with any requirements for same set forth in
Pennsylvania's Right-to-Know Law,220 as amended) or on a form
established for general use by Pennsylvania's Office of Open
Records.
(b) Written requests may be submitted to the Township in person,
by mail, to a designated facsimile machine and/or to a
designated e-mail address.
(c) Each request must include the following information:
220. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1054
[1] Identification or description of the requested record, in
sufficient detail.
[2] Medium in which the record is requested.
[3] Name and address of the individual to receive the
Township's response.
(d) The Township shall not require an explanation of the reason for
the request or the intended use of the requested record, unless
otherwise required by law.
(7) Response to request.
(a) Township employees shall be directed to forward requests for
access to public records to the Open Records Officer.
(b) Upon receipt of a written request for access to a record, the
Open Records Officer shall determine if the requested record is
a public record and if the Township has possession, custody or
control of that record.
(c) The Open Records Officer shall respond as promptly as
possible under the existing circumstances, and the initial
response time shall not exceed five business days from the date
the written request is received by the Open Records Officer.
(d) If the Township fails to respond to a request within five
business days of receipt, the request for access shall be
deemed denied.
(8) Extension of time.
(a) Upon receipt of a written request for access, the Open Records
Officer will determine if any one of the following applies:
[1] Redaction. The request for access requires redaction of a
record.
[2] Retrieval time/remote storage. The request for access
requires retrieval of a record stored in a remote location.
[3] Staffing limitations. A timely response to the request for
access cannot be accomplished due to bona fide and
specified staffing limitations.
[4] Legal review. A legal review is necessary to determine
whether the requested record is a public record subject to
access.
[5] Lack of policy compliance. The requester has not complied
with Township policy governing access to public records.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1055
[6] Failure to pay fees. The requester refuses to pay
applicable, established fees.
[7] Nature of request. The extent or nature of the request
precludes a response within the required time period.
(b) If the Open Records Officer determines that an extension of
time is required to respond to a request, in accordance with
the factors stated in law, written notice shall be sent within five
business days of receipt of request. The notice shall indicate
that the request for access is being reviewed, the reason that
the review requires an extension, a reasonable date when the
response is expected and an estimate of applicable fees owed
when the record becomes available.
(c) Up to a thirty-calendar-day extension for one of the listed
reasons does not require the consent of the requester. If the
response is not given by the specified date, it shall be deemed
denied on the day following that date.
(d) A requester may consent, in writing, to an extension that
exceeds 30 calendar days, in which case the request shall be
deemed denied on the day following the date specified in the
notice if the Open Records Officer has not provided a response
by that date.
(e) If the requester agrees to the date extension, the request shall
be deemed denied on the day following the date specified in
the notice of the Township (if the Township has not provided a
response by that date).
(9) Granting of request.
(a) If the Open Records Officer determines that the request will be
granted, the response shall inform the requester that access is
granted and either include information on the regular business
hours of the administration office, provide electronic access or
state where the requester may go to inspect the records or
information electronically at a publicly accessible site. The
response shall include a copy of the fee schedule in effect, a
statement that prepayment of fees is required in a specified
amount if access to the records will cost in excess of $100, and
the medium in which the records will be provided.
(b) A public record shall be provided to the requester in the
medium requested if it exists in that form; otherwise, it shall be
provided in its existing medium. However, the Township is not
required to permit the requester the use of its own computers.
(c) The Open Records Officer may respond to a records request by
notifying the requester that the record is available through
publicly accessible electronic means or that the Township shall
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1056
provide access to inspect the record electronically. If the
requester, within 30 calendar days following receipt of the
Township's notice, submits a written request to have the
record converted to paper, the Township shall provide access
in printed form within five business days of receipt of the
request for conversion to paper.
(d) A public record that the Township does not possess but which
is possessed by a third party with whom the Township has
contracted to perform a governmental function and which
directly relates to that governmental function shall be
considered a public record of the Township.
(e) If the Open Records Officer determines that a public record
contains information both subject to and not subject to access,
the Open Records Officer shall grant access to the information
subject to access and deny access to the information not
subject to access. The Open Records Officer shall redact from
the record the information that is not subject to access. The
Open Records Officer shall not deny access to a record if
information is able to be redacted.
(f) If the Open Records Officer responds to a requester that a copy
of the requested record is available for delivery at the
Township's administrative office, and the requester does not
retrieve the record within 60 calendar days of the Township's
response, the Township shall dispose of the copy and retain any
fees paid to date.
(10) Notification to third parties.
(a) When the Township produces a record that is not a public
record in response to a request, the Open Records Officer shall
so notify any third party that provided the record to the
Township, the person that is the subject of the record and the
requester.
(b) The Open Records Officer shall notify a third party of a record
request if the requested record contains a trade secret or
confidential proprietary information, in accordance with law
and any applicable administrative regulations.
(11) Denial of request.
(a) If the Open Records Officer denies a request for access to a
public record, whether in whole or in part, a written response
shall be sent within five business days of receipt of the request.
The response denying the request shall include the following:
[1] Description of the record requested.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1057
[2] Specific reasons for denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority.
[3] Name, title, business address, business telephone number
and signature of the Open Records Officer on whose
authority the denial is issued.
[4] Date of the response.
[5] Procedure for the requester to appeal a denial of access.
(b) The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a
record if the requester has made repeated requests for that
same record and the repeated requests have placed an
unreasonable burden on the Township.
(c) The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a
record when timely access is not possible due to a disaster or
when access may cause physical damage or irreparable harm
to the record. To the extent possible, a record's contents shall
be made accessible even when the record is physically
unavailable.
(d) Information that is not subject to access and is redacted from a
public record shall be deemed a denial.
(12) Appeal of denial. If a written request for access to a record is
denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an appeal of same
with Pennsylvania's Office of Open Records within 15 business days
of the mailing date of the Open Records Officer's response or
deemed denial.
(13) Fees.
(a) The Township shall establish and keep current a list of
reasonable fees relative to requests for public records.
(b) No fee may be imposed for review of a record by the
Township's staff to determine whether the record is subject to
access under law.
(c) Prior to granting access, the Township may require
prepayment of estimated fees when the fees required to fulfill
the request are expected to exceed $100.
(d) The Township may waive duplication fees when the Township
deems it is in the public interest to do so.
(e) Fees for public records are as follows:
[1] Postage: Costs of postage incurred by the Township in
mailing the requested records to the requester, which
amount shall not exceed the actual cost of such mailing.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1058
[2] Photocopies: $0.25 per page (for size 8 1/2 inches by 11
inches); for larger-size copies, plans, drawings and/or
other nonstandard size documents: the actual costs of
duplication/copying incurred by the Township, as billed to
it by commercial printers or copiers.
[3] Printing from electronic media: $0.25 per page,
[4] Copying onto electronic media: $7.50, includes electronic
medium (disk, CD).
[5] Facsimile transmission: Local call, $1 per transmission;
long-distance call, $1.50 per page.
[6] Transmission by electronic means: $5 per document.
[7] Certification: The Township's fee for official certification of
copies containing the Township seal is $2 per copy.
[8] Hourly rate (of Township employees) for preparation,
compilation and copying: $20 per hour.
(f) For public records maintained only electronically, the Township
shall charge its costs to duplicate same (which shall be the
lesser of the cost to copy onto paper or to copy electronically,
unless the requester asks for the more expensive option).
(g) The Township also reserves the right to charge other actual
costs incurred by it (to the extent not otherwise specified
herein) in complying with a request, which costs shall be
reasonable.
(h) In the event that the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records or
other authorized entity or agency shall hereafter establish
maximum permitted fees or rates for any of the abovereferenced
services (and which maximum permitted fees or
rates shall be less than the fees or rates set herein), then such
fees or rates of the Township for that service(s) shall be
automatically adjusted to such mandated maximum(s), so as to
all times be in conformity therewith.
(14) Exempted records.
(a) To determine if a requested record is exempt from access, the
Open Records Officer will consider and apply each exemption
separately.
(b) The following records are exempt from public access by a
requester in accordance with the Pennsylvania Right-To-Know
Law,221 as amended.
221. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1059
[1] Loss of funds/physical harm/personal security: when the
disclosure of a record would result in the Township's loss
of federal or state funds or would reasonably be likely to
result in a substantial and demonstrable risk of physical
harm to or personal security of an individual.
[2] Public safety: when the disclosure of a record maintained
in connection with the military, homeland security,
national defense, law enforcement or other public safety
activity would reasonably be likely to jeopardize or
threaten public safety or public protection activity, or a
record that is designated "classified" by an appropriate
federal or state military authority.
[3] Safety/security of facilities: when the disclosure of a
record creates a reasonable likelihood of endangering the
safety or physical security of a building, public utility,
resource, infrastructure, facility or information storage
system, which may include:
[a] Documents or data relating to computer hardware;
source files; software; and system networks that could
jeopardize computer security by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against,
mitigating or responding to a terrorist act.
[b] Lists of infrastructure, resources and significant
special events, including those defined by the federal
government in the National Infrastructures
Protections, that are deemed critical due to their
nature and result from risk analysis; threat
assessments; consequences assessments;
antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
counterterrorism measures and plans; and security
needs assessments.
[c] Building plans or infrastructure records that expose or
create vulnerability through disclosure of the location,
configuration or security of critical systems, including
public utility systems; structural elements;
technology; communication; electrical; fire
suppression; ventilation; water; wastewater; sewage;
and gas systems.
[4] Computer systems: when the disclosure of a record
regarding computer hardware, software and networks,
including administrative and technical records, would
reasonably be likely to jeopardize computer security.
[5] Medical information: when the disclosure of a record of an
individual's medical, psychiatric or psychological history
or disability status, including an evaluation; consultation;
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1060
prescription; diagnosis or treatment; results of tests, to
include drug tests; enrollment in a health care program
or program designed for participation by persons with
disabilities, including vocational rehabilitation; workers'
compensation and unemployment compensation; or
related information would disclose individually identifiable
health information.
[6] Personal identification information: disclosure of the
following personal identification information:
[a] A record containing all or part of an individual's social
security number; driver's license; driver's license
number; personal financial information; home, cellular
or personal telephone numbers; personal e-mail
addresses; employee number or other confidential
personal identification number.
[b] A spouse's name, marital status, beneficiary or
dependent information.
[c] The home address of a law enforcement officer or
judge.
[7] Personal information that must be disclosed includes the
name; position; salary; actual compensation or other
payments or expenses; employment contract; employmentrelated
contract or agreement; and length of service of a
public official or Township employee.
[8] The Open Records Officer may redact from a record the
name or other identifying information relating to an
individual performing an undercover or covert law
enforcement activity.
[9] Certain employee information: disclosure of the following
records relating to a Township employee:
[a] A letter of reference or recommendation pertaining to
the character or qualifications of an identifiable
individual, unless it was prepared in relation to the
appointment of an individual to fill a vacancy in an
elected office or an appointed office requiring Senate
confirmation.
[b] A performance rating or review.
[c] The result of a civil service or similar test
administered by a commonwealth agency, legislative
agency or judicial agency. The result of a civil service
or similar test administered by a local agency shall not
be disclosed if restricted by a collective bargaining
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1061
agreement. Only test scores of individuals who
obtained a passing score on a test administered by a
local agency may be disclosed.
[d] The employment application of an individual who is
not hired by the Township.
[e] Workplace support services information.
[f] Written criticisms of a Township employee.
[g] Grievance material, including documents related to
discrimination or sexual harassment.
[h] Information regarding discipline, demotion or
discharge contained in a personnel file, except
information that applies to the Township's final action
that results in demotion or discharge.
[i] An academic transcript.
[10] Labor relations/negotiations/arbitration: disclosure of a
record pertaining to strategy or negotiations relating to
labor relations or collective bargaining and related
arbitration proceedings, unless otherwise provided under
collective bargaining agreement and the employees' actual
file. In the case of the arbitration of a dispute or grievance
under a collective bargaining agreement, disclosure of an
exhibit entered into evidence at an arbitration proceeding
or a transcript of the arbitration or the opinion. This
exemption does not apply to a final or executed contract or
agreement between the parties in a collective bargaining
agreement, or to the final award or order of the arbitrator
in a dispute or grievance procedure.
[11] Predecisional drafts: disclosure of the draft of a bill,
resolution, regulation, statement of policy, management
directive, or ordinance, or their amendments, prepared by
or for the Township.
[12] Predecisional deliberations disclosure of a record that
reflects:
[a] The internal, predecisional deliberations of the
Township, its Supervisors, employees or officials, or
predecisional deliberations between members of its
Board of Supervisors, employees or officials and
members, employees or officials of another agency,
including predecisional deliberations relating to a
budget recommendation; legislative proposal;
legislative amendment; contemplated or proposed
policy or course of action; or any research, memos or
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1062
other documents used in the predecisional
deliberations, subject to law governing open
meetings. Public records do include a record of any
of the above that is not exempt from access by law
and which is presented to a quorum for deliberation
in accordance with law governing open meetings; a
written or Internet application or document that has
been submitted to request commonwealth funds; and
the results of public opinion surveys, polls, focus
groups, marketing research or similar efforts
designed to measure public opinion.
[b] The strategy to be used to develop or achieve the
successful adoption of a budget, legislative proposal
or regulation.
[13] Trade secret/confidential proprietary information:
disclosure of a record that constitutes or reveals a trade
secret or confidential proprietary information.
[14] Personal notes/working papers: disclosure of notes and
working papers prepared by or for a Township public
official or employee and used solely for that official's or
employee's own personal use, including telephone
message slips; routing slips; and other materials that do
not have an official purpose.
[15] Donor identity: disclosure of records that would disclose
the identity of an individual who lawfully makes a donation
to the Township, unless the donation is intended for or
restricted to providing remuneration or personal tangible
benefit to a Township public official or employee, including
lists of potential donors compiled by the Township to
pursue donations; donor profile information; or personal
identifying information relating to a donor.
[16] Unpublished academic works: disclosure of unpublished
lecture notes, unpublished manuscripts, unpublished
articles, creative works in progress, research-related
material, and scholarly correspondence of a community
college or an institution of the State System of Higher
Education or one of their faculty members, employees,
guest speakers or students.
[17] Academic records: disclosure of academic transcripts,
examinations, examination questions, scoring keys and
answers to examinations, including licensing and other
examinations relating to the qualifications of an individual;
examinations; and examinations given in institutions of
higher education.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1063
[18] Criminal investigations: disclosure of a record of the
Township or an agency relating to or resulting in a
criminal investigation, including:
[a] Complaints of potential criminal conduct other than a
private criminal complaint.
[b] Investigative materials, notes, correspondence, videos
and reports.
[c] A record that includes the identity of a confidential
source or of a suspect who has not been charged with
an offense to whom confidentiality has been promised.
[d] A record that includes information made confidential
by law or court order.
[e] Victim information, including any information that
would jeopardize the safety of a victim.
[f] A record that if disclosed would reveal the institution,
progress or result of a criminal investigation, except
the filing of criminal charges; deprive an individual of
the right to a fair trial or impartial adjudication;
impair the ability to locate a defendant or
codefendant; hinder an agency's ability to secure an
arrest, prosecution or conviction; or endanger the life
or physical safety of an individual. This exemption
does not apply to information contained in a police
blotter as defined in law and utilized or maintained by
the State Police, local, campus, transit or port
authority police department or other law enforcement
agency, or in a traffic report except as provided by law.
[19] Noncriminal investigations: disclosure of a Township
record relating to a noncriminal investigation, including:
[a] Complaints submitted to the Township.
[b] Investigative materials, notes, correspondence and
reports.
[c] A record that includes the identity of a confidential
source, including individuals subject to the
Whistleblower Law.222
[d] A record that includes information made confidential
by law.
[e] Work papers underlying an audit.
222. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 1421 et seq.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1064
[f] A record that if disclosed would reveal the institution,
progress or result of a Township investigation, except
the imposition of a fine or civil penalty; the
suspension, modification or revocation of a license,
permit, registration, certification or similar
authorization issued by an agency or an executed
settlement unless the agreement is determined to be
confidential by a court; deprive a person of the right to
an impartial adjudication; constitute an unwarranted
invasion of privacy; hinder an agency's ability to
secure an administrative or civil sanction; or endanger
the life or physical safety of an individual.
[20] Emergency communications: disclosure of records or
parts of records, except time response logs, pertaining to
audio recordings, telephone or radio transmissions
received by emergency dispatch personnel, including 911
recordings, unless the agency or a court determines that
the public interest in disclosure outweighs the interest in
nondisclosure.
[21] DNA/RNA: disclosure of DNA and RNA records.
[22] Coroner/medical examiner: disclosure of specific records
and reports of a coroner or medical examiner.
[23] Draft minutes/executive sessions: disclosure of draft
minutes of any previous meeting of the Township's Board
of Supervisors, Planning Commission, Environmental
Advisory Council, Parks and Recreation Commission, or
other official or duly authorized committee of the
Township, until the next regularly scheduled meeting of
such aforenamed, respective entities; any minutes or notes
of an executive session; and any record of discussions held
in executive session.
[24] Real estate appraisals feasibility studies: disclosure of the
contents of real estate appraisals, engineering or
feasibility estimates, environmental reviews, audits or
evaluations made for or by the Township relative to the
leasing, acquiring, or disposing of real property or an
interest in real property; the purchase of public supplies or
equipment included in the real estate transaction; and
construction projects. This exemption does not apply to
the documents listed above once the decision is made to
proceed with the lease, acquisition or disposal of real
property or an interest in real property, the purchase of
public supplies, or a construction project.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1065
[25] Library records: disclosure of library and archive
circulation and order records of an identifiable individual
or groups of individuals.
[26] Library/museum materials: disclosure of library archived
and museum materials or valuable or rare book collections
or documents contributed by gift, grant, bequest or devise,
to the extent of any limitations imposed by the donor as a
condition of the contribution.
[27] Archeological site/endangered species: disclosure of a
record identifying the location of an archeological site or
an endangered or threatened plant or animal species if not
already known to the general public.
[28] Precontract award documents: disclosure of a proposal
pertaining to Township procurement or disposal of
supplies, service or construction prior to the award of the
contract or prior to the opening and rejection of all bids;
financial information of a bidder or offerer requested in an
invitation for bid or request for proposals to demonstrate
the bidder's or offerer's economic capability; or the
identity of members, notes and other records of Township
proposal evaluation committees established under law
relating to competitive sealed proposals.
[29] Insurance communications: disclosure of a record or
information relating to a communication between the
Township and its insurance carrier, administrative service
organization or risk management office. This exemption
does not apply to a contract with an insurance carrier,
administrative service organization or risk management
office, or to financial records relating to the provision of
insurance.
[30] Social services: disclosure of a record or information
identifying an individual who applies for or receives social
services, the type of social services received by an
individual, an individual's application to receive social
services, or eligibility to receive social services.
[31] General Assembly correspondence: disclosure of
correspondence between an individual and member of the
General Assembly and records accompanying the
correspondence that would identify an individual
requesting assistance or constituent services, except for
correspondence between a member of the General
Assembly and a principal or lobbyist under law.
[32] Minors: disclosure of a record identifying the name, home
address or date of birth of a child 17 years of age or
younger.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1066
[33] Township does not possess record.
[a] A request for a public record that the Township does
not possess but is possessed by a third party with
whom the Township has contracted to perform a
governmental function and which relates directly to
that governmental function must be submitted to the
Township's Open Records Officer.
[b] If the Open Records Officer determines that the
requested record is subject to public access, the Open
Records Officer will respond and grant access in
accordance with law, Township policy and
administrative regulations.
[c] The requester will pay the established duplication fee.
[d] If the third party that possessed the requested public
record duplicated the record in response to the
request, the Open Records Officer will remit the fee to
the third party.
[e] The third party is not required to provide access to
any other of its records.
[34] Transcripts of administrative proceedings.
[a] Prior to an adjudication becoming final, binding and
nonappealable, a transcript of an administrative
proceeding will be provided to a requester by the
proceeding's stenographer.
[b] To request access to a prefinal adjudication transcript
possessed by a stenographer that is subject to
disclosure, the requester must directly contact the
stenographer and pay any fees assessed by the
stenographer.
[c] After an adjudication becomes final, binding and
nonappealable, a transcript of an administrative
proceeding will be provided to a requester, and the
Township's regular established duplication fee will be
charged.
[35] Trade secrets/confidential proprietary information.
[a] When a third party provides a record to the Township
and includes a written statement signed by its
representative that the record contains a trade secret
or confidential proprietary information, the Open
Records Officer will notify that third party of a request
for access to that record.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-12
142:1067
[b] "Trade secret" is defined as information, including a
formula; drawing; pattern; compilation such as a
customer list; program; device; method; technique; or
process that derives independent economic value,
actual or potential, from not being generally known to
and not being readily ascertainable by proper means
by other persons who can obtain economic value from
its disclosure or use and is the subject of efforts that
are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain
its secrecy. The term includes data processing
software obtained by the Township under a licensing
agreement prohibiting disclosure.
[c] Confidential proprietary information is defined as
commercial or financial information that is privileged
or confidential, and the disclosure of which would
cause substantial harm to the competitive position of
the individual that submitted the information.
[d] The Open Records Officer will provide notice within
five business days of receipt of the request. The third
party will have five business days from receipt of the
Open Records Officer's notice to provide input on the
release of the requested record.
[e] The Open Records Officer will provide access to the
record or will deny the request for access within 10
business days of providing notice to the third party
and will notify the third party of the Open Records
Officer's decision.
[36] Computer access. The Open Records Officer will not grant
requests for access to the Township's or its employees'
computers.
[37] Discretionary access. The Open Records Officer may
exercise discretion and make an otherwise exempt record
accessible in response to a request. The otherwise
exempted record will be made accessible for access and
duplication, in accordance with law and Township policy, if
all of the following apply:
[a] Disclosure of the record is not prohibited by federal or
state law or regulation, or by judicial order or decree.
[b] The record is not protected by privilege, to include the
attorney-work product doctrine; attorney-client
privilege; doctor-patient privilege; speech and debate
privilege; or other privilege recognized by a relevant
court.
§ A144-12 PINE CODE § A144-12
142:1068
§ A144-13. Pine Community Park and Karrington Woods Park
permit fees. [Added 12-6-1999 by Res. No. 589; amended 1-6-2003
by Res. No. 663; 1-3-2005 by Res. No. 710; 12-13-2007 by Res. No.
770; 2-17-2009 by Res. No. 794; 2-21-2012 by Res. No. 857]
[c] It is determined that the public interest favoring
access outweighs any individual, Township or public
interest that may favor restriction of access.
[38] Miscellaneous provisions relating to exempted records.
[a] The listed exemptions do not apply to financial
records, except that the Open Records Officer shall
redact the portions of a financial record protected
under the exemptions of Subsection C(14)(b)[1], [2],
[3], [4], [5], [6], [18] or [19] of this § A144-12.
[b] The listed exemptions do not apply to aggregated data
maintained or received by the Township, except for
data protected under the exemptions of Subsection
C(14)(b)[1], [2], [3], [4] or [5] of this § A144-12.
[c] The Open Records Officer will not disclose the identity
of an individual performing an undercover or covert
law enforcement activity.
A. Pine Community Park Pavilion. The Pavilion will be scheduled on a yearto-
year basis by the Parks and Recreation Department, with requests
for reservations accepted on a first-come, first-serve basis beginning
January 31 for Pine residents (with proof of residency required) and
after March 31 for nonresidents.
(1) Per day rental fees and security deposits for the Pavilion shall be as
follows: [Amended 2-5-2018 by Res. No. 987]
Rental Deposit
Pine residents/Pine nonprofit
organizations*
$75 $100
Pine business $150 $100
Nonresident $210 $100
Business/organization** (maximum
125 people)
$325 $100
NOTES:
* Churches, youth groups, tax exempt organizations. (Day-care
centers are not considered nonprofit organizations).
** Residents who have businesses located outside of Pine must
pay the business rental fee of $325 plus security deposit of
$100.
§ A144-12 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-13
142:1069
(2) Pavilion use is also subject to the following additional fees and
regulations:
(a) A security deposit of $100 and a key deposit of $25 (checks
only — cash will not be accepted) are required for the use of
the Pavilion. These deposits will be returned following return
of key and provided extra clean-up work or repair is not
necessary, following use. Should the security deposit not be
sufficient to cover all clean-up or repair costs, the applicant
will be billed for the difference. Separate checks are required
for the rental fee and above-referenced deposits. Please note:
Deposit checks should be post-dated to coincide with the
reservation date.
(b) The use of any amplified sound system, i.e., stereo or DJ, must
have advance written permission from the Parks and
Recreation Department. Live bands are not permitted.
(c) The Parks and Recreation Department reserves the right to
limit the size of a group using the Pavilion. Maximum number
of participants is 125.
(d) A Pavilion reservation does not guarantee a playing field or
volleyball court. Such facilities must be separately reserved
(subject to availability) with the Parks and Recreation
Department.
(e) If alcohol is to be served, an alcohol permit is required with
each Pavilion reservation. There is an alcohol permit fee of $25
for both residents and nonresidents.
(f) The maintenance gate to the gravel roadway and Pavilion will
be closed and locked. Access to the Pavilion is from the parking
lot area only. The walkway from the parking lot to the Pavilion
is handicapped accessible.
(g) Roasting fires are prohibited unless prior special written
advance permission is obtained from the Parks and Recreation
Department.
(h) Any organized/group activity using the Pavilion requires a
permit and the appropriate fees.
(i) Pine Community Park closes at dusk; therefore, all Pavilion
rentals shall conclude at dusk.
(j) Permanent fasteners, staples, thumb tacks, nails, etc., are not
permitted to be used in the Pavilion. Temporary fasteners,
string, or tape must be removed after their use by the renter of
the Pavilion and properly disposed of in trash containers.
§ A144-13 PINE CODE § A144-13
142:1070
(k) There is a maximum of six bags of garbage that the Township
will haul away. Any additional bags of garbage are the
responsibility of the renter of the Pavilion.
(l) All vehicles must be parked in the parking lot. Fines will be
issued for illegal parking of vehicles.
(m) Moonwalks, trains, mechanical devices, etc., are not
permitted.
(n) Refunds of fees are not given for any reason. Requests for date
changes are subject to availability and must be accompanied
by a fee of $10 for same.
B. Pine Community Park playing fields. Playing fields will be scheduled on
a year-to-year basis by the Parks and Recreation Department, with
requests for reservations accepted between January 1 and January 31.
Requests made after such time period will be considered only upon
playing field availability.
(1) Season playing field permits will be issued by April 1, and usage
fees shall be as follows: [Amended 2-5-2018 by Res. No. 987]
Playing Field Fees
(percentage total
organization)
Per Slot/
Season* Per Event
Pine residents, 75% to 100% No charge No charge
Pine residents, 50% to 74% $80 $20
Pine residents, 25% to 49% $100 $25
Other groups $270 $30
NOTES:
* Maximum length of season: 16 weeks.
* For baseball/softball, add $10 to each per slot/season fee as an
additional charge to defray extra maintenance costs for such
uses.
(2) Time slots are available on the following field locations: Bronco I,
Bronco II, Colt, Pony, Soccer I, Soccer II, and (beginning with its
expected availability in 2013) Multi-purpose Field. Times per week:
Monday through Friday, 3:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:30 p.m.; Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., 12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m., 3:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., 6:00 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.
(3) Playing field use is also subject to the following additional fees and
regulations:
§ A144-13 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-13
142:1071
(a) Priority for use of playing fields will be given to youth sports
over adult sports and to league organizations over individual
teams.
(b) A security deposit of $100 is required for the use of each
playing field. This deposit will be returned, provided that extra
clean-up work or repair is not necessary following use. Should
the deposit not be sufficient to cover all clean-up or repair
costs, the applicant will be billed for the difference. A security
deposit of $100 must be maintained throughout permit usage.
Separate checks are required for the rental fee and security
deposit.
(c) Requests for tournament dates must be made at the time of
application. The tournament fee is $100 per playing field/per
day.
(d) Soft toss is not permitted at Pine Community Park playing
fields.
(e) Groups desiring to use Pine Community Park playing fields
must carry liability insurance of at least $500,000. A certificate
from the insurance carrier verifying limits must be sent to the
Parks and Recreation Department prior to issuance of permit.
This certificate must:
[1] Provide a single limit of $500,000 for personal injury and
property damage (each occurrence);
[2] Name the Township of Pine as an additional insured; and
[3] Be written in such a manner that it is primary, regardless
of any other liability insurance that the Township may
carry.
(f) All vehicles must be parked in the paved parking lot. Fines
shall be issued upon illegally parked vehicles. Grassy areas
shall not be used as roadways or for parking or for other
purposes which may injure or destroy the turf or landscaping.
C. Karrington Woods Park. The playing field at Karrington Woods Park will
be scheduled on a year-to-year basis by the Parks and Recreation
Department, with requests for reservations accepted between January
1 and January 31. Requests made after such time period will be
considered only upon playing field availability.
(1) Season playing field permits will be issued by April 1, and usage
fees shall be as follows:
§ A144-13 PINE CODE § A144-13
142:1072
§ A144-14. Pine Community Center membership rates and facility
rental rates. [Added 6-16-2008 by Res. No. 779]
Playing Field Fees
(percentage total
organization)
Per Slot/
Season* Per Event
Pine residents, 75% to 100% No charge No charge
Pine residents, 50% to 74% $60 $20
Pine residents, 25% to 49% $75 $25
Other groups $230 $30
NOTE:
* Maximum length of season: 16 weeks.
(2) The playing field at Karrington Woods Park is also subject to the
following additional fees and regulations:
(a) The playing field will be limited to recreational and practice
use only. No organized league games will be permitted.
(b) Due to playing field limitations, baseball practice will not be
permitted.
(c) Playing field permits will be limited to four nights per week
(Monday through Thursday).
(d) Cars/vehicles are not permitted to be parked along Karrington
Drive.
(e) A security deposit of $100 is required. This deposit will be
returned, provided that extra clean-up work or repair is not
necessary following use. Should the deposit not be sufficient to
cover all clean-up or repair costs, the applicant will be billed
for the difference. A security deposit of $100 must be
maintained throughout permit usage. Separate checks are
required for the rental fee and security deposit.
(f) Groups desiring to use the playing field at Karrington Woods
Park must carry liability insurance of at least $500,000. A
certificate from the insurance carrier verifying limits must be
sent to the Parks and Recreation Department prior to issuance
of permit. This certificate must:
[1] Provide a single limit of $500,000 per personal injury and
property damage (each occurrence);
[2] Name the Township of Pine as an additional insured; and
[3] Be written in such a manner that it is primary regardless of
any other liability insurance that the Township may carry.
§ A144-13 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-14
142:1073
A. Pine Community Center membership rates. Membership in the Pine
Community Center shall be subject to all definitions, rules, and
regulations as may be separately established for usage of the Pine
Community Center, and such membership (individual, family, or
business) shall be provided upon payment of the applicable, respective
fees set forth below: [Amended 1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 894;
2-5-2018 by Res. No. 987]
Membership Type Fee
3-Month Annual
120 Month
Debit
Associate Rates* (upper
floor use only)
Pine resident N/A $30 N/A
Nonresident N/A $60 N/A
Full Facility Membership*
Pine family $240 $660 $55
Nonresident family $345 $900 $75
Pine adult $135 $360 $30
Nonresident adult $195 $540 $45
Pine senior $105 $300 $25
Nonresident senior $150 $420 $35
Pine teen $105 $300 $25
Nonresident teen $150 $420 $35
NOTE:
*Family definition and age requirements will apply.
BUSINESS MEMBERSHIP PRICING
Pine Business, 1-4 Employees Joining
Membership Type Residency
3-Month
(pay in
full) Annual
12-Month
Debit
Pine business
employee adult
(age 18-64)
Resident $135 $360 $30
Pine business
employee adult
Nonresident $195 $432 $36
Pine business
employee and
family
Resident $240 $660 $55
§ A144-14 PINE CODE § A144-14
142:1074
BUSINESS MEMBERSHIP PRICING
Pine Business, 1-4 Employees Joining
Membership Type Residency
3-Month
(pay in
full) Annual
12-Month
Debit
Pine business
employee and
family
Nonresident $345 $792 $66
Pine business
senior (age 65+)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Pine business
senior (age 65+)
Nonresident $150 $420 $35
Pine business teen
(age 13-17)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Pine business teen
(age 13-17)
Nonresident $150 $420 $35
Pine Business, 5+ Employees Joining
Membership Type Residency
3-Month
(pay in
full) Annual
12-Month
Debit
Pine business
employee adult (age
18-64)
Resident $135 $360 $30
Pine business
employee adult
Nonresident$135 $360 $30
Pine business
employee and family
Resident $240 $660 $55
Pine business
employee and family
Nonresident$240 $660 $55
Pine business senior
(age 65+)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Pine business senior
(age 65+)
Nonresident$105 $300 $25
Pine business teen
(age 13-17)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Pine business teen
(age 13-17)
Nonresident$105 $300 $25
§ A144-14 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-14
142:1075
Non-Pine Business, 5+ Employees Joining
Membership Type Residency
3-Month
(pay in
full) Annual
12-Month
Debit
Non-Pine business
employee adult (age
18-64)
Resident $135 $360 $30
Non-Pine business
employee adult
Nonresident$195 $432 $36
Non-Pine business
employee and
family
Resident $240 $660 $55
Non-Pine business
employee and
family
Nonresident$345 $792 $66
Non-Pine business
senior (age 65+)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Non-Pine business
senior (age 65+)
Nonresident$150 $420 $35
Non-Pine business
teen (age 13-17)
Resident $105 $300 $25
Non-Pine business
teen (age 13-17)
Nonresident$150 $420 $35
NOTES:
1. Daily passes are available at the rates which follow:
Gym guest pass (use of gymnasium and track only): $6;
Facility guest pass: $12;
Fitness class drop-in (members): $8;
Fitness class drop-in (non-members): $10.
2. VIP memberships are available at an additional charge exclusively
on annual memberships. VIP memberships include complimentary
access to all scheduled fitness classes. Rates for VIP memberships
are an additional $20 per month (individual VIP membership) or
an additional $25 per month (family VIP membership) to the
respective annual rates shown above.
B. Pine Community Center facility rental rates. Rental of the below-stated,
various facilities within the Pine Community Center shall be subject to
availability and to all rules and regulations as may be separately
established for usage of such various facilities (and also for the Pine
Community Center itself) and may be provided upon payment of the
applicable, respective usage fees set forth below. (For alcohol permit,
§ A144-14 PINE CODE § A144-14
142:1076
add $25 to below-stated rates.) [Amended 2-21-2012 by Res. No.
857]
Fee
Member, Resident,
and Nonprofit in
Pine
Weekday
Nonprime Prime
4-hour
package
6-hour
package
8-hour
package
10-hour
package**
Community Room A
or B*
$59.50 $70 $252 $357 $448 $595
Community Room A
& B*
$119 $140 $450 $637 $800 $1,062
Multipurpose Room I
or II
$34 $40 $144 $204 $256 $340
Meeting Room $37.50 $44 $158.50 $225 $282 $374
Gym, maple wood
floor (full)
$127.50 $150 $540 $765 $960 $1,275
Gym, maple wood
floor (half)
$76.50 $90 $324 $459 $576 $765
Exercise Room I or II $34 $40 $144 $204 $256 $340
Informal gathering
area
$34 $40 $144 $204 $256 $340
Catering kitchen $50 per use $50 per
use
$50 per
use
$50 per
use
$50 per
use
$50 per
use
Nonmember,
Associates,
Nonresident or
Nonprofit Business
(Out of Pine)
Weekday
Nonprime
Prime 4-hour
package
6-hour
package
8-hour
package
10-hour
package**
Community Room A
or B*
$68 $80 $288 $408 $512 $680
Community Room A
& B*
$136 $160 $522 $739 $928 $1,232
Multipurpose Room I
or II
$43 $50 $180 $255 $320 $425
Meeting Room $47.50 $55 $198 $280 $352 $468
Gym, maple wood
floor (full)
$145 $170 $612 $867 $1,088 $1,445
Gym, maple wood
floor (half)
$85 $100 $360 $510 $640 $850
Exercise Room I or II $43 $50 $180 $255 $320 $425
Informal gathering
area
$43 $50 $180 $255 $320 $425
Catering kitchen 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use
§ A144-14 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A144-14
142:1077
Fee
Pine Business Weekday
Nonprime
Prime 4-hour
package
6-hour
package
8-hour
package
10-hour
package**
Community Room A
or B*
$61 $72 $259 $367 $461 $612
Community Room A
& B*
$122 $144 $470 $665 $835 $1,109
Multipurpose Room I
or II
$38 $45 $162 $230 $288 $383
Meeting Room $42 $50 $178 $253 $317 $422
Gym, maple wood
floor (full)
$131 $153 $551 $780 $979 $1,301
Gym, maple wood
floor (half)
$77 $90 $324 $459 $576 $765
Exercise Room I or II $38 $45 $162 $230 $288 $383
Informal gathering
area
$38 $45 $162 $230 $288 $383
Catering kitchen 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use 50 per use
NOTES:
* Four-hour rental minimum during prime time hours (Community Room)
** Ten-hour rate equals all day (maximum 10 hours).
C. Pine Community Center wedding package facility rental rates. [Added
2-21-2012 by Res. No. 857]
10-Hour Packages
Resident Nonresident
Ballroom, all day $1,062 $1,232
Rehearsal dinner (1/2 E or W) $252 $288
Kitchen $50 $50
Photo shoot — —
Gazebo wedding (Bring a tent,
room backup)
$300 $350
Ballroom and gazebo $1,362 $1,582
Ballroom and rehearsal dinner $1,314 $1,520
Ballroom, rehearsal dinner and
gazebo
$1,464 $1,870
§ A144-14 PINE CODE § A144-14
142:1078
Chapter A145
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR TAX ON EARNED INCOME
AND NET PROFITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 128.
§ A145-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in the tax resolutions/ordinances
and in these rules and regulations have the following meanings unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT — Act 511 Tax, the Local Tax Enabling Act.223
ASSESSMENT — The determination by a local taxing authority of the
amount of underpayment by a taxpayer.[Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No.
564]
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily a domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
NOTES:
1. Kitchen not included in above pricing.
2. Packages may also be eligible for additional discounts (menu and
accessories) on goods/services provided by participating area
merchants.
223. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ A144-14 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-1
142:1079
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. 1, Subpt. B, Art. V (relating
to personal income tax). Employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971.
The term shall not include offsets for business losses. The amount of any
housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable
as earned income.[Amended 12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686; 6-15-2009 by
Res. No. 801]
EMPLOYEE — A natural person employed by an employer on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis.
EMPLOYER — A natural person, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body/bodies or unit or agency or any other entity employing
one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
basis.
INCOME TAX OFFICER(S) — A person, public employee or private agency
designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax on
earned income and net profits. For purposes of these regulations, said
person will be referred to as the "tax officer(s)" or "officer(s)."
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY — An association that is a limited liability
company organized and existing under Act 106 of 1994, known as the
"Limited Liability Company Act,"224 or the laws of another state.[Added
4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP — A general or limited partnership
which has elected limited liability partnership status under Act 106 of 1994,
known as the "Limited Liability Company Act"225 or the laws of another
state.[Added 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — A political subdivision levying an eligible
tax. The term shall include any officer, agent, agency, Clerk, income tax
officer, collector, employee or other person to whom the governing body
has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment, determination or
administration of an eligible tax. The term shall not include a tax collector
or collection agency who has no authority to audit a taxpayer to determine
the amount of an eligible tax or whose only responsibility is to collect an
eligible tax on behalf of the governing body.[Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No.
564]
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971,"226 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V
224. Editor's Note: See 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 8901 et seq.
225. Editor's Note: See 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 8901 et seq.
226. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ A145-1 PINE CODE § A145-1
142:1080
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:[Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No.
489; 12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district. A nonresident subject to the tax under
§ A145-2D hereof is hereinafter referred to as an "applicable nonresident."
ORDINANCE — The legislation enacting the tax.
OVERPAYMENT — Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner
provided by law not to be legally due.[Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
REGULATIONS — The Township of Pine and Pine Richland School District
Rules and Regulations for Tax on Earned Income and Net Profits, as may
be amended from time to time, promulgated pursuant to the ordinance and
resolution.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
RESOLUTION — The official School Board or municipal governing body's
action, by resolution or ordinance, levying the earned income and net
profits tax and adopting applicable tax regulations.
RESTRICTED PROFESSIONAL COMPANY — A limited liability company
that renders one or more restricted professional services.[Added
4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX — The Township of Pine and Pine Richland School District earned
income and net profits tax.
TAXING DISTRICT or DISTRICT — The Township of Pine and Pine Richland
School District, levying the earned income and net profits tax and requiring
resident employers to withhold the tax.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes;
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ A145-1 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-1
142:1081
UNDERPAYMENT — The amount or portion of any tax determined to be
legally due in the manner provided by law for which payment or remittance
has not been made.[Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
§ A145-2. Imposition of tax.
A. The tax levied by the district shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned in the period beginning January l of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year or for
taxpayer fiscal years beginning in the current year, except that taxes
imposed for the first time shall become effective from the date specified
in the ordinance or resolution, and the tax shall continue in force on a
calendar-year or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis, without annual
reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in rate shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance.
B. The entire earned income and net profits received and/or earned by a
resident or applicable nonresident of the taxing district is subject to the
tax. Neither the source of the earned income or net profits nor the place
where it is received and/or earned exempts a resident or applicable
nonresident from the tax.
C. Resident taxation.
(1) All residents of the Township of Pine are subject to the tax. A
"resident" is an individual who is domiciled in the taxing district as
evidenced by one or more of the following:
(a) By customarily being physically present, sleeping and eating
there.
(b) By maintaining religious, civic and club affiliations there.
(c) By holding oneself out as residing there, i.e., giving address or
registration for licenses, voting or payment of per capita,
personal property or income taxes.
(d) By spouse and minor children living there.
(e) By the center of affairs appearing to be there.
(2) Normally it is not difficult to determine the residence or domicile of
an individual because most of the determining factors usually point
to one conclusion. If a person has the foregoing factors occurring in
one district, he is a resident of the district. In more difficult
situations, each case must be determined solely on its own facts.
D. Nonresident taxation. [Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
(1) Nonresidents who are employed or who reside temporarily in the
Township of Pine are subject to the tax on earned income and net
profit received while employed or temporarily residing in the
§ A145-1 PINE CODE § A145-2
142:1082
district. Appropriate credit will be given to such nonresidents for
similar taxes paid to the jurisdiction in which they are domiciled to
the extent that such similar taxes are not used as a credit against
any other taxes payable by the nonresident.
(2) Nonresidents are not subject to taxation by the school district.
E. Taxable income. The tax is imposed on earned income and net profits as
both are defined in § A145-1 of these rules and regulations. These items
are subject to the tax whether a taxpayer receives them directly or
through an agent.
F. Earned income. Examples of earned income (without intending in any
way to limit the provisions of the resolutions/ordinances to these
examples) are:
(1) Salaries.
(2) Wages.
(3) Commissions.
(4) Bonuses.
(5) Contributions to deferred income plans, i.e., 401K, IRA, SEP and
other plans deferred from federal tax but subject to Pennsylvania
tax.
(6) Court awards to the extent that they represent back wages.
(7) Director's fees.
(8) Distributions (including interest earned) from a pension plan,
deferred payment programs and individual retirement accounts
other than by reason of death, disability, retirement upon reaching
a specific age or rollover to another deferred payment program to
the extent that they have not been previously taxed and as included
in compensation of the Pennsylvania tax return. [Amended
12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
(9) Drawing accounts. (If amounts received as a drawing account
exceed the salary or commissions earned, the tax is payable on the
amounts received. If the employee subsequently repays to the
employer any amounts not in fact earned, the tax shall be adjusted
accordingly but not below zero.)
(10) Early retirement payment incentives.
(11) Employer contributions to a cafeteria plan to the extent the
employee could have elected taxable benefits as included in
Pennsylvania wages, but excluding those contributions within a
qualified Section 125 Plan for hospitalization benefits; sickness,
disability, or death benefits; supplemental unemployment benefits;
or strike benefits. Contributions for payment of care for employee's
§ A145-2 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-2
142:1083
dependents shall be included within the definition of "earned
income." [Amended 12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
(12) Executor's fees.
(13) Exercised stock options.
(14) Fees.
(15) Fellowships and stipends paid as regular wages for services
rendered unless excluded in Subsection H.
(16) Honoraria.
(17) Incentive payments.
(18) Jury and witness fees.
(19) Nonactive military duty pay; active military duty pay if earned
within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended 12-1-2003
by Res. No. 686]
(20) Noncompetition payments; payments received as consideration for
refraining from the performance of services (covenant not to
compete).
(21) (Reserved)227
(22) Proceeds from profit-sharing and stock-option plans unless
qualifying as a sole retirement plan and excluded from
Pennsylvania tax in the year received.
(23) Regular wages received during a period of sickness or disability.
(24) Reimbursed moving expense in excess of allowable expense on
Pennsylvania Schedule UE or Federal Schedule 3903 as stated in
§ A145-2J.
(25) Severance pay.
(26) Taxes assumed by the employer for the employee.
(27) Tips and gratuities.
(28) Vacation/holiday pay.
(29) All other forms of compensation for an employee's services,
including supplemental wage plans. Neither the kind nor rate of
payment nor the manner of employment exempts an employee from
the tax except as stated in § A145-2H. [Amended 12-1-2003 by
Res. No. 686]
G. Net profits.
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(21), Parsonage/housing allowance, was repealed
12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686.
§ A145-2 PINE CODE § A145-2
142:1084
(1) Net profits include any item correctly reportable on the net profits
from business, profession or farm and net income from rents,
royalties, patents and copyrights lines of Form PA 40, or as
reported on Schedule C, F, E and K-1, excluding those things not
taxed by the ordinance as set forth in § A145-2H.
(2) (Reserved)228
(3) Examples of net profits (without intending in any way to limit the
provisions of the resolution/ordinances to these examples) are:
(a) Joint-venture income as may be reported on Federal or
Pennsylvania Schedule K-1 or any other form acceptable as
part of the federal or Pennsylvania tax return of the individual.
(b) Partnership income as reported on Federal or Pennsylvania
Schedule K-1.
(c) Sole proprietorship as reported on Federal or Pennsylvania
Schedule C.
(d) Farm profit as reported on Federal or Pennsylvania Schedule F.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
(e) Income from a limited liability company, limited liability
partnership or restricted professional company which is
reported to a taxpayer. [Added 4-17-1995 by Res. No.
489229]
(f) Royalties received by authors, inventors, copyrights, etc.,
except from natural resource production, i.e., oil, gas and
lumber, etc.
(g) Income from the operation of hotels, motels, trailer camps,
tourist homes, boardinghouses and other similar businesses.
(h) Income from the business of renting personal property.
(i) (Reserved)230
(j) Income from the business of gambling.
(k) All other net profits of an individual enterprise, venture or
other activity, whether such activities are conducted within or
outside the taxing district.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2), dealing with income as reported on Federal
Schedule K-1 (1120S), was repealed 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489.
229. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided for the repeal of former Subsection G(3)(e),
which dealt with Subchapter S corporation income.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(3)(i), which provided that income or net profits from
renting or leasing property be an example of net profits, was repealed 11-20-2000 by Ord.
No. 613.
§ A145-2 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-2
142:1085
H. Exclusions from taxable income. The following are not considered to be
earned income and are not subject to the tax:
(1) Active military duty pay earned outside of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. [Amended 12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
(2) Alimony.
(3) Capital gains.
(4) Child support.
(5) Damages for personal injury.
(6) Death benefit payments to an employee's beneficiary or estate,
whether payable in a lump sum or otherwise.
(7) Disability or sick pay paid by a third-party insurance company.
(8) Distributions from pensions, deferred-income plans and individual
retirement accounts excluded from compensation on the
Pennsylvania tax return in the year received.
(9) Dividend income.
(10) Federally taxed but not Pennsylvania taxed noncash fringe benefits,
i.e., personal use of employer's automobile, airplane or group term
life insurance premiums.
(11) Fellowship based on need or academic achievement and therefore
not a benefit to the institution as documented by the institution and
not paid as regular wages or reported as compensation on the
Pennsylvania tax return.
(12) Gifts of cash or property made from detached or disinterested
generosity are not taxable. However, transfers of cash or property
made pursuant to an obligation to provide payment for
compensable services are taxable and not gifts.
(13) Interest income.
(14) Life insurance policy proceeds.
(15) Lottery and gambling winnings unless in the active business of
gambling.
(16) Public assistance.
(17) Income or net profits from the rental or lease of commercial or
residential real estate. [Amended 11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 613]
(18) Scholarships.
(19) S corporation net profit. [Added 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
§ A145-2 PINE CODE § A145-2
142:1086
(20) Social security.
(21) Strike benefits.
(22)SUB pay, when received periodically during a period of
unemployment continuing only for that period.
(23) (Reserved)231
(24)Workman's compensation.
(25) Unemployment compensation.
(26) Value of meals and lodging furnished to domestics or other
employees by the employer for the latter's convenience.
(27) Housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy. [Added
12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
(28) Royalty income received from natural resource production, i.e. oil,
gas and lumber etc. [Added 12-1-2003 by Res. No. 686]
I. Credit for tax paid to other states/municipalities.
(1) Where district residents are employed in another state and subject
to a state or local income tax at their place of employment, the
district will credit against their liability for any local taxes the
amount of tax paid out of state. The same dollar of the out-of-state
tax cannot be claimed as credit against liability for both state and
local taxes in Pennsylvania, but the credit can be divided and
apportioned against Pennsylvania state and local tax liability. Tax
payments made voluntarily to another state do not qualify for the
credit; there must be evidence that the taxpayer was legally liable
for the out-of-state taxes. This credit does not extend to taxes paid
to foreign countries. Credit for taxes paid to other states and
localities is limited to the amount payable to the district on that
portion of the taxpayer's income which was subject to taxation by
the other state.
(2) Taxpayers who wish to take credit for taxes paid to other
jurisdictions must complete a supplemental final return form,
which can be obtained from the tax office. Documentation must
include a notarized list of income earned in all jurisdictions along
with the respective taxes paid, a copy of the Pennsylvania
individual tax return and additional documentation as required.
J. Deductions.
(1) Employee's unreimbursed business expense. Business expenses for
which an employee has not been reimbursed are allowed as a
deduction from gross wages, provided that such expenses are
231. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H(22), which contained provisions on S corporation
investment income, was repealed 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489.
§ A145-2 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-2
142:1087
§ A145-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
necessary (required by the employer) in order for the taxpayer to
keep his present job, to the extent that they are allowable for state
income tax purposes on Pennsylvania Schedule UE which must be
submitted to allow deduction.
(2) Employee unreimbursed moving expense. Pennsylvania Schedule
UE or Federal Schedule 3903 must be submitted to allow
deduction.
K. Losses. [Amended 12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
(1) A business loss cannot be offset against earned income (W-2
wages). [Amended 6-15-2009 by Res. No. 801232]
(2) A business profit can be offset by a business loss. [Amended
6-15-2009 by Res. No. 801]
(3) Subchapter S corporation losses cannot be used as an offset as they
are not taxable items under the code.
(4) Rental losses cannot be used as an offset against earned income
unless the taxpayer is in the business of renting property.
(5) A net loss in any year may not be carried over to any other year.
A. Annual return of taxpayers.
(1) On or before April 15 of each year, every person who was a resident
or nonresident subject to the tax of the Township of Pine for all or
any part of the preceding calendar year shall file with the Tax
Officer an annual tax return showing all earned income and net
profits received and/or earned for the previous year. Proof of
earnings is required. A copy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
income tax return, W-2 statements and net profit schedules must be
submitted. Failure to submit the required attachments and
schedules shall result in the annual tax return being invalid and
therefore considered not filed.
(2) If a person has no earned income to report, the word "none" shall
be entered on the annual tax return, and the return shall be signed,
dated and returned to the officer with an explanation (military
service, retired, disability income only, etc.).
(3) If self-employment profit is incurred, the type of business,
profession or enterprise shall be indicated on the annual tax return,
and the amount of the profit shall be shown on the appropriate line
of the return.
232. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that it shall be effective for the tax year
commencing on 1-1-2009.
§ A145-2 PINE CODE § A145-3
142:1088
(4) When a return is made for a fiscal year, the return shall be filed
within 105 days from the end of said fiscal year.
(5) Such return shall also show the taxpayer's name, address, place or
places of employment or business, the amount of tax due, the
amount of any credit claimed for tax withheld by an employer (with
a copy of the withholding statement showing the amount of tax
withheld) and such other information as may be indicated on the
return form or as may be required by the Officer(s). Every person
subject to the tax shall file such return, regardless of the fact that
his wages may have been subject to withholding of the tax by his
employer and regardless of whether or not tax is due.
(6) At the time of filing the annual return, the taxpayer shall pay any
tax due. Total balances less than $1 need not be paid. In the case of
overpayment, request for refund of amounts over $10 or a credit
for amounts of $1 or more to the succeeding year may be made.
(7) Tax returns must be signed and dated by the taxpayer(s) in the
space(s) provided.
B. Quarterly returns of taxpayers.
(1) Quarterly filing, declaration and payment, if any due, shall be made
to the Tax Officer. One percent of the gross earnings and/or 1% of
the estimated net profit shall be paid to the Tax Officer at the
following times: [Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
(a) January, February and March: by April 30.
(b) April, May and June: by July 31.
(c) July, August and September: by October 31.
(d) October, November and December: by January 31.
(2) Quarterly filing is required, whether or not tax is due, with the
following exceptions: [Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No. 489]
(a) Tax payers who work part-time, i.e., students and retirees; who
anticipate earnings of $5,000 per year or less may be excused
from filing of quarterly returns upon approval of the Tax
Officer(s). Filing of the annual return is required.
C. Calendar years. Normally, taxpayers shall use the calendar-year method
for reporting and paying tax.
D. Extensions.
(1) A taxpayer who receives an extension for filing federal and state tax
returns shall present proof of such extension to the tax officer(s). A
copy of the federal or Pennsylvania application for extension of
time to file shall be required, along with payment of any estimated
additional tax due, by the annual filing due date. Upon filing of the
§ A145-3 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-3
142:1089
§ A145-4. Collection at source.
federal and state tax returns, the taxpayer shall file a final tax
return with the appropriate local officer with any additional tax
plus penalty and interest due. [Amended 4-17-1995 by Res. No.
489]
(2) A taxpayer who receives an extension on federal and state taxes
shall present proof of such extension to the Tax Officer(s), file and
pay an estimated tax return and, upon final filing of federal and
state tax returns, then file and pay (if additional tax is due) a final
tax return with the appropriate local officer(s).
E. Changes in taxable income. If the amount of a taxpayer's earned income
or net profits reported on his annual federal or Pennsylvania tax return
is changed or corrected, either by action of the Internal Revenue
Service or the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue or by the
individual's filing of an amended annual federal or state return, the
taxpayer shall report to the appropriate officer such change or
correction within 30 days after the date when the final such change or
correction was determined.
A. Employers required to withhold. Every employer having an office,
factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business
located within the taxing district and who employs one or more persons
(other than domestic servants in a private home) for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct the tax from the
resident and applicable nonresident employee's wages at the time of
payment thereof.
B. Voluntary withholding. Any employer located outside the taxing district
may voluntarily withhold the tax from employees who are residents or
applicable nonresidents of the taxing district but who are employed
outside the district.
C. Registration of employers.
(1) Each employer withholding or required to withhold tax pursuant to
Subsection A or B shall register with the Tax Officer(s) such
employer's name, address and such other information as the
Officer(s) may require after becoming a withholding employer.
(2) Any employers who have a place of business located within the
taxing district shall maintain complete records of all employees for
a period of six years in such form as to enable the Officer to
determine the employer's liability to withhold for each employee,
the amount of taxable income for each employee, the actual amount
withheld, the actual amount transmitted to the Officer(s) and such
other information available to such employers as will enable the
Officer(s) to carry out his responsibilities.
§ A145-3 PINE CODE § A145-4
142:1090
§ A145-5. Administration and enforcement.
D. Liability of employee. Failure of any employer to withhold tax shall not
relieve the employee from payment of such tax.
E. Returns of employers and payment of withheld tax.
(1) Every employer required to withhold the tax shall file a return on
the proper form, setting forth the name, social security number,
address and amount of tax withheld for each employee who is a
resident or applicable nonresident of the district and shall remit
the total sum thereof to the appropriate officer(s) at the following
times: [Amended 12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
For Quarter Comprising the
Following Months in Which
Wages Are Paid
Employers' Quarterly
Return and Payment Due
on or Before
January, February and March April 30
April, May and June July 31
July, August and September October 31
October, November and December January 31
(2) Every employer who discontinues business prior to the completion
of the taxable year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of
business, file and furnish the returns required by this section
covering periods between the last such returns and the date of
discontinuing business and transmit to the Officer(s) all tax
remaining due.
(3) The willful or negligent failure of any employer to withhold and/or
transmit the tax shall subject the employer to liability and penalties
as provided by the Act.
F. Tax received from an employer for individuals who are not domiciled or
temporarily domiciled in the Township will be returned to the employer.
[Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
A. Income Tax Officer(s)/Collector(s). The Officer(s) is charged with the
administration and enforcement of the resolutions/ordinances and
these rules and regulations and is authorized to act on behalf of the
Township of Pine and the Pine Richland School District in such
administrative and enforcement matters.
B. Administrative appeals. Any taxpayer or employer may file a petition in
the form and under the requirements of the Township of Pine and Pine
Richland School District tax disclosure statement to appeal the
assessment, determination or refund of an eligible tax. [Amended
12-7-1998 by Res. No. 564]
C. Examination of books and records.
§ A145-4 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-5
142:1091
(1) The Officer(s) and agents designated in writing by him are
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer or of any employer or supposed
employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return or, if no
return was filed, to ascertain the tax due, if any. Every taxpayer or
supposed taxpayer and every employer or supposed employer is
required to give the Officer(s) or any agent so designated by him
the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are authorized.
(2) Information obtained by the Officer(s) or his agent, as a result of
any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or
authorized, is confidential and may not be disclosed to any person,
except for official use in connection with administration or
enforcement of the resolutions/ordinances or as otherwise
provided by law.
D. Records to be kept by taxpayers. Taxpayers and employers subject to
the resolutions/ordinances are required to keep such records as will
enable the filing of true and accurate returns, whether of taxes withheld
at source or of taxes payable upon earned income or net profits, or
both; and such records shall be preserved for a period of not less than
six years in order to enable the Tax Officer(s) or his agent to verify the
correctness of the returns filed.
E. Refunds and credits. A completed annual tax return and all necessary
documentation must be filed before a request for refund or credit can
be considered. Depending upon the nature of the refund or credit,
additional documentation to substantiate the request may be required.
Amounts less than $10 will not be refunded unless tax is withheld by
employer or taxpayer has moved out of the district or retired. Refunds
shall not be made unless a written claim is filed within three years of
the annual return due date. Overpayment greater than $1 will be
credited to the succeeding year if a refund has not been issued.
F. Interest on refunds. The district will pay interest on any tax money
which has been collected but to which it is not legally entitled. The rate
of interest shall be the same as the commonwealth's variable rate. The
interest shall be allowed and paid for the period during which the
district retained the overpayment, beginning with the date of the
overpayment, except that if any overpayment of tax is refunded or
credited within 75 days of either April 15 of the succeeding year if the
final return and full verification is filed by then or the date of filing a
final return and full verification if it occurs after April 15 of the
succeeding year, then no interest shall be allowed on the overpayment.
G. Interest and penalties. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due,
interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an
additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for recovery of any such tax,
§ A145-5 PINE CODE § A145-5
142:1092
the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of
collection and interest and penalties herein imposed.
H. Suit for collection of tax.
(1) The Officer(s) may sue in the name of the taxing district for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under the ordinance.
(2) Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed pursuant to the
regulations shall be begun within three years after such tax is due
or within three years after the declaration or return has been filed,
whichever date is later; provided, however, that this limitation shall
not prevent the institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due
or determined to be due in the following cases:
(a) Where no declaration or return or an incomplete declaration or
return was filed by any person although a declaration or return
was required to be filed by him under provisions of the
ordinance or resolution, there shall be no limitation.
(b) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or
return in the possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent
evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(c) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25%
or more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(d) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of
the ordinance or resolution and has failed to pay the amounts
so deducted to the Officer(s) or where any person has willfully
failed or omitted to make the deductions required by the
regulations, there shall be no limitation.
(e) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body
from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided
by Pennsylvania Act 511.
(f) The Officer(s) may sue for the recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided that such suit is begun two years after making such
refund, except that the suit may be brought within five years if
it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation of material fact.
I. Fines and penalties for violations. Any person who violates any
provisions of the resolutions, ordinances and regulations shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, plus costs, and in default of payment thereof, to be imprisoned
for a time not exceeding 30 days. Some of the violations which may
result in such conviction are:
§ A145-5 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-5
142:1093
§ A145-6. Tax disclosure statement. [Added 12-7-1998 by Res. No.
564]
The Township of Pine and the Pine Richland School District shall prepare,
utilize and distribute a tax disclosure statement in the form set forth in
Attachment 1,233 the provisions of which are hereby incorporated herein
by reference, to these rules and regulations which shall, in simple and
nontechnical terms, set forth: the rights of taxpayers and obligations of
the local taxing authority during an audit or administrative review; the
administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer may appeal or
seek judicial review of any adverse decision of the local taxing authority; the
procedure for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer complaints;
and enforcement procedures. The local taxing authority shall notify (with
such notification to be in the form provided by Act 50 of 1998234) any
taxpayer contacted regarding the assessment, audit, determination, review
(1) Revelation for unauthorized purposes by any officer(s) or employee
of any confidential information acquired as a result of the operation
of the resolutions, ordinances or regulations.
(2) Failure, neglect or refusal on the part of any person, any partner of
a partnership or any officer of a corporation or association to file
any report or return or to pay, deduct from wages or transmit any
tax, penalty or interest required of such person, partnership,
corporation or unincorporated association.
(3) Failure, neglect or refusal to maintain or to reveal to the Officer(s)
or his authorized representative or to permit the latter to examine
books, records or papers relevant to tax imposed hereunder.
(4) Knowingly making any incomplete, false or fraudulent report or
return or attempting to do any other thing to avoid payment of the
tax in whole or in part.
J. Concurrent remedies. Imposition of any fine or imprisonment shall not
bar either the liability for tax, penalty or interest or prosecution for
embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, theft or other offense under the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
K. Failure to receive forms. Failure of a taxpayer or employer to receive
forms or returns required by the resolutions, ordinances or regulations
shall not excuse any failure to file any reports or returns required or to
pay any tax due.
L. Nonsufficient-funds checks. Any taxpayer or employer who submits a
nonsufficient-funds check for payment of taxes due under resolutions,
ordinances or regulations shall be charged a fee of $20 for
administrative processing of such check.
233. Editor's Note: Attachment 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
234. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8423.
§ A145-5 PINE CODE § A145-6
142:1094
or collection of an eligible tax of the availability of such tax disclosure
statement and shall make copies available to taxpayers upon request at no
charge to the taxpayer, including mailing costs.
§ A145-7. Volunteer Service Credit Program. [Added 11-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 381235]
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — An individual who volunteers at a volunteer
fire company and has satisfied the following conditions:
APPLICATION — A form provided by the Township of Pine to a
volunteer applying for certification under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program.
AUTHORIZED EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — Keystone
Collections Group or the current regional earned income tax collector
for the Township of Pine.
COMMISSIONER — The State Fire Commissioner of the
Commonwealth.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."236
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn
credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an
emergency call with one of the entities listed under Subsection B(3).
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a
volunteer responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's
home, place of business or other place where he/she shall have been
when the call was received.
VOLUNTEER — A member (including a business member) of a
volunteer fire company.
Completes the activities of the Volunteer Service Credit Program
set forth in Subsection B;
(1)
Receives certification as an active volunteer by the Chief or his/her
designee of a volunteer fire company; and
(2)
Receives approval as an active volunteer by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Pine.
(3)
B. Program established; criteria; general provisions.
235. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to 1-20-2017.
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ A145-6 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-7
142:1095
(1) Establishment. The Township of Pine hereby establishes a
volunteer service credit program. The goal of the program is to
encourage membership and service in volunteer fire companies
providing invaluable services to the Township of Pine and its
residents.
(2) Program criteria. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
shall establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met
to qualify for credits under the program based on the following:
(a) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(b) The level of training and participation in formal training and
drills for a volunteer.
(c) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on
administrative and other support services, including but not
limited to:
[1] Fund-raising.
[2] Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
[3] Financial bookkeeping.
(d) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the
financial viability, emergency response, or operational
readiness of a volunteer fire company.
(e) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
(3) Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available
to residents of the municipality who are volunteers of the following
volunteer fire companies:
(a) Wexford volunteer fire company.
(4) Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set
by separate resolution authorized under this section, during the
eligibility period to qualify for the local earned income tax credits
authorized under Subsection C.
(a) For Tax Year 2017, the eligibility period under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program shall run from January 20, 2017, until
October 31, 2017.
(b) For Tax Year 2018, and each subsequent tax year thereafter,
the eligibility period shall run from the prior November 1 until
October 31 of the year for which the tax credit will apply.
(5) Recordkeeping. The Chief (or his/her designee) of each volunteer
fire company listed under Subsection B(3) shall keep specific
records of each volunteer's activities in a service log to establish
§ A145-7 PINE CODE § A145-7
142:1096
necessary credits under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
Service logs shall be subject to audit/review by:
(a) The Township Manager of the Township of Pine or his/her
designee;
(b) The State Fire Commissioner; and
(c) The State Auditor General.
(6) Volunteer application. On or before the first Monday in November
of each year, volunteers who have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an
application for certification (as provided by the Township of Pine)
to their Chief or his/her designee. The Chief or his/her designee
shall sign the application, if the volunteer has met the minimum
criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit Program, and shall forward
said application to the Township Manager of the Township of Pine,
together with the notarized list required by Subsection B(7), within
the timeframe specified herein.
(7) Notarized list. On or before November 15 of each year, the Chief, or
his/her designee, shall deliver to the Township Manager of the
Township of Pine a notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that
have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and have applied for certification pursuant to Subsection
B(6). The Chief, or his/her designee, shall also post a copy of the
notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer fire
company's facilities.
(8) Municipal review. The Township Manager of the Township of Pine
shall review the applications for credit under the Volunteer Service
Credit Program and shall cross-reference them with the notarized
eligibility list. At the first regular meeting in December of each
year, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine shall
approve or disapprove the volunteers that appear on the notarized
list submitted pursuant to Subsection B(6). All applicants approved
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine shall then be
issued an earned income tax credit certificate by the Township
Manager of the Township of Pine by no later than December 15 of
each year.
(9) Appeal of denial of certification. A volunteer who is denied
certification as an active volunteer shall have the right to request a
hearing before the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
within 30 days of the denial pursuant to the provisions of 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and
procedure of local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7,
Subchapter B (relating to judicial review of local agency action),
also known as the "Local Agency Law."237
237. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ A145-7 WATER DISTRICTS, ESTABLISHMENT OF § A145-7
142:1097
(10) Official tax credit register. The Township of Pine shall keep an
official tax credit register of all active volunteers that were issued
earned income tax credit certificates. No later than December 31 of
each year, the Township Manager of the Township of Pine shall
issue updates, as needed, of the official tax credit register to the
following:
(a) The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine;
(b) Chief of the Wexford Volunteer Fire Company; and
(c) Authorized earned income tax collector.
(11) Injured volunteers.
(a) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future earned income tax
credits. The injury must have occurred while responding to,
participating in, or returning from an emergency response call
with one of the entities listed under Subsection B(3).
(b) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation
from a licensed physician with the application required under
Subsection B(6) stating that their injury prevents them from
performing duties to qualify as an active volunteer. In such a
case, the injured emergency responder shall be deemed an
active volunteer for that tax year.
(c) An injured emergency responder with a continuing qualifying
injury shall annually submit the application required under
Subsection B(6), along with updated documentation from a
licensed physician stating that the injury still exists and
prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer. The
injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. Such an injured emergency
responder shall only be deemed an active volunteer for a
maximum of five consecutive tax years.
C. Earned income tax credit.
(1) Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Township of Pine's Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be
eligible to receive a local earned income tax credit of up to $300 of
the earned income tax levied by the Township of Pine. When an
active volunteer's earned income tax liability is less than the
amount of the tax credit, the tax credit shall equal the individual's
earned income tax liability.
(2) Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may claim a
tax credit on his (or her) Township of Pine earned income tax
liability when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year
with the authorized earned income tax collector.
§ A145-7 PINE CODE § A145-7
142:1098
Chapter A146
(RESERVED)
Chapter A147
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 13.
(3) Rejection of tax credit claim.
(a) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the
taxpayer is not on the official tax credit register issued by the
Township Manager of the Township of Pine.
(b) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be
notified, in writing, of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing
the decision pursuant to Subsection D.
(c) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer pursuant to Subsection D.
D. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under Subsection C shall
have a right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under Subsection C shall follow the
provisions of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the
"Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights,"238 and Chapter A145 (Attachment
1) of the Code of the Township of Pine.
E. Penalties for false reporting.
(1) Any individual who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false
report in an application for certification under this section commits
a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
(2) Any individual who knowingly provides or conspires to provide
false information that is used to compile a service log under this
section commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a
fine of $2,500.
238. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ A145-7 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN § A145-7
A147:1099
§ A147-1. Findings.
Whereas, § 7503 of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services
Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq., mandates that the Township of Pine
prepare, maintain and keep current an emergency operations plan for
the prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by a major
emergency or disaster within the Township; and whereas, in response to the
mandate stated above, the Township of Pine has prepared an emergency
operations plan to provide prompt and effective emergency response
procedures to be followed in the event of a major emergency or disaster;
and whereas, the Township of Pine has also prepared an emergency
operations plan in order to reduce the potential effects of a major
emergency or disaster and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of this Township.
§ A147-2. Adoption of plan.
The Supervisors of the Township of Pine do hereby approve, adopt and
place into immediate effect the Emergency Operations Plan of the Township
of Pine.239 This plan shall be reviewed every two years to make certain
that it conforms with the requirements of the Allegheny County Emergency
Operations Guideline.
Chapter A148
COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalty on delinquent real estate taxes — See
Ch. 128, Art. V.
Realty transfer tax — See Ch. 128, Art. VI.
Rules and regulations for tax on earned
income and net profits — See Ch. A145.
§ A148-1. Regulations and fees established.
The following regulations and administrative fees shall apply to and be
imposed upon the collection of real estate taxes by its Township Manager
for the Township of Pine and the Pine-Richland School District.
§ A148-2. Preparation fee.
Requests for real estate tax certifications shall be subject to a preparation
fee of $12 per certification payable in advance by the party requesting the
same.
239. Editor's Note: The text of the Emergency Operations Plan is on file in the Township offices,
where it may be examined during regular office hours.
§ A145-7 PINE CODE § A148-3
A148:1100
§ A148-3. Payment by check required.
All payments of real estate taxes tendered to the Township Manager by mail
or at the Township's Municipal Building shall be made by check. No cash
shall be accepted for such taxes by the Township Manager at the Township's
Municipal Building.
§ A148-4. Returned check fee.
Any checks in payment of real estate taxes that are not negotiable or
returned or dishonored for the reasons of postdating or insufficient funds
shall subject the taxpayer to a returned check fee of $20 so as to
compensate the Township of Pine for its effort and expense in processing
such returned check. Such fee shall be in addition to any and all other fees,
taxes, penalties and interest against the taxpayer.
§ A148-5. Full payment required.
Partial payment of real estate taxes, whether Township portion or school
district portion, shall not be accepted by the Township Manager. Any checks
tendered in less than the full amount due shall be returned by the Township
Manager to the taxpayer.
Chapter A149
STORMWATER CONTROL SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Excavations and grading — See Ch. 48.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 23.
Sewers — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
78.
Zoning — See Ch. 84.
§ A148-3 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § A148-5
A148:1101

ARTICLE I
Oversight, Inspection and Management
[Adopted 10-17-2016 by Res. No. 950]
§ A149-1. Policies and procedures established.
The Township's policies and procedures related to the oversight, inspection,
management, and administration of stormwater control systems and
facilities within the Township of Pine shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. Except as otherwise may be provided herein, the Township of Pine shall
proceed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Second
Class Township Code (Article XXVII; 53 P.S. § 67601 et seq.).
B. The Board of Supervisors shall establish any stormwater management
district by enactment of an ordinance therefor.
C. Each property owner within a stormwater management district may be
required to dedicate, free of cost, public right-of-way through such
property to facilitate the construction, installation, alteration,
inspection, or maintenance of the stormwater control systems and
facilities.
D. The Board of Supervisors may authorize and elect to directly bid and
award any contract to construct, install, alter, inspect, repair, or
maintain such stormwater control systems and facilities, pursuant to
the established procedures of the Township of Pine.
E. The Township of Pine may make the initial payment of all necessary
costs and expenses for the construction, installation, alteration,
inspection, repair, or maintenance of stormwater control systems and
facilities, including associated engineering and legal fees.
F. All property owners within a stormwater management district shall be
assessed by the Township of Pine for all such costs and expenses in
connection with the stormwater-related activities specified in this
article, with such assessments to be instituted and enforced in a
manner authorized and permitted by Article XXVII (Storm Water
Management Plans and Facilities) of the Second Class Township Code,
as most recently amended July 1, 2016, by P.L. 439, No. 62. Any funds
collected through such assessments of fees upon property owners shall
be used by the Township of Pine solely for the purposes authorized by
the provisions of the above-referenced Article XXVII of the Second
Class Township Code.
G. Any owner of property so assessed by the Township of Pine shall have
such assessment filed with the Township Treasurer and shall be
responsible to pay same in annual or more frequent installments (as
may be specified in the ordinance which establishes such stormwater
§ A149-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § A149-1
A148:1103
management district or otherwise establishes the assessment related
thereto).
H. A municipal lien shall be filed by the Township of Pine against all
properties within the stormwater management district for which the
assessments are not immediately paid in full in the amount of said
assessment.
I. Attorneys' fees incurred on all accounts referred to the Township's
Solicitor for enforcement and collection shall, if not collected in due
course with the debt as by voluntary agreement, shall be included in all
claims (including liens) filed on behalf of the Township of Pine in the
course of enforcement, including (if accrued before liening) in any
claim originally filed with the Prothonotary and in accordance with
Ordinance No. 281 of the Township of Pine.240
240. Editor's Note: See Chapter 3, Attorney Fees.
§ A149-1 PINE CODE § A149-1
A148:1104
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
741
4-17-2006 Human Resource Policy
amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Res. No.
742
5-1-2006 National Incident
Management System
NCM
Res. No.
743
5-15-2006 Investment of note
proceeds
NCM`
Ord. No.
334
6-5-2006 Alarm devices
amendment
Ch. 91
Ord. No.
335
6-19-2006 Public contracts: bidding
practices and procedures
Ch. 9A, Art. I
Res. No.
744
7-18-2006 Grant request NCM
Res. No.
745
8-7-2006 Temporary traffic signals NCM
Res. No.
746
9-5-2006 Transfer of liquor license NCM
Res. No.
747
9-18-2006 Signature for grant for
Pine Community Center
Phase I project
NCM
Res. No.
748
11-6-2006 Wood Haven Water
District assessments
NCM
Res. No.
749
11-20-2006 Human Resource Policy
amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Res. No.
750
12-4-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
751
12-4-2006 2007 budget NCM
Res. No.
752
12-4-2006 Police Pension Trust
contribution reduction
NCM
Res. No.
753
1-16-2007 Authorization given to
state to collect deed
transfer taxes
NCM
§ A149-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1105
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
754
1-2-2007 Appointments and 2007
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
755
1-2-2007 2007 Township meeting
dates and location
NCM
Res. No.
756
1-16-2007 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
757
2-20-2007 Adoption of Allegheny
County Hazard
Vulnerability Assessment
and Mitigation Plan
NCM
Res. No.
758
Not adopted
Res. No.
759
5-21-2007 Standard details Superseded by Res.
No. 808-2009
Res. No.
760
7-16-2007 Grant request NCM
Res. No.
761
7-16-2007 Blighted property
determination
NCM
Ord. No.
336
9-4-2007 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 116
Ord. No.
337
3-5-2007 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 120
Ord. No.
338
Number not used
Ord. No.
339
6-18-2007 Right-of-way vacation NCM
Res. No.
762
9-4-2007 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
763
9-4-2007 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
764
9-4-2007 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
340
10-15-2007 Right-of-way vacation NCM
Res. No.
765
11-19-2007 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
341
12-3-2007 Solid waste management Ch. 126
Res. No.
766
12-3-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1106
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
767
12-3-2007 2008 budget NCM
Res. No.
768
12-3-2007 Police Pension Trust
contribution reduction
NCM
Res. No.
769
12-3-2007 Transfer of liquor license NCM
Res. No.
770
12-3-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Res. No.
771
1-7-2008 Appointments and 2008
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
772
1-7-2008 2008 Township meeting
dates and location
NCM
Ord. No.
342
1-22-2008 Acquisition of land NCM
Res. No.
773
Number not used
Res. No.
774
2-19-2008 Disposition of certain
public records
NCM
Res. No.
775
Number not used
Res. No.
776
2-19-2008 Transportation Impact
Fee Advisory Committee
Chs. 20 (reference
only); 42
Ord. No.
343
3-3-2008 Franchise agreement NCM
Res. No.
780
4-19-2008 Approval of liquor license
transfer
NCM
Res. No.
777
4-22-2008 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
344
5-5-2008 Sidewalk maintenance
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. VIII
Res. No.
778
5-5-2008 Transfer of liquor license NCM
Res. No.
779
6-16-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Ord. No.
345
9-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res. No.
781
9-15-2008 Naming rights policy NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1107
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
346
11-17-2008 Local services tax Ch. 128, Art. VII
Res. No.
782
11-17-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Ord. No.
347
12-1-2008 Mercantile tax; business
privilege tax
Ch. 128, Arts. III and
IV
Res. No.
783
12-1-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
784
12-1-2008 2009 Township budget NCM
Res. No.
785
12-1-2008 Northern Regional Police
Pension Plan participant
contribution amendment
NCM
Res. No.
786
12-1-2008 Delegation of signature
authority
NCM
Res. No.
787
1-5-2009 Procedures for
administration and
enforcement of electrical
inspections
NCM
Res. No.
788
1-5-2009 Appointments and setting
of 2009 official holidays
NCM
Res. No.
789
1-5-2009 2009 Township meeting
dates and location
NCM
Res. No.
790
1-5-2009 Street acceptances NCM
Res. No.
791
Authorization for
accounts and loans
NCM
Res. No.
792
1-20-2009 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
793
1-20-2009 Disposition of certain
public records
NCM
Res. No.
794
2-17-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Ord. No.
348
3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res. No.
795
4-6-2009 Approval of additional
expenditures beyond total
approved in 2009 budget
of Northern Regional
Police Department
NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1108
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
796
4-6-2009 Approval of unrestricted
donation of funds to
Wexford Volunteer Fire
Company
NCM
Res. No.
797
5-4-2009 Approval of transfer of
liquor license
NCM
Res. No.
798
5-4-2009 Approval of transfer of
liquor license
NCM
Res. No.
799
5-4-2009 Confirmation of grant
application
NCM
Ord. No.
349
6-1-2009 Roadway repair
agreement
NCM
Res. No.
800
6-15-2009 Approval of transfer of
liquor license
NCM
Res. No.
801
6-15-2009 Rules and regulations for
tax on earned income and
net profits amendment
Ch. A145
Res. No.
802
7-6-2009 Signature authority for
North Hills DUI Task
Force agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
350
7-27-2009 Fire prevention:
International Fire Code
Superseded by Ord.
No. 363
Res. No.
803
8-18-2009 Trail maintenance
agreement
NCM
Res. No.
804
8-18-2009 Appointment of Tax
Collection Committee
delegates
NCM
Res. No.
805
9-21-2009 Grant request NCM
Res. No.
806
9-21-2009 Policy for employees
serving as members of
volunteer fire company
NCM
Res. No.
807
10-5-2009 Energy audit participation NCM
Ord. No.
351
10-19-2009 Real estate acquisition NCM
Res. No.
808
11-2-2009 Standard details Ch. 70
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1109
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
352
11-16-2009 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 78; 84
Ord. No.
353
11-16-2009 Establishment of levels of
financial support to
Wexford Volunteer Fire
Company
NCM
Ord. No.
354
12-7-2009 Street vacation NCM
Res. No.
809
12-7-2009 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
Res. No.
810
12-7-2009 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
811
12-7-2009 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
812
12-7-2009 Policy governing
prevention, deterrence,
detection, investigation
and punishment of fraud
and corruption
NCM
Ord. No.
354
9-7-2009 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
355
9-20-2010 Incurrence of debt NCM
Res. No.
813
1-4-2010 Ratification of Northern
Regional Police Pension
Plan
NCM
Res. No.
814
1-4-2010 Appointments and 2010
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
815
1-4-2010 2010 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
816
1-4-2010 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
817
1-4-2010 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
818
1-19-2010 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
819
3-15-2010 Transfer of liquor license NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1110
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
820
5-3-2010 Declaration of state of
emergency: 2-9-2010
through 2-11-2010
snowstorm
NCM
Res. No.
821
6-21-2010 Reimbursement
agreement
NCM
Res. No.
822
6-21-2010 Opposition to House Bill
2431
NCM
Res. No.
823
7-6-2010 Transfer of liquor license NCM
Res. No.
824
10-18-2010 Grant NCM
Ord. No.
356
11-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Ord. No.
357
11-1-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Res. No.
825
11-1-2010 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
826
11-1-2010 Confirmation of grant
application
NCM
Res. No.
827
11-1-2010 Supplemental
appropriations
Repealed by Res. No.
828
Res. No.
828
11-15-2010 Supplemental
appropriations; repeal of
Res. No. 827
NCM
Res. No.
829
12-6-2010 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
830
12-6-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
Res. No.
831
12-6-2010 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
832
12-6-2010 Ratification of Northern
Regional Police Pension
Plan
NCM
Res. No.
833
1-3-2011 Appointments and 2011
holidays
NCM
Res. No.
834
1-3-2011 2011 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
835
2-22-2011 Disposition of public
records
NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1111
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
836
3-21-2011 Confirmation and
approval of land use
assumptions report and
roadway sufficiency
analysis; adopting new
transportation capital
improvements plan
NCM
Res. No.
837
3-21-2011 Urging General Assembly
and Governor to enact
state-wide property tax
reassessment moratorium
NCM
Ord. No.
358
4-4-2011 Transportation
Improvements Program
amendment
Ch. 80
Ord. No.
359
4-4-2011 Franchise agreement NCM
Res. No.
838
5-16-2011 Erection of traffic signals NCM
Res. No.
839
5-16-2011 Erection of traffic signals NCM
Res. No.
840
5-16-2011 Retirement plan and trust NCM
Res. No.
841
6-6-2011 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
360
7-18-2011 Supervisor salary NCM
Res. No.
842
7-18-2011 Erection of traffic signals NCM
Ord. No.
361
8-1-2011 Right-of-way vacation NCM
Ord. No.
362
Number not used
Res. No.
843
9-6-2011 Regional Police Pension
Plan amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
846
Res. No.
844
1-3-2012 Appointments and 2012
holidays
NCM
Res. No.
845
1-3-2012 2012 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
846
11-7-2011 Regional Police Pension
Plan amendment; repeal
of Res. No. 843
NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1112
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
847
1-3-2012 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
363
11-21-2011 Fire prevention: Fire
Prevention Code repealer;
International Fire Code
Ch 54, Art. I
(reference only); Art.
IV
Res. No.
848
12-5-2011 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
849
12-5-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
Res. No.
850
12-5-2011 2012 budget NCM
Res. No.
851
12-5-2011 Ratification of Northern
Regional Police Board
action
NCM
Res. No.
852
12-5-2011 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
853
12-5-2011 Fund balance policy NCM
Res. No.
854
1-3-2012 Human Resource Policy
amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Res. No.
855
1-17-2012 Support for House Bill
2052
NCM
Res. No.
856
2-21-2012 Disposition of certain
public records
NCM
Res. No.
857
2-21-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Res. No.
858
2-21-2012 Adoption of Allegheny
County 2011 Hazard
Mitigation Plan
NCM
Res. No.
859
2-21-2012 Confirmation of grant
application
NCM
Res. No.
860
4-2-2012 Urging General Assembly
to eliminate or amend
Prevailing Wage Act
NCM
Res. No.
861
4-16-2012 Authorizing execution of
contribution agreement
with PennDOT
NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1113
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
862
6-18-2012 Calling upon Governor
and General Assembly to
impose moratorium on
county reassessments and
to establish property
values among all counties
NCM
Res. No.
863
8-6-2012 Right-of-way conditional
acceptance
NCM
Res. No.
864
9-4-2012 Approval and adoption of
revised safety program
manual
NCM
Res. No.
865
10-22-2012 Right-of-way acquisition NCM
Res. No.
866
12-3-2012 Fund balance policy NCM
Res. No.
867
12-3-2012 Tax rate for 2013 Repealed by Res. No.
875
Res. No.
868
12-3-2012 2013 budget NCM
Res. No.
869
12-3-2012 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
870
12-3-2012 Police pension plan
participant contributions
for 2013
NCM
Res. No.
871
12-3-2012 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
872
12-3-2012 Police Pension Trust
amendment
NCM
Res. No.
873
1-7-2013 Township appointments
and 2013 holidays
NCM
Res. No.
874
1-7-2013 2013 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
875
2-5-2013 Tax rate for 2013; repeal
of Res. No. 867
NCM
Res. No.
876
2-19-2013 Disposition of certain
public records
NCM
Res. No.
877
3-4-2013 Right-of-way acquisition NCM
Res. No.
878
3-18-2013 Grant NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1114
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
879
5-20-2013 Right-of-way name
change
NCM
Res. No.
880
6-17-2013 Sewage Facilities Plan
revision for new land
development
NCM
Ord. No.
364
Number not used
Ord. No.
365
Not adopted
Ord. No.
366
8-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res. No.
881
9-3-2013 Agreement NCM
Res. No.
882
9-3-2013 Sewage Facilities Plan
revision for new land
development
NCM
Res. No.
883
9-3-2013 Disbursement of funds
repealer
NCM
Res. No.
884
9-3-2013 Police Pension Trust
amendment
NCM
Res. No.
885
1-6-2014 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
886
11-18-2013 Declaration of local
government week
NCM
Ord. No.
367
12-2-2013 Financial support of
volunteer fire company
NCM
Res. No.
887
12-2-2013 Fund balance policy NCM
Res. No.
888
12-2-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
Res. No.
889
12-2-2013 2014 budget NCM
Res. No.
890
12-2-2013 Police pension plan
participant contributions
for 2014
NCM
Res. No.
891
12-2-2013 Rights-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No.
892
1-6-2014 Township appointments
and 2014 holidays
NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1115
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
893
1-6-2014 2014 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Ord. No.
368
1-21-2014 Administration of
government amendment;
Parks and Recreation
Commission amendment
Chs. 2; 28
Res. No.
894
1-21-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Res. No.
895
2-18-2014 Grant NCM
Res. No.
896
2-18-2014 Sewer line NCM
Res. No.
897
2-18-2014 Disposition of certain
public records
NCM
Res. No.
898
2-17-2014 Sewage Facilities Plan
revision for new land
development
NCM
Res. No.
899
3-17-2014 Approval of a public
infrastructure
improvement overlay
district
NCM
Res. No.
900
3-17-2014 Grant NCM
Ord. No.
369
4-7-2014 Acceptance of public
roads
Ch. 65
Ord. No.
370
6-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 138
Ord. No.
371
6-2-2014 Flood damage prevention Ch. 56
Res. No.
901
6-16-2014 Sewage Facilities Plan
revision for new land
development
NCM
Res. No.
902
7-22-2014 Transfer of liquor license NCM
Ord. No.
372
10-20-2014 Sanitary sewer district
establishment
NCM
Res. No.
903
7-22-2014 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
904
7-22-2014 Traffic sign approval NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1116
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
905
11-17-2014 Acceptance of right-ofway
NCM
Res. No.
906
11-17-2014 Municipal separate storm
sewer system minimum
control measure plan
NCM
Res. No.
907
11-17-2014 Acceptance of right-ofway
NCM
Res. No.
908
11-17-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
Res. No.
909
11-17-2014 2015 budget NCM
Res. No.
910
12-1-2014 Fund balance policies NCM
Res. No.
911
12-1-2014 Northern Regional Police
Department Pension Plan
NCM
Res. No.
912
1-5-2015 Township appointments
and 2015 holidays
NCM
Res. No.
913
1-5-2015 2015 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
914
1-5-2015 Procedures for
compliance with
professional services
contract provisions
NCM
Res. No.
915
1-20-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Ord. No.
373
2-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 84
Res. No.
916
2-2-2015 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
917
2-2-2015 Investment Policy Ch. 19
Res. No.
918
2-17-2015 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 116
Res. No.
919
2-17-2015 Recognizing Pittsburgh
North Regional Chamber
Educational Foundation
as a civic and/or service
organization
NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1117
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
374
3-16-2015 PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group
Trust
Ch. 10, Art. XII
Ord. No.
375
3-16-2015 Pennsylvania Townships
Health Insurance
Cooperative Trust
Ch. 10, Art. XIII
Res. No.
920
3-16-2015 Declaration of Local
Government Week
NCM
Res. No.
921
6-15-2015 Traffic sign approval NCM
Res. No.
922
6-15-2015 Acceptance of land NCM
Res. No.
923
7-20-2015 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
924
7-20-2015 Official sewage facilities
plan
NCM
Res. No.
925
8-17-2015 Abandonment of right-ofway
NCM
Res. No.
926
11-2-2015 Police Pension Trust
amendment
NCM
Res. No.
927
12-7-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
Res. No.
928
12-7-2015 2016 budget NCM
Res. No.
929
12-7-2015 Fund balance policies NCM
Res. No.
930
12-7-2015 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
Res. No.
931
12-7-2015 Abandonment of right-ofway
NCM
Res. No.
932
1-4-2016 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
933
1-4-2016 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
934
1-4-2016 Township appointments
and 2016 holidays
NCM
Res. No.
935
1-4-2016 2016 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1118
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
376
1-19-2016 Cooperative and
intermunicipal
agreements: Northern
Regional Police
Department of Allegheny
County amendment
Ch. 10, Art. II
Res. No.
936
1-19-2016 Declaration of Local
Government Week
NCM
Res. No.
937
2-1-2016 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
938
2-1-2016 Hazard Mitigation Plan NCM
Res. No.
939
2-16-2016 Comprehensive Plan NCM
Res. No.
940
2-16-2016 Closing out grant project NCM
Res. No.
941
2-16-2016 Plan revision for new land
development
NCM
Ord. No.
377
3-21-2016 Street vacation NCM
Res. No.
942
3-21-2016 Retirement plan and trust NCM
Res. No.
943
3-21-2016 Plan revision for new land
development
NCM
Res. No.
944
4-4-2016 Pine Township Authority
appointments
NCM
Res. No.
945
3-21-2016 Recognizing Brad-Mar-
Pine Baseball and Softball
Association as a civic and/
or service association
NCM
Res. No.
946
3-21-2016 Grant agreement NCM
Res. No.
947
4-4-2016 Grant request NCM
Ord. No.
378
5-2-2016 Cable franchise
agreement
NCM
Res. No.
948
5-2-2016 Pine Township Authority
termination
NCM
Res. No.
949
7-18-2016 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1119
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
950
10-17-2016 Stormwater control
systems and facilities:
oversight, inspection and
management
Ch. A149, Art. I
Res. No.
951
Pending adoption
Res. No.
952
10-2-2017 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
953
11-7-2016 Live Well Allegheny
campaign pledge
NCM
Res. No.
954
11-7-2016 Participation in vacant
property recovery
program
NCM
Ord. No.
379
11-21-2016 Purchase of land NCM
Res. No.
955
11-21-2016 Human Resource Policy
amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Ord. No.
380
11-21-2016 Sale of real estate:
certification of sanitary
sewer status
Ch. 65A, Art. I
Res. No.
956
12-5-2016 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
957
12-5-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
Res. No.
958
12-5-2016 Fund balance policy NCM
Res. No.
959
12-5-2016 Northern Regional Police
Pension Plan participant
contribution amendment
NCM
Res. No.
960
1-3-2017 Appointments and 2017
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
961
1-3-2017 2017 Township meeting
dates and locations
NCM
Res. No.
962
3-20-2017 Pine Historical Society
recognition
NCM
Res. No.
963
6-19-2017 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
964
6-19-2017 Plan revision for new land
development
NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1120
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
965
7-17-2017 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
966
8-21-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
Res. No.
967
8-21-2017 Grant request NCM
Res. No.
968
10-16-2017 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
969
10-16-2017 Human Resource Policy
amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Ord. No.
381
11-6-2017 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit Program;
rules and regulations for
tax on earned income and
net profits amendment
Ch. 128, Art. II; Ch.
A145
Res. No.
970
11-6-2017 Volunteer fire company
annual criteria for
Volunteer Service Credit
Program
NCM
Res. No.
971
11-6-2017 Authorizing Supervisors'
participation in group
health insurance medical
benefits
NCM
Res. No.
972
11-6-2017 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
382
12-4-2017 Stormwater management:
stormwater management
district
Ch. 71, Art. I
Ord. No.
383
1-16-2018 Right-of-way vacation NCM
Ord. No.
384
12-4-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 116
Ord. No.
385
12-4-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
Res. No.
973
12-4-2017 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
974
12-4-2017 Sewage facilities plan
revision
NCM
Res. No.
975
12-4-2017 Fund balance policies NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1121
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
976
12-4-2017 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
977
12-4-2017 Tax rate for 2018 NCM
Res. No.
978
12-4-2017 Northern Regional Police
Pension Plan participant
contribution amendment
NCM
Res. No.
979
12-4-2017 Adoption of Commodore
Perry Regional Trail Plan
NCM
Res. No.
980
12-4-2017 Implementing national
incident management
system
NCM
Res. No.
981
12-4-2017 Adoption of emergency
operations plan
NCM
Res. No.
982
12-4-2017 Prohibition against
Category 4 licensed
facility
NCM
Res. No.
983
1-2-2018 Appointments and 2018
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
984
1-2-2018 Setting dates, times and
location of Board of
Supervisors 2018
meetings
NCM
Res. No.
985
2-5-2018 Street Acceptance NCM
Res. No.
986
1-16-2018 Declaration of local
government week
NCM
Res. No.
987
2-5-2018 Fees amendment Ch. A144
Res. No.
988
3-5-2018 Disposition of public
records
NCM
Res. No.
989
3-19-2018 Participation in Storm
Water Management
District
NCM
Res. No.
990
5-7-2018 Investment Policy
Amendment
Ch. 19
Res. No.
991
5-7-2018 Participation in Storm
Water Management
District
NCM
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1122
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
992
7-16-2018 Appropriations NCM
Res. No.
993
7-16-2018 Human Resource Policy
Amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Res. No.
994
7-16-2018 Human Resource Policy
Amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Res. No.
995
8-20-2018 Sewage Facilities Plan
Update
NCM
Res. No.
996
8-20-2018 Public Infrastructure
Improvement Overlay
District
NCM
Res. No.
997
Not Adopted
Ord. No.
386
10-15-2018 Taxation: Homestead and
Farmstead Exclusion
Ch. 128, Art. IX
Res. No.
951
10-15-2018 Street Acceptance NCM
Res. No.
998
10-15-2018 Street Acceptance NCM
Res. No.
999
10-15-2018 Street Acceptance NCM
Res. No.
1000
11-5-2018 Sewage Facilities Plan
Update
NCM
Ord. No.
387
12-3-2018 Stormwater Management Codification Pending
Ord. No.
388
11-5-2018 Water: Skylark Drive
Water District
Ch. 141, Art. XII
Res. No.
1001
12-3-2018 Homestead and
Farmstead Exclusion Rate
NCM
Res. No.
1002
12-3-2018 Budget NCM
Res. No.
1003
12-3-2018 Fund Balance Policy NCM
Res. No.
1004
12-3-2018 Tax Rate NCM
Res. No.
1005
12-3-2018 Police Pension Plan
Participant Contribution
NCM
Res. No.
1006
12-3-2018 Street Acceptance NCM
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1123
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
1007
12-3-2018 Application for Traffic
Signal Approval
NCM
Res. No.
1008
12-3-2018 Declaration - Local
Government Week
NCM
Res. No.
1009
1-7-2019 Appointments and 2019
Township holidays
NCM
Res. No.
1010
1-7-2019 Setting dates, times and
location of Board of
Supervisors 2019
meetings
NCM
Res. No.
1011
1-22-2019 Standard Details
Amendment
Ch. 70
Res. No.
1012
1-22-2019 Human Resource Policy
Amendment
Repealed by Res. No.
1044
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No. 389 7-15-2019 Establishment
of Sanitary
Sewer District
NCM 21
Ord. No. 390 3-16-2020 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 84 21
Res. No. 1013 2-19-2019 Concurring
Resolution for
Grant
NCM 21
Res. No. 1014 2-19-2019 Disposition of
Public Records
NCM 21
Res. No. 1015 3-18-2019 Grant
Agreement
NCM 21
Res. No. 1016 6-17-2019 Concurring
Resolution for
Grant
NCM 21
Res. No. 1018 Withdrawn 21
Res. No. 1019 6-17-2019 Sewage
Facilities Plan
for New Land
Development
NCM 21
Res. No. 1020 7-15-2019 Transfer of
Liquor License
NCM 21
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1124
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No. 1021 10-21-2019 Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1022 7-15-2019 Supplemental
Appropriations
NCM 21
Res. No. 1023 7-15-2019 Unincorporated
Association
Resolution
NCM 21
Res. No. 1024 7-15-2019 Unincorporated
Association
Resolution
NCM 21
Res. No. 1025 8-19-2019 Concurring
Resolution for
Grant
NCM 21
Res. No. 1026 9-19-2019 Acknowledging
Participation in
Avonlea Estates
- Phase I
Residential
Development in
Stormwater
Management
District
NCM 21
Res. No. 1027 8-19-2019 Request for
Grant
NCM 21
Res. No. 1028 10-21-2019 Request for
Grant
NCM 21
Res. No. 1029 10-21-2019 Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1030 10-21-2019 Homestead and
Farmstead
Exclusion Rate
and Extension
Ch. 128, Art.
IX (footnote
only)
21
Res. No. 1031 10-21-2019 Human
Resource Policy
Amendment
Repealed by
Res. No.
1044
21
Res. No. 1032 12-2-2019 2020 Budget NCM 21
Res. No. 1033 12-2-2019 Fund Balance
Policies
NCM 21
Res. No. 1034 12-2-2019 Tax Rate NCM 21
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1125
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No. 1035 12-2-2019 Northern
Regional Police
Pension Plan
Participant
Contribution
Amendment
NCM 21
Res. No. 1036 12-2-2019 Declaration of
Local
Government
Week
NCM 21
Res. No. 1037 11-18-2019 Conditional
Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1038 11-18-2019 Conditional
Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1039 12-2-2019 Conditional
Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1040 12-2-2019 Conditional
Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1041 12-2-2019 Conditional
Street
Acceptance
NCM 21
Res. No. 1042 1-6-2020 Appointments
and 2020
Township
holidays
NCM 21
Res. No. 1043 1-6-2020 Setting Dates,
Times and
Location of
Board of
Supervisors
2020 Meetings
NCM 21
Res. No. 1044 12-2-2019 Human
Resource Policy
Repealer
Ch. A146,
reference
only
21
Res. No. 1045 12-2-2019 2020 Employee
Handbook
NCM 21
§ DL-1 PINE CODE § DL-1
A148:1126
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No. 1046 1-21-2020 Recognition of
Pine-Richland
Youth Lacrosse
Organization as
Civic and/or
Service
Association
NCM 21
Res. No. 1047 2-17-2020 Grant
Agreement
NCM 21
Res. No. 1048 3-2-2020 Disposition of
Public Records
NCM 21
Res. No. 1049 3-2-2020 Consideration
of Proposed
Zoning
Amendment
NCM 21
Res. No. 1050 3-16-2020 Declaration of
Disaster
Emergency
NCM 21
Res. No. 1051 4-20-2020 Extension of
Declaration of
Disaster
Emergency
NCM 21
Res. No. 1052 5-18-2020 Internal
Procedures for
Donations from
Friends of Pine
Community
Parks
NCM 21
Res. No. 1053 5-18-2020 Extension of
Real Estate Tax
Payment Date
NCM 21
Res. No. 1054 5-18-2020 Grant Request NCM 21
Res. No. 1055 5-18-2020 Request for
Adequate
Review of
Number and
Location of
Polling Places
NCM 21
§ DL-1 COLLECTION OF REAL ESTATE TAXES § DL-1
A148:1127

TOWNSHIP OF PINE
ORDINANCE NO. 387
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF PINE AMENDING CHAPTER 84
ZONING") OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF PINE, SO AS TO DELETE
AND AMEND OR REVISE CERTAIN EXISTING PROVISIONS THEREOF AND
ALSO SO AS TO ADD ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS THERETO REGARDING
REGULATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND USAGE OF LAND WITHIN THE
TOWNSHIP OF PINE, WITH SUCH DELETIONS, AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS,
AND ADDITIONS AFFECTING PORTIONS OF: ARTICLE VI THEREOF ( BY
DELETING THE EXISTING REGULATIONS OF SECTION 84- 125
CONCERNING STORMWATER MANAGEMENT) AND OF SECTION 84- 125. 1
CONCERNING MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEMS (" MS4s")
AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES)) AND ADOPTING NEW REGULATIONS FOR
BOTH OF SAME TO NOW BOTH BE CONTAINED IN SUCH SECTION 125 AND
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF ALL PRIOR INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
AND/ OR RESOLUTIONS AND PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY.
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, as the Township' s
governing body, is granted authority to enact, amend, and repeal zoning ordinances and regulations, pursuant to the authority of and the procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P. L. 805, Act 247, as reenacted by Act of December 31,
1988, P. L. 1329, Act 170 ( 53 P. S. Section 10101 et seq.); and as thereafter amended; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Pine has experienced and continues to experience a
significant increase in its population and increased development of its land for various purposes
and uses, and, as a result, the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township requires
that certain of the provisions of Chapter 84 (" Zoning") of the Code of the Township of Pine be
amended so as to revise the regulation of both the use and development of land within the
Township of Pine; and
TADMS: 5050876- 1 004531- 182292
WHEREAS, the Township of Pine has prepared and has previously submitted the within
contained amendment to the following entities for review and comment: the Township of Pine' s
Planning Commission; the Township of Pine' s Environmental Advisory Council; and the County of
Allegheny ( Department of Economic Development); and
WHEREAS, the Township of Pine has received, reviewed, and considered any comments
received from the Township' s Planning Commission and from its Environmental Advisory Council,
and, also, any comments received from the County of Allegheny; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Pine has held a public hearing, pursuant to properly
advertised public notice, on the within contained amendment on December 3, 2018, at 6: 30 PM in
the Township of Pine's Community Center and duly considered the comments of the public made
thereat; and
WHEREAS, after careful consideration, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine
finds that the within contained amendment:
1.) reflects and advances the policy goals of the Township of Pine, as such are set
forth in the statements of purpose and of community development objectives
contained in Sections 84- 2 and 78- 2 of the Code of the Township of Pine, and also
the objectives of the Township' s Comprehensive Plan;
2.) advances the health, safety, and welfare of the Township' s citizens;
3.) accurately and adequately reflects the character of the Township of Pine, the
needs of its citizens, and the suitabilities and special nature of the Township;
4.) balances the legitimate concerns of the residents and citizens of the Township as
to the maintenance and protection of the Township' s essential character with the
constitutionally and statutorily protected rights of property owners to make both
economically advantageous and environmentally appropriate uses of their land;
and
5.) re- states and clarifies certain, prior existing provisions of the Code of the Township
of Pine.
TADMS: 5050876- 1 004531- 182292 2
NOW, THEREFORE, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine, as authorized by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, does hereby ENACT, ADOPT, and ORDAIN the
following provisions as part of the applicable and within described sections of Chapter 84
Zoning") of the Code of the Township of Pine:
Section 1. Chapter 84 (" Zoning") of the Code of the Township of Pine is hereby
amended so as to delete in its entirety the existing provisions of both Sections 84- 125
Stormwater Management") and 84- 125. 1 (" MS4 Prohibited Discharge") of Article " VI"
Requirements Applying to All Districts") thereof and to replace such provisions with the text
Article I through X) and related Appendices A, B, and C which are attached hereto as Exhibit " A"
and incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. Such provisions, as set forth on the
attached Exhibit " A" shall be entitled Section 84- 125 (" Stormwater Management") and its content
organized pertaining to subject matter as follows:
Article I - General Provisions
Section 101. Short Title
Section 102. Statement of Findings
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Statutory Authority
Section 105. Applicability
Section 106. Repealer
Section 107. Severability
Section 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements
Section 109. Erroneous Permit
Section 110. Waivers
Section 111. Version of Regulations and Standards
Section 112. Disclaimer of Liability
Article II - Definitions
Article Ill- Stormwater Management Standards
Section 301. General Requirements
Section 302. Exemptions
Section 303. Volume Controls
Section 304. Rate Controls
Section 305. Riparian Buffers
TADMS: 5050876- 1 004531- 182292 3
Article IV- Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
Section 401. Plan Requirements
Section 402. Plan Submission
Section 403. Plan Review
Section 404. Modification of Plans
Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans
Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity
Section 407. Record Drawings, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection
Article V- Design Criteria
Section 501. Calculation Methodology
Section 502. Design and Construction StandardsCollection and Conveyance Facilities
Section 503. Design and Construction StandardsStormwater Detention Facilities
Article VI- Operation and Maintenance
Section 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners
Section 602. Operation and Maintenance Agreements
Section 603. Performant Guarantee
Article VII- Feeds and Expenses
Section 701. General
Article VIII- Prohibitions
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
Section 802. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs
Article IX- Enforcement and Penalties
Section 901. Right of Entry
Section 902. Inspection
Section 903. Enforcement
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation
Section 905. Penalties
Section 906. Appeals
Article X- References
Appendix A- Release Rate Management Districts( Maps)
Appendix B- Operation and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix C- Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan
TADMS: 5050876- 1 004531- 182292 4
Section 2. All other existing language and provisions of Chapter 84 (" Zoning") of the
Code of the Township of Pine, which are not specifically deleted, amended, or revised by the
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected by this Ordinance and shall retain full force and
effect.
Section 3. All prior Ordinances and Resolutions of the Township of Pine which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
Section 4. If a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any individual
provision of this Ordinance or the application of any individual provision of this Ordinance to any
circumstance to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this Ordinance and the
application of such provision to other circumstances shall remain in full force and effect. The
intention of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine is that the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be severable and that this Ordinance would have been adopted if any such illegal
or unconstitutional provision had not been included.
ORDAINED and ENACTED into law this day of DEe-eivt r , 201 by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Pine.
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP OF PINE
41-64 By
Township Secretary/ Manager Chair - n, :-' rd of Supervisors
TADMS: 5050876- 1 004531- 182292 5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I — General Provisions
Section 101. Short Title
Section 102. Statement of Findings
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Statutory Authority
Section 105. Applicability
Section 106. Repealer
Section 107. Severability
Section 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements
Section 109. Erroneous Permit
Section 110 Waivers
Section 111 Version of Regulations and Standards
Section 112 Disclaimer of Liability
Article II — Definitions
Article III — Stormwater Management Standards
Section 301. General Requirements
Section 302. Exemptions
Section 303. Volume Controls
Section 304. Rate Controls
Section 305 Riparian Buffers
Article IV— Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
Section 401. Plan Requirements
Section 402. Plan Submission
Section 403. Plan Review
Section 404. Modification of Plans
Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans
Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term ofValidity
Section 407. Record Drawings, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection
Article V— Design Criteria
Section 501. Calculation Methodology
Section 502. Design and Construction Standards—
Collection and Conveyance Facilities
Section 503 Design and Construction Standards—
Stormwater Detention Facilities
Article VI — Operation and Maintenance
Section 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners
Section 602. Operation and Maintenance Agreements
Section 603. Performance Guarantee
Article VII — Fees and Expenses
Section 701. General
A- 2
Article VIII — Prohibitions
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
Section 802. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs
Article IX— Enforcement and Penalties
Section 901. Right of Entry
Section 902. Inspection
Section 903. Enforcement
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation
Section 905. Penalties
Section 906. Appeals
Article X— References
Appendix A—Release Rate Management Districts ( Maps)
Appendix B— Operation and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix C— Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan
A- 3
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the " Township of Pine Stormwater Management Ordinance."
Section 102. Statement of Findings
The governing body of the Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed
increases runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying
capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines flood plain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of waterresources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management ( SWM), including regulation of development and activities
causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the protection of people of
the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and supports
the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure ( GI) and low impact development ( LID) are intended to address the root cause of
water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and
recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/ or 3) harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure
practices and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of pre- development hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These
municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems
under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ( NPDES) program.
Section 103. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the Municipality and its watershed by
minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in Section 102 of this Ordinance, through provisions
designed to:
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect
water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best management practices ( BMPs) that are
implemented within the Township.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A- 4
Section 104. Statutory Authority
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968,
P. L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and/ or the Act of October 4, 1978,
P. L. 864 ( Act 167), 32 P. S. Section 680. 1, et seq., as amended, The Stormwater Management Act.
Section 105. Applicability
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and earth
disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this Ordinance. All activities related to proper operation and
maintenance of approved stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute non- stormwater
discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to regulation by this Ordinance.
Section 106. Repealer
Any other ordinance provision( s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 107. Severability
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or provision of this Ordinance invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements
Approvals issued and actions taken under this Ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
Section 109. Erroneous Permit
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information provided by an
applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established
pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of
the Township purporting to validate such a violation.
Section 110. Waivers
A. If the Township determines that any requirement under this Ordinance cannot be achieved for a particular
regulated activity the Township may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than those in this
Ordinance, subject to Section 110, paragraph B. The proposed area of disturbance shall be less than one( 1)
acre. The request for a modification or waiver shall originate with the Landowner, shall be in writing, and shall
accompany the Stormwater Management Site Plan submitted to the Township. The request shall provide the facts
on which the request is based, the provisions of the Ordinance involved, and the proposed modification. The
Designated Plan Reviewer shall review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of the Ordinance,
including paragraph B below. If acceptable to the Township, the Township may grant the waiver or modification.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this Ordinance may be approved by the Township if enforcement
will exact undue hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the land in question,
provided that the modifications will not be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome, and that the purpose of the Ordinance is preserved. Hardship must be due to such unique physical
circumstances or conditions and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the
Stormwater Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications
shall not substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. A request
for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the Stormwater Management Site Plan submission, as directed
in Section 110, paragraph A above.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to
one ( 1) acre may be granted by the Township.
A- 5
D. This Section shall not apply to requests for waiver or modification to the provisions of Section V— Design Criteria.
All requests for waivers or modifications from Section V shall be reviewed by the Township for applications of any
size earth disturbance.
Section 111. Version of Regulations and Standards
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to refer to the latest or most current version of
that document.
Section 112. Disclaimer of Liability
A. For regulatory purposes, the degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this Chapter is
considered reasonable. This Chapter shall not impose upon the Township any legal duty in addition to those duties
otherwise imposed under the Stormwater Management Act upon the Township, any appointed or elected official,
employee or representative of the Township. It is not the intention of the Township to guarantee the elimination of
harm resulting from stream flow, floods, rain, snow, or stormwater runoff; or erosion resulting therefrom. It is the
intention of the Township to create reasonable stormwater management regulations which balance several
competing interests in an appropriate fashion with the emphasis on public safety.
B. This Chapter does not imply that areas within or outside any identified flood- prone area will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
C. Neither the granting of any approval under this Ordinance, nor the compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
or with any condition imposed by the Township or a Township official hereunder, shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose
any liability upon the Township for damages to person or property.
D. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management facilities shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township, or by an official, employee, or consultant thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use, or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of
action against the Township, or an official, employee, or consultant thereof, for any damage that may result
pursuant thereto.
A- 6
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural
number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender
include masculine gender.
B. The word " includes" or" including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its
meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
C. The words " shall" and " must" are mandatory; the words " may" and " should" are permissive.
These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or statutes and are
intended for this Ordinance only.
Act 167 - The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater
quality and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P. L. 864 ( Act 167), 32 P. S. Section 680. 1, et seq.,
as amended, the " Storm Water Management Act."
Agricultural Activity—Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and
animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking,
harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
Applicant — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the Township for approval to
engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the Township.
Best Management Practice ( BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage
stormwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater
recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: " structural" or " non- structural." In this Ordinance, non- structural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/ or behavior- related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with
stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is
installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of
practices and devices, from large- scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small- scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural
stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
Conservation District— A conservation district, as defined in Section 3( c) of the Conservation District Law ( 3 P. S.
851( c)) that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a
portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.
Design Storm — The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability
of occurrence ( e. g., a 5- year storm) and duration ( e. g., 24 hours) used in the design and evaluation of stormwater
management systems. Also see Return Period.
Designated Plan Reviewer— A Qualified Professional as defined herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County
Conservation District, that has been designated by the Township to be the reviewer of SWM Site Plans for the
Township, and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Township within this ordinance.
Detention Basin — An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely in a designed period after
a rainfall event, and to become dry until the next rainfall event.
Detention Volume — The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the Commonwealth at a
controlled rate.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
A- 7
Developer— A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth disturbance activity.
Development— See " Earth Disturbance Activity." The term included redevelopment.
Development Site ( Site) — See Project Site.
Disturbed Area— An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
Earth Disturbance Activity —A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including,
but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building construction;
and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
Erosion — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan — A plan for a project site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation.
Existing Condition — The dominant land cover during the 5- year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated
activity.
FEMA— Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Floodplain — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable
FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as
listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers ( as amended or
replaced from time to time by DEP).
Floodway — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the 100- year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as
indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100- year floodway, it is assumed-- absent evidence to the contrary-- that the floodway
extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
Forest Management/ Timber Operations — Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland.
These include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting
budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
Green Infrastructure — Systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or
reuse stormwater on the site where it is generated.
Groundwater— Water beneath the earth' s surface that supplies wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of
soil and rock.
Groundwater Recharge — The replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies from precipitation or
overland flow.
Hydrologic Soil Group ( HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as
well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs ( A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration
rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of
most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may
be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices.
Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D( NRCS1. 2).
Impervious Surface ( Impervious Area)— A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious
surfaces ( or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are counted
as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
A- 8
Invasive Species— DCNR defines invasive plants as those species that are not native to the state, grow
aggressively, and spread and displace native vegetation. ( see
http:// www.dcnr. state. pa. us/ cs/ groups/ public/ documents/ document/ dcnr 010314.pdffor a list of invasive
species.
Infiltration — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the
atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
Land Development( Development)— Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings: ( i) the improvement of one lot
or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving ( a) a group of two or more buildings
or ( b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
ii) any subdivision of land; ( iii) development in accordance with Section 503( 1. 1) of the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.
Low Impact Development ( LID) — Site design approaches and small- scale stormwater management practices that
promote the use of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to
new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter,
evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large- scale conveyance and treatment
systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of small, cost- effective landscape features located on- site.
Municipality— Municipality NameTownship of Pine, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Native Vegetation— Plant species that have historically grown in Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined
herein.
NPDES— National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal government' s system for issuance of permit under
the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS— USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service ( previously SCS).
Outfall -" Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122. 2 at the point where a storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
Peak Discharge— The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
Person - An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or
any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Point Source- Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92. 1.
Pervious Area— Any area not defined as impervious.
Project Site— The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or
maintained.
Qualified Person or Qualified Professional— Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or
otherwise qualified under Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this Ordinance.
Redevelopment— Earth disturbance activities on land which has previously been disturbed or developed.
Regulated Activities— Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of
land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity— Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code
92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
Release Rate— The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed
conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
Release Rate District— A watershed or portion of a watershed for which a release rate has been established by an
A- 9
adopted Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.
Retention Volume/ Removed Runoff— The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface
waters of this Commonwealth during or after a storm event.
Return Period— The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to
occur one time. For example, the 25- year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25
years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25- year storm occurring in any one year is 0. 04 ( i. e., a 4% chance).
Riparian Buffer— A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and
wetlands.
Road Maintenance - Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing
existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
Runoff— Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
Sediment— Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
Separate Storm Sewer System - A conveyance or system of conveyances ( including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man- made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting
and conveying stormwater runoff.
State Water Quality Requirements — The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water
quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
Stormwater— Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
Stormwater Management Facility—Any structure, natural or man- made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not
limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
Stormwater Management Site Plan— The plan prepared by the developer or the developer' s representative indicating
how stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this Ordinance. Stormwater
Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site Plan throughout this Ordinance.
Stream - A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
Subdivision —As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P. L. 805, No. 247.
Township - The Township of Pine, a municipality located in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Township' s Standard Details - The most recent construction specifications adopted by the Township of Pine and
contained in Chapter 70 of the Code of the Township of Pine.
USDA— United States Department of Agriculture.
Waters of this Commonwealth — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses,
storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
Commonwealth.
Watercourse— See Stream.
Watershed — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this Commonwealth to a
downstream point.
Wetland — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
A- 10
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
A- 11
ARTICLE III - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
Section 301. General Requirements
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM Site Plan is specifically exempted in Section 302:
1. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.
2. No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues written approval of an SWM Site Plan,
which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. SWM Site Plans approved by the Township, in accordance with Section 406, shall be on site throughout the
duration of the regulated activity.
C. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in regulated activities.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities ( e. g., during construction) to meet the
purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual( E& S Manual4), No. 363- 2134- 008, as amended and updated. Comment on the
adequacy of the Erosion and Sedimentation Controls may be provided by the Township per the requirements of
Allegheny County Conservation District. Erosion and Sedimentation Control provisions shall be as follows:
1. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until approval by the Township
of an erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities.
2. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP) has regulations that require an erosion and
sediment control plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5, 000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code §
102. 4( b).
3. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES Construction Activities permit is required for any
earth disturbance of one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the Township' s storm
sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff ( hereinafter collectively referred to as
regulated earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during
any stage of, a larger common plan of development.
4. Evidence of any necessary permit( s) for regulated earth disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP
regional office or Allegheny County Conservation District must be provided to the Township. The issuance of
an NPDES Construction Permit[ or permit coverage under the statewide General Permit( PAG- 2)] satisfies this
requirement.
5. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall
be available at the project site at all times.
E. Impervious areas:
1. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in stages.
2. For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance
with this Ordinance.
3. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the
requirements of this Ordinance; except that the volume controls in Section 303 and the peak rate controls of
Section 304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
A- 12
F. Regulated stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered without written notification of the affected property owner( s). Notification
shall include a description of the proposed development and the stormwater flows that are being created,
increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a minimum include any
property having a shared boundary with the subject property of the SWM Site Plan, however, if in the judgement
of the Designated Plan Reviewer additional properties are being affected, additional notifications may be required.
Proof of notification ( signed postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM Plan submission to
the Township. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
1. Protect health, safety, and property.
2. Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:
a. Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.
b. Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
c. Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
d. Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth.
e. Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.
3. Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual ( BMP
Manual3). If methods other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to achieve the volume
and rate controls required under this Ordinance, the SWM Site Plan must include a detailed justification,
acceptable to the Designated Plan Reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not
practicable.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at strategic locations, made as shallow as
practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on- site infiltration features while still meeting the other
requirements of this Ordinance.
I. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control
capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
Infiltration tests performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP
Manual, must support time- to- empty calculations if infiltration is a factor.
J. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall be as obtained in
PennDOT' s Drainage Manual, Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation- Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA' s Atlas
145 can be accessed at: http:// hdsc. nws. noaa. gov/ hdsc/ pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the
purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual3.
M. The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this Ordinance, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not
conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
Section 302. Exemptions
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than one- quarter ( 0. 25) acre and propose an
increase in impervious area of less than 5, 000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in Section 401 of this
A- 13
ordinance except as provided in paragraph B below.
B. Earth disturbances between one- twentieth ( 0. 05) acre ( 2, 178 square feet) and one- quarter ( 0. 25) acre ( 10, 890
square feet) of earth disturbance must submit a SWM Site Plan to the Township which shall consist of the following
items and related supportive material needed to determine compliance with Sections 303 through 305. The
applicant can use the protocols in the Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan ( Appendix C).
a. General description of proposed stormwater management techniques, including construction
specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
b. An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and letters of adequacy from the
Conservation District where appropriate.
c. Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area that is proposed;
proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed by the Applicant,
acknowledging that any revision to the approved drainage plan must be approved by the Township,
and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the Township or
Conservation District for approval.
d. All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail; and all
calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this
Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter102.
E. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase impervious area, and underground
infrastructure projects are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, provided the activities meet the
requirements of all other Municipal, State and Federal requirements. Exemptions from any provisions of this
Ordinance shall not relieve the applicant from the requirements in Sections 301. D. through J.
F. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this Section at any time for any project that the
Township believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
G. Voluntary Green Stormwater Infrastructure ( GSI) retrofit projects that are solely intended to better manage runoff
from existing development and are not part of new development or redevelopment, are exempt from the stormwater
management provisions of this Ordinance. This does not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or
federal regulation.
Section 303. Volume Controls
The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual3 shall be utilized for all
regulated activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or alternative design criteria as
allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
A. The Design Storm Method( CG- 1 in the BMP Manual3) is applicable as a method to any size of regulated activity.
This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be incorporated into the CG1 method:
1. Do not increase the post- development total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than the 2- year 24- hour
duration precipitation.
2. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed
from the runoff flow, i. e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the
listed removal options are not feasible, and the Designated Plan Reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in
a facility designed for a 48 to 72 hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system ( not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed for a 72 hour dewatering
A- 14
time in an area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the
environment. Justification, as prepared and sealed by a qualified professional, for assertion that permanent
removal is not feasible must be provided, at a minimum, in the form of field measured infiltration rate testing
and geotechnical evaluation of the existing site soils with regard to the impact of proposed infiltration.
Applications omitting this justification, including infiltration rate testing will be considered incomplete. BMPs
proposing use of extended detention in lieu of permanent reduction through the listed methods shall include a
valve to adjust or regulate dewatering time to achieve the performance standards noted herein. The valve
system shall include an inspection/ monitoring port for review of dewatering.
3. For modeling purposes:
a. Existing ( predevelopment) non- forested pervious areas must be considered meadow in good condition.
b. 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow in good condition in the
model for existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method( CG- 2 in the BMP Manual3) provided below is independent of site conditions and should be
used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than
one acre or for projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
1. Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two ( 2) inches of runoff from the net increase in impervious
surfaces.
2. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed
from the runoff flow, i. e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the
listed removal options are not feasible, and the Designated Plan Reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in
a facility designed for a 24 hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system ( not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed for a 72 hour dewatering
time in an area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the
environment.
3. Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire
permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0. 5 inch of the permanently removed runoff
should be infiltrated.
4. This method is exempt from the requirements of Section 304, Rate Controls, if the project qualifies for exemption
by the provisions of Section 302.A.
Section 304. Rate Controls
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
Post- development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre- development discharge rates for the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-
50-, and 100- year, 24- hour storm events. This is the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to
those rates shown in the maps contained in Appendix A ( Release Rate Management Districts). This Predevelopment to Post- development control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the " Conditional Direct
Discharge" areas on the Release Rate maps. For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second ( cfs). If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post- development
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the pre- development analysis for 1-, 2-,
5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100- year, 24- hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the
applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement. Peak
flows should be computed using the methods included in the Chapter titled " Stormwater Calculations and
Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
For the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100- year, 24- hour storm events, the post- development peak discharge rates
will follow the applicable approved release rate maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A ( Release Rate
Management Districts) of this Ordinance For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a
cubic foot per second ( cfs). For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the post- development discharge
A- 15
rates shall not exceed the pre- development discharge rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should be
computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
Section 305. Riparian Buffers
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a Riparian Buffer Easement shall be created and recorded as part of
any subdivision or land development that encompasses a Riparian Buffer. The intent of this ordinance in
establishing a Riparian Buffer is to protect and improve stream water quality. The Riparian Buffer is intended to
slow overland flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and shrubs, allowing
infiltration/ groundwater recharge; causing deposition of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the
buffer rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream bank stabilization. The trees provide
shade for streams; keeping waters cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by PA Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be required for all streams
as defined in Article II) with a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The Riparian Buffer Easement
shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the streambank ( on each side).
C. Minimum Management Requirements for Riparian Buffers.
1. No use or construction within the Riparian Buffer shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the intent of the
Riparian Buffer as described in Section 305. A.
2. Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within the Riparian Buffer Easement.
3. Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively removed and the Riparian Buffer Easement shall
be planted with native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native plant community
appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.
D. The Riparian Buffer Easement shall be enforceable by the Township and shall be recorded in the appropriate
County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property located
therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area
required by Zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning Ordinance.
E. Any permitted use within the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent
of the existing 100- year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and preserve and protect the ecological
function of the floodplain.
F. Roadway crossings, when authorized by PA Chapter 105 Permitting as issued by DEP and stormwater drainage
pipes shall be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement, but they shall cross the Easement in the shortest
practical distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not permitted within the Riparian Buffer
Easement.
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/ or private recreation trails are permitted by the Township
within Riparian Buffers:
1. It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for non- motorized use only; however, impermeable
trails are permitted provided they have adequate drainage
2. Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant species and other sensitive environmental
features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement and
shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement; however, work shall be performed to
minimize disturbance area and removal of trees. Restoration within the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be with
native species of trees, grasses, and other plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the
restoration shall be designed by a Registered Professional with the requisite experience. Aboveground utilities
shall only be permitted to cross the Easement perpendicular to the Easement or in the shortest practical distance.
Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as required.
A- 16
ARTICLE IV - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ( SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 401. Plan Requirements
Appropriate sections from the Township' s Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local
ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM Site Plans.
The Township shall not approve any SWM Site Plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance. At
its sole discretion and in accordance with this Article, when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient, the Township may
either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the Township may
accept submission of modifications.
The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:
A. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and
infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the Operation and Maintenance ( O& M) Plan discussed in
paragraph C. 11 below. The lawdowner shall convey to the Township easements and/ or rights- of-way to assure
access for periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance if required.
B. The following signature block for the Township:
Municipal official or Designated Plan Reviewer ( Section 403. A)), on this date ( Signature date), has reviewed
and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance
No. except where waivers have been granted as noted on the Plan. The review is based on a
survey and plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is correct and valid as submitted."
C. The SWM Site Plan shall provide the following information:
1. The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
2. A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual3. A detailed site evaluation shall be
completed for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields.
3. A key map showing the development site' s location within the Township' s stormwater management
districts, watersheds and subareas. On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the district( s),
watershed( s) and subarea( s) as they are located on the development site and identify their district and
watershed names and applicable subarea numbers.
4. Location of the one hundred year floodplain on the development site based on the current municipal Flood
Insurance Rate Maps. Land identified as flood- prone on maps issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration shall be subject to the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program and shall comply
with the provisions of the Code of the Township of Pine governing floodplains.
5. Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this Ordinance, or as otherwise
necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, including the recommendations and general requirements in Section 301.
6. Expected project time schedule.
7. A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted to the approval
authority.
8. The effect of the project ( in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows) on surrounding
properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected
by the project.
9. Plan and profile drawings and details of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open
channels, and swales.
A- 17
10. SWM Site Plan shall show the property lines, dimensions of the site and the locations of existing and
proposed on- lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells, property boundaries, existing and proposed
topography, point( s) of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
11. The SWM Site Plan shall include an O& M Plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities. This plan shall address long- term ownership and responsibilities for O& M including
type and schedule/ frequency of maintenance activities, personnel and equipment requirements, estimated
annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing O& M.
12. A justification, acceptable to the Designated Plan Reviewer, must be included in the SWM Site Plan if
BMPs other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed to achieve the volume, rate
and water quality controls under this Ordinance.
13. Certification and seal of the qualified professional responsible for the preparation of the plans and report.
14. Watershed maps delineating pre- development and post- development watershed boundaries and land
cover conditions, as well as the flow path and segments used to determine time of concentrations for each
watershed
15. Storm sewer calculations and watershed maps delineating all sub- areas used to size and compute flow for
storm sewer system.
16. Existing contours at intervals of two ( 2) feet except in areas with slopes greater than fifteen percent( 15%),
in which case five ( 5) foot contour intervals may be used.
17. Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two ( 2) feet, except in areas with slopes greater than
fifteen percent( 15%), in which case, five ( 5) foot contour intervals may be used.
Section 402. Plan Submission
Up to five copies of the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted as follows:
1. Two copies to the Township.
2. One copy to the municipal engineer ( when applicable).
3. One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District( when requested by the District).
Section 403. Plan Review
A. The Township has designated Municipal Engineer as the Designated Plan Reviewer of SWM Site Plans for the
Township, and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Township within this ordinance.
B. SWM Site Plans shall be reviewed by the Township for consistency with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the SWM Site Plan is approved or
disapproved or requires additional documentation. If the SWM Site Plan involves a Subdivision and Land
Development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code
90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be
so notified by the Township.
D. For any SWM Site Plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green infrastructure and LID practices to achieve
the volume and rate controls required under this Ordinance, the Township will not approve the SWM Site Plan
unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are not practicable.
E. If the Township disapproves the SWM Site Plan, the Township will state the reasons for the disapproval in writing.
The Township also may approve the SWM Site Plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable
A- 18
conditions for approval in writing.
F. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VII, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site
plan.
Section 404. Modification of Plans
A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the
relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
SWM Site Plan, as determined by the Designated Plan Reviewer, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM
Site Plan in accordance with this Article.
Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans
A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Township' s concerns, to the
Township in accordance with this Article. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan.
Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity
The Township' s approval of an SWM Site Plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for
a maximum term of validity of 5 years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a term of validity shorter
than 5 years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Township
signs the approval for an SWM Site Plan. If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed according to Section 407
within the term of validity, then the Township may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and
all permits. SWM Site Plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with
Section 405 of this Ordinance.
Section 407. Record Drawings, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM
Site Plan, including, but not limited to BMP grading, outlet structure configuration and emergency spillway
configuration. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be
submitted to the Township.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a qualified professional
verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications.
The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location
of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate. The certification shall include documentation confirming field
reviewed dewatering times for rate and volume control BMPs. Record Drawings shall be provided in both hard
copy and electronic ( AutoCAD, latest edition) format.
C. The Township may conduct inspections during construction as it deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the
Township reveal deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM Site Plan, the Township may request corrective
actions. Any corrective action shall be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
1. The Township or a designated representative shall field review the construction of the temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities for the development site. The permittee shall notify the
Township 48 hours in advance of the completion of the following key development phases:
a. At the completion of the preliminary site preparation, including stripping of vegetation,
stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary stormwater management and erosion
control facilities.
b. At the completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage or other
site development improvement and ground covers.
c. During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such times as specified by the
A- 19
Township.
d. Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities, including established ground
covers and plantings.
e. Completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures or other site restoration work
done in accordance with the approved plan and permit.
2. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding one has been field reviewed by
the Township Engineer and approved by the Township in writing. If there are deficiencies in any phase,
the Township shall issue a written description of the required corrections and stipulate the time by which
the corrections must be made.
3. If during construction the contractor or permittee identifies any site conditions, such as subsurface soil
conditions or alterations in surface or subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of the
approved stormwater facilities, said person must notify the Township within 24 hours of the discovery of
such condition and request a field review by the Township. The Township shall determine if the condition
requires a stormwater plan modification.
4. In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of landslide- prone soils or where other
special site conditions exist, the Township may require special precautions, such as soil tests and core
borings, full-time resident project representative services and/ or similar measures. All costs of any such
measures shall be borne by the permittee.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the Township, the Township may conduct a final inspection.
A- 20
ARTICLE V - DESIGN CRITERIA
Section 501. Calculation Methodology
A. All computations used in conjunction with the analysis and design of stormwater management facilities shall be
based on one ( 1) or more of the following methods, or as otherwise approved in advance by the Township:
1. TR- 55- Soil Conservation Service ( SCS) Technical Release No. 55
2. TR- 20- Soil Conservation Service ( SCS) Technical Release No. 20
3. Modified Rational Method
4. Penn State Runoff Model
5. Virginia Tech / Penn State Runoff Model
B. These methods for determining peak discharge shall be used to:
1. Determine pre- development runoff conditions;
2. Analyze the impact of development; and
3. Perform calculations in the design of any detention/ retention facilities used in controlling runoff.
C. The SCS, Type II Rainfall Distribution shall be used for all analyses. The design storm frequencies for the
watershed are:
Design Storm 24 Hour Rainfall Depth
1- Year 1. 97
2- Year 2. 35
5- Year 2. 88
10- Year 3. 30
25- Year 3. 90
50- Year 4. 40
100- Year 5. 20
D. Pre- Development Conditions: The cover type for all sites will be considered to be the dominant land cover during
the 5- year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity:
1. For the purposes of pre- development peak flow rate and volume determination, existing non- forested
pervious areas conditions shall be considered as meadow ( good condition). Forested land areas shall
be considered in good condition.
2. For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume determination, 20 percent of existing
disturbed impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow ( good condition).
E. Post- Development Conditions: The hydrologic parameters used to develop peak flow rates shall be reflective of
anticipated soil runoff characteristics following grading and development of the site.
F. Time of Concentration: The minimum time of concentration for any watershed shall be 6 minutes. A minimum
6- minute time of concentration may be assumed for any post development watershed. Calculations must be
provided for all pre- development times of concentrations. A minimum time of concentration cannot be assumed
for predevelopment conditions.
G. The use of the Basic Rational Method in estimating runoff may be employed in the design of the storm sewer
conveyance system within the development. The storm sewer system shall be interpreted as the conduits,
A- 21
culverts, inlets and appurtenant features for the conveying of stormwater to, through or from a development site
to the point of final discharge or control facility. The Rational Method shall not be used in the analysis of
stormwater runoff from the development in its entirety or in conjunction with the design of any retention/ detention
facilities or other runoff control measures.
H. Points of interest for analysis of pre- and post- development runoff must be selected to demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of Sections 303 and 304 is achieved at all points where runoff exits the perimeter of the
property.
I. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to another unless the watersheds are sub- areas
of a larger watershed that are tributary to a common point of interest within or near the perimeter of the property.
Transfer of runoff from one watershed to another under any other circumstances shall only be approved at the
discretion of the Township. Documentation shall be provided that peak flow rates are not increased following
development and there will be no detrimental impact in downstream areas.
J. The Stormwater Management Plan shall consider all of the stormwater runoff flowing over the project site. Runoff
calculations shall be made to ensure that runoff from the fully development upstream watershed area ( based on
the Comprehensive Plan) can be accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements and watercourses, etc. on
the site.
Section 502. Design and Construction Standards — Collection and Conveyance Facilities
A. All stormwater collection and conveyance facilities ( pipes, swales, and structures) shall be designed for a
100-year design storm event, unless the runoff would naturally drain overland to a stormwater detention
facility, in which case a 25- year design storm event may be used. The hydraulic gradeline must be a
minimum of two ( 2) feet below the surface elevation of structures and within the pipe. Swales and channels
shall provide at least one foot of freeboard above the energy gradeline. Backwater effects of pipes
discharging under surcharge conditions shall be included.
B. Runoff calculations shall include complete hydrology and hydraulic analysis of all downstream swales and pipe
facilities to permanent stream discharge point, to the municipal boundary or connection to a State or County
owned conveyance system.
C. Manholes shall not be spaced more than four hundred ( 400) feet apart for pipe sizes up to twenty-four ( 24) inches
in diameter and not more than six hundred fifty ( 600) feet apart for larger pipe sizes.
D. No public stormwater pipe shall be less than 15- inches in diameter that conveys surface runoff. The minimum
pipe slope shall be 1. 0% grade or maintain velocity of 2 ft/ s. For public storm sewer systems, only pipes related
to construction of stormwater BMPs may be less than 15 inches in diameter.
E. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Township' s Construction Standards. In addition, all
workmanship and materials shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be supplied by
manufacturers or suppliers listed in PennDOT' s Bulletin 15. No stormwater facility shall be enclosed or covered
over until the Township has field reviewed the construction. All construction materials used in storm sewers shall
be tested by a qualified testing laboratory, if required by the Township. The cost for such test shall be borne by
the developer.
F. Manhole and inlet castings shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408 and
PennDOT Standards for Roadway Construction. Inlet grates shall be bicycle safe. Frames and grates shall be
cast iron or structural steel. Concrete frames shall not be permitted.
G. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by construction of a suitable junction box ( inlet or
manhole) to provide access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
H. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well- defined drainage course, which has a defined bed and
bank. If stormwater runoff cannot be discharged to a defined drainage course, documentation of written
permission from each downstream property owner shall be provided for all properties between the source of
discharge and the defined drainage course. The use of level spreaders or similar BMPs that promote sheet flow
may be permitted if the applicant provides documentation that the peak post- development 100- year discharge is no
greater than pre- development 2- year discharge and a letter from the Geotechnical Engineer of Record regarding
A- 22
slope stability of the downstream area is provided. Use of a level spreader requires a waiver to be granted by the
Township.
I. Easements for stormwater management facilities shall be required to have a minimum width of 20 feet. Where a
subdivision or land development is, or will be, traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a stormwater or
drainage easement of a width sufficient for the purpose, but not less than 20 feet. The stormwater detention facilities
must be provided within a drainage easement. An access easement must be provided from the public right- of- way
to the stormwater detention facility with a minimum width of 20 feet.
1. Operation and management plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code § 102
after the date of this section shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
2. If a conservation easement is provided the long- term ownership, access, maintenance, and use restrictions
must be identified on the recording plan.
K. No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage
swale to the detriment of any other property owner, whether upstream or downstream. All subdivision and/ or land
development plans containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or other conveyance systems
that cross property boundaries, existing or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries shall contain a
note stating the above.
L. All roof drains shall discharge to an on- lot sump or to a storm sewer system, which is controlled by a detention
pond. Outlets from roof drain sumps shall not discharge directly onto fill slopes. Outlets shall not discharge directly
to the gutter line of any street. All pipes from roof drains shall be a minimum four- inch Schedule 40 ABS, PVC or
SDR 35 pipe. Four- inch Schedule 40 PVC or ABS pipe is required for a distance of 10 feet from the foundation of
the dwelling. No stormwater drainage system shall be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer system. No
pipes shall be permitted to be constructed through any curbing on any public street.
M. Intersections of private driveways and public streets. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be placed where each
private driveway intersects with a public street. The design shall be approved by the Township and shall meet the
following requirements: The facility shall be placed to maintain the flow line of the stormwater drainage facility in the
public street.
1. Where an apron gutter is to be utilized, said apron gutter shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the Township' s Standard Details.
2. Where reinforced concrete, metal or tile pipe is to be used beneath the driveway, said pipe shall not be less
than 15 inches in diameter and shall extend across the full width of the driveway and beyond the driveway
for a distance determined by the Township. The pipe shall be installed with flared end sections and shall
be designed to support H- 15 loading and any other imposed loadings necessary without structurally
damaging the system. The installation of the pipe shall be in accordance with the adopted Township' s
Standard Details.
Section 503. Design and Construction Standards — Stormwater Detention Facilities
A. All retention/ detention facilities shall be equipped with multistage outlet structures to provide discharge control for
each designated storm frequency. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the post- development one- hundred
year storm runoff in the event of an outlet structure failure without damaging or impairing the continued function of
the facilities ( i. e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities. The facility( ies) must have an emergency outlet
which is able to discharge the post- development one- hundred year peak flow. Should any stormwater management
facilities qualify as a dam under PaDEP Chapter 105 criteria, the facility shall be designed in accordance with those
regulations and meet the regulations concerning dam safety.
B. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway designed to
convey the unattenuated 100- year post- development peak rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure and
an inundation stormwater to the invert elevation of the spillway, with a minimum one- foot freeboard to the crest of
the embankment.
C. Woody vegetation shall not be permitted on the embankments or within 25 feet of the emergency spillway.
A- 23
D. Fencing at least 4 feet in height shall be required for a storage facility if directed by the Township.
E. Side slopes of storage facilities shall not exceed a ratio of three to one ( 3: 1) horizontal to vertical dimension. The
crest of the embankment shall have a minimum width of not less than 10 feet.
F. The facility shall be equipped with an access road at least ten ( 10) feet wide and with a maximum of grade of 15
percent. Access roads greater than 12% grade must be paved. Access roads 12% or less shall have a minimum
6" depth non- eroding aggregate surface. An access easement with a minimum width of 20 feet to all stormwater
detention facilities shall be provided. The access easement shall include a statement on the recorded plan from
the owner/ operator of the facility granting access to the Township.
G. All stormwater facility outlet structures shall have suitable gaskets to prevent leakage and piping of water through
the facility embankment. All storm pipe installed through the facility embankment must be constructed of reinforced
concrete pipe. Use of high- performance polypropylene pipe may be permitted with documentation of pipe
manufacturer' s backfill requirements.
H. A geotechnical investigation report for the construction of the stormwater detention/ retention and infiltration facilities
must be provided including design recommendation for embankment construction, interior and exterior slopes,
drainage swales and infiltration areas.
I. Basin outlet structures shall have non- clogging trash radcs over all design openings. Periodic cleaning of debris
from trash racks shall be included in the operation and maintenance plan.
J. Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow
path through the basin.
K. Detention ponds shall be designed to be integrated into the overall site design and incorporate landscaping features,
fountains and passive recreational amenities such as benches and pathways to provide an aesthetic and functional
facility that fits within the character of the Township. When aesthetic and passive recreational amenities are
incorporated into the design of the detention pond, the detention pond may be calculated as a part of the required
open space as required elsewhere in this chapter. Side slopes of such facilities shall not exceed 4: 1 horizontal to
vertical dimension.
L. BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses ( e. g., drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and
maintain the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in" Special Protection" streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93( collectively
referred to herein as " State Water Quality Requirements").
A- 24
ARTICLE VI - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
Section 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners
A. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final
approval of the SWM Site Plan. The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements
for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to reject or accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any
portion of the stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances
and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O& M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the provisions of this Article.
E. Maintenance during development. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities during development of a
project shall be the responsibility of the developer and/ or landowner and shall usually include, but shall not be
limited to;
3. Removal of silt from all debris basins, traps or other structures or measures when 40% of capacity is filled
with silt.
4. Disposal of collected silt in a manner which will not adversely affect the environment.
5. Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities such as replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters,
or similar measures
6. Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or sodding of scoured areas
where vegetation has not been successfully established. A developer or landowner retains this obligation
as to property he or she has developed or improved even if the proper season for " seeding" occur initially
sometime after the project is otherwise completed in whole or as to a particular phase.
7. Installation of necessary controls sufficient to protect against problems caused by storm events within
design frequencies.
8. Removal of all temporary measures upon completion of the project.
F. After acceptance of the plan by the Township. In the event that the Township accepts public improvements in the
plan, except in cases where an agreement between the developer and the Township has been executed to the
contrary, the maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall be the responsibility of the developer and/ or
landowner or his assigns and shall include, but shall not be limited to, where necessary:
1. Mowing to maintain adequate stands of grass and to control weeds. Chemical weed control may be used
if state and Township regulations are met. Selection of seed mixtures shall reflect the type of
maintenance desired by the Township.
2. Removal of silt, debris or trash from all permanent structures, which trap silt or sediment to keep this
material from building up in grassed waterways and other permanent structures, thereby, reducing their
capacity. Disposal of silt, debris or trash in a manner which will not adversely affect the environment.
3. Removal of trees and shrubs from pond embankments.
4. Repair of animal burrows and removal of animals causing the same.
5. Replace or repair facilities so as to function as intended.
6. Replace eroded material and revegetate eroded areas. Seed and mulch disturbed areas.
A- 25
G. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner or developer to inspect all permanent facilities to see that corrective
action is taken where necessary. Permanent facilities to be inspected shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Detention facilities, including outlet conditions.
2. Storm sewers, swales, concrete gutters, and other conveyance devices.
3. Catch basin, manholes, and other stormwater catchments/ transition structures.
4. Access for maintenance
H. Stormwater facilities located on private property shall be maintained by the landowner or his agent; however, this
does not relieve the landowner or his agent of the obligation to inspect their own facilities. The Township reserves
the right to enter upon private property to make periodic reasonable inspections and to require the landowner to
take necessary corrective actions. An easement shall be recorded granting access over private property to the
stormwater facilities.
I. If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities, following due notice by the Township to correct the
problems, the Township shall perform the necessary maintenance or corrective work. The owner shall reimburse
the Township for all costs upon presentation of documentation of same
Section 602. Operation and Maintenance Agreements
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan, the property owner shall sign and record an Operation and
Maintenance( O& M) Agreement( see Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately
owned.
1. The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the approved maintenance
schedule in the O& M Agreement.
2. The owner shall convey to the Township conservation easements to assure access for periodic inspections by
the Township and maintenance, as necessary.
3. The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
company responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information shall be submitted
by the owner to the Township within ten ( 10) working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance ( O& M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to
the O& M Agreement, the Township may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
Section 603. Performance Guarantee
For SWM Site Plans that involve subdivision and land development, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee
to the Township for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by
the approved SWM Site Plan and this Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A- 26
ARTICLE VII - FEES AND EXPENSES
Section 701. General
The Township may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged to an applicant. The
review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
A. Administrative/ clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM Site Plan.
C. Review of a SWM Site Plan resubmission.
D. Attendance at meetings.
E. Inspections.
A- 27
ARTICLE VIII — PROHIBITIONS
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any non- stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter the surface
waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into waters of this
Commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except( 1) as provided in paragraph C below and
2) discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors to pollution of a
regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth:
1. Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
2. Discharges from potable water sources including water line flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of Total Residual Chlorine( TRC).
3. Non- contaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance, landscape drainage and flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands.
4. Diverted stream flows and springs.
5. Non- contaminated pumped ground water and water from foundation and footing drains and crawl space
pumps.
6. Non- contaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.
7. Residential ( i. e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where cleaning agents are not utilized.
8. Non- contaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such discharges do not contain detectable
concentrations of TRC.
9. Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool
water discharge are followed.
D. In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in Subsection C significantly
contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth, the Township or DEP will
notify the responsible person( s) to cease the discharge.
Section 802. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the Township, no stormwater from roofs or driveway drains shall be discharged to
the street surface or curb.
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, drainage easements, or
structures that were installed as a requirement of this Ordinance without the written approval of the Township.
A- 28
ARTICLE IX - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section 901. Right of Entry
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township or its designated agent may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to
any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this Ordinance.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township
such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/ or sampling of the discharges from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a BMP shall be deemed a violation of this section.
Section 902. Inspection
The landowner or the owner' s designee ( including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM
BMPs, facilities and/ or structures installed under this Ordinance according to the following frequencies, at a minimum,
to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/ or structures continue to function as intended:
a. Annually for the first 5 years.
b. Once every 3 years thereafter.
c. During or immediately after the cessation of a 10- year or greater storm.
Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following precipitation events. A written inspection report shall
be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date and time of the inspection, the
individual( s) who completed the inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected, observations on
performance, and recommendations for improving performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to
the Township within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
Section 903. Enforcement
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an approved SWM Site
Plan, unless specifically exempted in Section 302.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate Section 803 of this Ordinance.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM Site Plan are a responsibility of the Township
D. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section,
the Township may order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of prohibited discharges;
3. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
6. The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
A- 29
7. Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
E. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such person to the penalty provisions of this section. All
such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all other
remedies available in law or equity.
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township pursuant to this Ordinance may be suspended or revoked for:
1. Non- compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM Site Plan or O& M Agreement.
2. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating
to the Regulated Activity.
3. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the Regulated Activity which constitutes or
creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
1. The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the suspension.
2. The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new
approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion, the Township may
provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the Township will provide the
owner, or the owner' s designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to
correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the Township may
revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this Ordinance.
Section 905. Penalties
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $ 1, 000. 00 for each violation, recoverable with costs. The violation of any
provision of this section is hereby deemed a public nuisance Each day that the violation continues shall be a
separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law
or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
Section 906. Appeals
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
may appeal to the Township within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to
the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the
Township' s decision.
A- 30
ARTICLE X - REFERENCES
1. U. S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service ( NRCS). National Engineering
Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969- 2001. Originally published as the National Engineering Handbook, Section
4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at: http:// www.nres. usda. gov/.
2. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D. C.
3. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363- 0300- 002 ( December 2006), as amended and
updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
4. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363- 2134- 008 ( March 31, 2012), as amended and
updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
5. U. S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004- 2006. Precipitation- Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3. 0, Silver Spring, Maryland. Internet address: http:// hdsc. nws. noaa. gov/ hdsc/ pfds/.
A- 31
APPENDIX A
RELEASE RATE MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS ( MAPS)
Release Rate Percentage by Subarea
e ®. wee ® e
Release Rate% 6em.:° ET:i
55 1o_.° 60 fle 65 LJ 70 E---i
75 dorm eo i... 7- 85 G
90 QW_" 95 r 100
Subarea % Subarea % Subarea % Subarea % Subarea % Subarea %
01 100 11 100 21 65 31 100 41 85 51 100
02 100 12 100 22 100 32 90 42 85 52 100
03 100 13 95 23 100 33 100 43 100 53 100
04 100 14 85 24 100 34 85 44 80 54 100
05 80 15 75 25 100 35 80 45 65 55 100
06 100 16 60 26 100 36 70 46 100 56 85
07 100 17 100 27 100 37 85 47 100 57 85
08 85 18 75 28 100 38 55 48 95 58 90
09 75 19 60 29 100 39 100 _ 49 100 59 100
10 100 20 100 30 100 40 75 50 100 60 100
Legend
Roadways coMow. RI1. cr« w Nwnh. a Qrrd. Te:.,,. n o ae. d. ry he,.( 100)
Nater C00
Merrtedlate( 301
6« M. 00 Cre. M oat, n. d Muniop. l eoo d., 0
hush GreekWnbhnd
001.! soda.
hush
S
VALENCIA
ire
1
4,....
C'; .
a,)%
kantecs, ,
ref,.. \
I;
9 y
N.
t
o
Ill
1%
A._
Rate
Brush/ Cite 3.4 ; ' ` .
t
MARSHALL ! Watersh d 33 r
t". ,
100% Rf18a eRate' 1/%'
s
ifi
5.
c„ i7 es: i76. W: • r
p,
4>,,,,
yyy I r •. 3
r
l
J
YS
55
t' low 53. •) RIC LAND
cilink
v
m •
35
7. —
37 ` > ` ` ii
DT
s . " 1
aucvfiaur " S
01 t
rt.—36 : I
s i
fes' „
y
1) ?,
1 ( " e Cre„ k g
42
r
46 L`
7\
I,,:.,tershed47 .
O1
2... i ail
1
E fes..
lr i
157el
l
c2 e1 4 i; ® 47,, bs 4
03 P., r 17 --. ' T x
1
FFt lti( KLII+1
Z5 45
04 PARK 59
i
15
48 , .
HAMPTON
05
MCCANDLES 49 9
S
i, 18 1
a 06 O7 09 t
22 26 h
29
a Pine Township
ar ARk LENNON,
e,. m,
waMITM,
COULERET
w. ir- E
0 1500 0. 000 0000
Pine Creek Watershed
muw., Iw
E Z tenon- aoao t.. r Assigned Release Rate Percentages
F. l
I._
a tea_ ..
I
APPENDIX B
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ( O& M) AGREEMENT
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ( SWM BMPs)
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this day of 20 by and between hereinafter
the" Landowner"), and County, Pennsylvania ( hereinafter" Municipality");
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in the land records of
County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book at page
hereinafter" Property").
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance( O& M) Plan approved by the Municipality( hereinafter
referred to as the " O& M Plan") for the property identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made
part hereof, as approved by the Municipality, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property
through the use of BMPs; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree that the health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on- site
SWM BMPs be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the SWM Site Plan, that SWM BMPs as
required by said SWM Site Plan and the Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately
operated and maintained by the Landowner, successors, and assigns.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and
the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1. The Landowner shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the SWM
Site Plan.
2. The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the SWM Site Plan in good working order in
accordance with the specific operation and maintenance requirements noted on the approved O& M Plan.
3. The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon
the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the BMPs whenever
necessary. Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.
4. In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMPs per paragraph 2, the Municipality or its
representatives may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said
BMP( s). It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said
facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality.
5. In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in
performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall
reimburse the Municipality for all expenses ( direct and indirect) incurred within 10 days of receipt of invoice from
the Municipality.
A- 28
6. The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the on- site BMPs by the
Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create any additional liability of any
party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
7. The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in interests, shall release the
Municipality from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted
against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the
BMP( s) by the Landowner or Municipality.
8. The Municipality intends to inspect the BMPs at a minimum of once every three years to ensure their continued
functioning.
This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of County,
Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and/ or equitable servitude, and shall be binding
on the Landowner, his administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity.
ATTEST:
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
SEAL) For the Municipality:
For the Landowner:
ATTEST:
City, Borough, Township)
County of Pennsylvania
a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid,
whose commission expires on the day of 20 do hereby certify that whose name( s)
is/ are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the day 20_, has acknowledged the same
before me in my said county and state.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS day of 20_.
NOTARY PUBLIC SEAL)
A- 29
APPENDIX C
SMALL PROJECT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN GUIDANCE
This small project stormwater site plan has been developed to assist those proposing residential projects to
meet the requirements of the Allegheny County Stormwater Management Plan Model Ordinance without
having to hire professional services to draft a formal stormwater management plan. This small project site
plan is only permitted for projects with earth disturbances between one-twentieth( 0. 05) acre and one quarter
0. 25) acre of earth disturbance( Section 302. B) and using The Simplified Method( CG- 2 in the BMP Manual3)
for Volume Control as described in Section 303. B. Additional information can be found in Chapter 6 ofthe
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Applicants proposing use of this
methodology shall complete and submit for review a Small Development Stormwater Management Plan
Application, as included herein.
A. What is an applicant required to submit?
All requirements of Section 302. B including a brief description of the proposed stormwater facilities,
including types of materials to be used, total square footage of proposed impervious areas, volume
calculations, and a simple sketch plan showing the following information:
Location of proposed structures, driveways, or other paved areas with approximate surface area in
square feet.
Location of any existing or proposed onsite septic system and/ or potable water wells showing
proximity to infiltration facilities.
County Conservation District erosion and sediment control " Adequacy" letter as may be required by
Municipal, County or State regulations.
B. Determination of Required Volume Control and Sizing Stormwater Facilities
By following the simple steps outlined below in the provided example, an applicant can determine the runoff
volume that is required to be controlled and how to choose the appropriate stormwater facility to permanently
remove the runoff volume from the site. Impervious area calculations must include all areas on the lot
proposed to be covered by roof area or pavement which would prevent rain from naturally percolating into
the ground, including impervious surfaces such as sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, patios or swimming
pools. Sidewalks, driveways or patios that are designed and constructed to allow for infiltration are not
included in this calculation.
Site Plan Example: Controlling runoff volume from a proposed home site
Step 1: Determine Total Impervious Surfaces
Impervious Surface Area ( sq. ft.)
House Roof( Front) 14 ft. x 48 ft. = 672 sq. ft.
House Roof( Rear) 14 ft. x 48 ft. = 672 sq. ft.
Garage Roof( Left) 6ft. x 24 ft. = 144 sq. ft.
Garage Roof( Right) 6 ft. x 24 ft. = 144 sq. ft.
Driveway 12 ft. x 50 ft. = 1000 sq. ft.
Walkway 4 ft. x 20 ft. = 80 sq. ft.
Total Imp. 3000 sq. ft.
A-30
Figure 1: Sample Site Sketch Plan
Smith Property
115 Buck Hill Drive
2 Allegheny City, PA
Stormwater Facility Sketch Plan
Submitted May 15, 2017
50 ft. 24 ft.
Garage Roof Lill
13 ft. Driveway
12 ft.
Y1Y111111,' tt6311,1,.,111'{ 1+1; 111!,}, yKyb yrY, 11;.
1, 0, 1Y1Y1+. 1\,11, 11111Y, 1tiV LVON4KW,: YltiC1' aYYl" a' i
for
olume
Preserved
or
41 .
mpaction;
Min.
Reductioniib : ;
Soil
Trees
22 ft.
15 ft.
a. 47$ rti,
t
iftI(
4 /
hr
4t.
0100#: bp,
V.
y` ,
X
H
4.
04044,
07411,'
1f
Mk7
liAer* *
141014
0004440*( 10:. s r
f+ '
Stormwater BMPs I ft: 14 ft.
1. Four tree plantings; controls 24 cu. ft. of runoff.
2. Infiltration Trench; 3 ft.( D) x 6 ft.( W) x 28. 3 ft.( L)
3. Rain Garden; 225 sq. ft.
4. Dry Well; 3. 5 ft.( D) x 9 ft.( L) x 9 ft.( W)
5. Protect existing trees; reduces required volume control by
21 cu. ft.
6. Minimize soil compaction; reduces required volume
control by 13. 8 cu. ft. if planted with meadow, and 10. 4
1
3
cu. ft. if planted with lawn.
Step 2: Determine Required Volume Control ( cubic feet) using the following equation:
Volume ( cu. ft.) = (Total impervious area in square feet x 2 inches of runoff) / 12 inches
3, 000 sq. ft. x 2 inches of runoff)/ 12 inches = 500 cu. ft.
A-31
Example continued:
Step 3: Sizing the Selected Volume Control BMP
Several Best Management Practices ( BMPs), as described below, are suitable for small stormwater
management projects. However, their application depends on the volume required to be controlled, how much
land is available, and the site constraints. Proposed residential development activities can apply both
nonstructural and structural BMPs to control the volume of runoff from the site. A number of different
volume control BMPs are described below. Note that Figure 1 is an example of how these BMPs can be
utilized in conjunction to control the total required volume on one site.
Structural BMPs
1. Infiltration Trench
An Infiltration Trench is a linear stormwater BMP consisting of a continuously perforated pipe at a minimum
slope in a stone- filled trench. During small storm events, infiltration trenches can significantly reduce volume
and serve in the removal of fine sediments and pollutants. Runoff is stored between the stones and infiltrates
through the bottom of the facility and into the soil matrix. Runoff should be pretreated using vegetative buffer
strips or swales to limit the amount of coarse sediment entering the trench which can clog and render the
trench ineffective. In all cases, an infiltration trench should be designed with a positive overflow.
Design Considerations:
Although the width and depth can vary, it is recommended that Infiltration Trenches be limited in
depth to not more than six ( 6) feet of stone.
Trench is wrapped in nonwoven geotextile ( top, sides, and bottom).
Trench needs to be placed on uncompacted soils.
Slope ofthe Trench bottom should be level or with a slope no greater than 1%.
A minimum of 6" of topsoil is placed over trench and vegetated.
The discharge or overflow from the Infiltration Trench should be properly designed for anticipated
flows.
Cleanouts or inlets should be installed at both ends ofthe Infiltration Trench and at appropriate
intervals to allow access to the perforated pipe.
Volume of facility = Depth x Width x Length x Void Space of the gravel bed ( assume 40%).
Maintenance:
Catch basins and inlets should be inspected and cleaned at least two times a year.
The vegetation along the surface ofthe infiltration trench should be maintained in good condition and
any bare spots should be re- vegetated as soon as possible.
Vehicles should not be parked or driven on the trench and care should be taken to avoid soil
compaction by lawn mowers.
A-32
Figure 2: Infiltration Trench Diagram
SWALE Al CENTERLINE
OVERLAP NONWOVEN
11NuouSLY
TTF'
6' SOLS) T.1 13. 12`t Xy
d'
I" ; *'` 4° z PERFORATED HDPE PIPE r
xl 6 ,
MIN_ DIAMETER
DEPTH IzL 45 CONTINUOUS NONWOVEN WfICA.+ C > rza°
TRENCH
e" 6" i
v` tk F-=
t
GEOTE% TILE 1'; f R ' ;,
VARIES T
te
TOPSIDES. AND BOTTOM) K r,
a CLEAN UNIFORMLY GRADED
I
E
Ydsa
R '{ COARSE AGGREGATE t ly ah AVA
6' M N '#„ , "`. ,,,
r,'^ ' ' UNCOMPAGTED SUB GRADE I
AREA BELOW
E' F,,.<._.{ i Pa . i:.mfi! C .. OUTFLOW INVERT 15
STORAGE VOLUME_
WIDTH VARIES. GENERALLY SEDIMENT
Y.Er._._...... — TRAP
Source: PA BMP Guidance Manual, Chapter 6, page 42.
Figure 3: Example of Infiltration Trench Installation
a
ke
410
Source: PA BMP Guidance Manual, Chapter 6, Page 46.
Sizing Example for Infiltration Trench
1. Determine Total Impervious Surface to drain to Infiltration Trench:
Garage Roof( Left) 6 ft. x 24 ft. = 144 sq. ft.
Driveway 12 ft. x 50 ft. = 1000 sq. ft.
Walkway 4 ft. x 20 ft. = 80 sq. ft.
2. Determine the required infiltration volume:
1224 sq. ft. x 2 inches of runoff)/ 12 ft. = 204 cu. ft. / 0. 4* = 510 cu. ft.
0. 4 assumes 40% void ratio in gravel bed)
3. Sizing the infiltration trench facility:
Volume ofFacility = Depth x Width x Length
Set Depth to 3 feet and determine required surface area of trench.
510 cu. ft. / 3 ft. = 170 sq. ft.
The width of the trench should be greater than 2 times its depth ( 2 x D), therefore in this example
the trench width of 6 feet selected.
A-33
Determine trench length: L= 170 sq. ft. / 6 ft. = 28. 3 ft.
Final infiltration trench dimensions: 3 ft. (D) x 6ft. (W) x 28. 3 ft. (L)
2. Rain Garden
A Rain Garden is a planted shallow depression designed to catch and filter rainfall runoff. The garden
captures rain from a downspout or a paved surface. The water sinks into the ground, aided by deep rooted
plants that like both wet and dry conditions. The ideal location for a rain garden is between the source of •
runoff( roofs and driveways) and the runoff destination ( drains, stream, low spots, etc.).
Design Considerations:
A maximum of 3: 1 side slope is recommended.
The depth of a rain garden can range from 6 - 8 inches. Ponded water should not exceed 6 inches.
The rain garden should drain within 72 hours.
The garden should be at least 10- 20 feet from a building' s foundation and 25 feet from septic system
drainfields and wellheads.
If the site has clay soils, soil should be amended with compost or organic material.
Choose native plants. See http:// pa. audubon. org/ habitat/ PDFs/ RGBrochure complete. pdf for a
native plant list. To find native plant sources go to www.pawildflower. org.
At the rain garden location, the water table should be at least 2' below the soil level. If water stands
in an area for more than one day after a heavy rain you can assume it has a higher water table and is
not a good choice for a rain garden.
Maintenance:
Water plants regularly until they become established.
Inspect twice a year for sediment buildup, erosion and vegetative conditions.
Mulch with hardwood when erosion is evident and replenish annually.
Prune and remove dead vegetation in the spring season.
Weed as you would any garden.
Move plants around if some plants would grow better in the drier or wetter parts ofthe garden.
Figure 4: Rain Garden Diagram
aau. FORDED 11A1E7
DEPTI( 6' 1W.) MULCH MI LEAF comPosr
OR SIREDOLD MUX.
11 sof SLAP' S( 7TP.) AVOID HOOD CAPS.
n
g
r
I%MONIED '' lint 1P" 6 who filsER
lasoeurnav
Source: PA BMP Guidance Manual, Chapter 6 Page 50
Sizing Example for Rain Garden
1. Pick a site for the rain garden between the source of runoff and a low lying area, a.k.a., a drainage
area.
A-34
2. Perform an infiltration test to determine the depth ofthe rain garden:
Dig a hole 8" x 8"
Fill with water and put a popsicle stick at the top of the water level.
Measure how far it drains down after a few hours ( ideally 4 hours).
Calculate the depth of water that will drain out over 24 hours.
3. Determine total impervious surface area to drain to rain garden:
House Roof( Front) 14 ft. x 48 ft. = 672 sq. ft.
4. Sizing the rain garden:
For this example, let' s say the infiltration test determined 6" of water drained out of a hole in 24 hours.
The depth ofthe rain garden should be set to the results of the infiltration test so 6" is the depth of the
rain garden. The sizing calculation below is based on controlling 1" of runoff. First divide the
impervious surface by the depth of the rain garden.
672 sq. ft. / 6 ( depth of rain garden in inches) = 112 sq. ft.
In order to control 2" of runoff volume, the rain garden area is multiplied by 2.
112 sq. ft. * 2 = 224 sq. ft.
The rain garden should be about 225 sq. ft. in size and 6" deep.
3. Dry Well (a. k.a., Seepage Pit)
A Dry Well, sometimes called a Seepage Pit, is a subsurface storage facility that temporarily stores and
infiltrates stormwater runoff from the roofs of structures. By capturing runoff at the source, Dry Wells can
dramatically reduce the increased volume of stormwater generated by the roofs of structures. Roof leaders
connect directly into the Dry Well, which may be either an excavated pit filled with uniformly graded
aggregate wrapped in geotextile, or a prefabricated storage chamber or pipe segment. Dry Wells discharge
the stored runoff via infiltration into the surrounding soils. In the event that the Dry Well is overwhelmed in
an intense storm event, an overflow mechanism ( surcharge pipe, connection to a larger infiltration are, etc.)
will ensure that additional runoff is safely conveyed downstream.
Design Considerations:
Dry Wells typically consist of 18 to 48 inches of clean washed, uniformly graded aggregate with 40%
void capacity ( AASHTO No. 3, or similar). " Clean" gravel fill should average one and one- half to
three ( 1. 5 — 3. 0) inches in diameter.
Dry Wells are not recommended when their installation would create a significant risk for basement
seepage or flooding. In general, 10 - 20 feet of separation is recommended between Dry Wells and
building foundations.
The facility may be either a structural prefabricated chamber or an excavated pit filled with aggregate.
Depth of dry wells in excess of three- and- a- half( 3. 5) feet should be avoided unless warranted by soil
conditions.
Stormwater dry wells must never be combined with existing, rehabilitated, or new septic system
seepage pits. Discharge of sewage to stormwater dry wells is strictly prohibited.
As shown in Figure 5, the installation should include a surcharge or overflow pipe.
A- 35
Maintenance:
Dry wells should be inspected at least four( 4) times annually as well as after large storm events.
Remove sediment, debris/ trash, and any other waste material from a dry well.
Regularly clean out gutters and ensure proper connections to the dry well.
Replace the filter screen that intercepts the roof runoff as necessary.
Figure 5: Dry Well Diagram
i 47 r 74-
5
3Mf3H$ C, ttift
r , EPP y
Source: PA BMP Guidance Manual, Chapter 6, Page 65.
Sizing Example for Dry Wells:
1. Determine contributing impervious surface area:
House Roof( Rear) 14 ft. x 48 ft. = 672 sq. ft.
2. Determine required volume control:
672 sq. ft. x ( 2 inches of runoff/ 12 inches/ ft.) = 112 cu. ft.
112 cu ft. / 0. 4 = 280 cu. ft. ( assuming the 40% void ratio in the gravel bed)
3. Sizing the dry well:
Set the depth to 3. 5 ft.; Set the width equal to the length for a square chamber.
3. 5 ft. x L x L = 280 cu. ft.; LxL = 280 cu. ft. / 3. 5 ft.; thus LxL= 80 sq. ft.; L=9 ( approx)
Dimensions = 3. 5 ft. (D) x 9ft. (L) x 9 ft. (W)
A- 36
NonStructural BMPs
1. Tree Plantings and Preservation
Trees and forests reduce stormwater runoff by capturing and storing rainfall in the canopy and releasing water
into the atmosphere through evapotranspiration. Tree roots and leaf litter also create soil conditions that
promote the infiltration of rainwater into the soil. In addition, trees and forests reduce pollutants by taking up
nutrients and other pollutants from soils and water through their root systems. A development site can reduce
runoff volume by planting new trees or by preserving trees which existed on the site prior to development.
The volume reduction calculations either determine the cubic feet to be directed to the area under the tree
canopy for infiltration or determine a volume reduction credit which can be used to reduce the size of any
one of the planned structural BMPs on the site.
Tree Considerations:
Existing trees must have at least a 4" trunk caliper or larger.
Existing tree canopy must be within 100 ft. of impervious surfaces.
A tree canopy is classified as the continuous cover of branches and foliage formed by a single tree
or collectively by the crowns of adjacent trees.
New tree plantings must be at least 6 ft. in height and have a 2" trunk caliper.
All existing and newly planted trees must be native to Pennsylvania. See_
http:// www. dcnr. state. pa.us/ forestry/ commontr/ commontrees. pdf for a guide book titled Common
Trees ofPennsylvania for a native tree list.
When using trees as volume control BMPs, runoff from impervious areas should be directed to
drain under the tree canopy.
Determining the required number of planted trees to reduce the runoff volume:
1. Determine contributing impervious surface area:
Garage Roof( Right) 6 ft. x 24 ft. = 144 ft.
2. Calculate the required control volume:
144 sq. ft. x 2 inches of runoff)/ 12 inches = 24 cu. ft.
3. Determine the number of tree plantings:
A newly planted deciduous tree can reduce runoff volume by 6 cu. ft.
A newly planted evergreen tree can reduce runoff volume by 10 cu. ft.
24 cu. ft. / 6 cu. ft. = 4 Deciduous Trees
Determining the volume reduction for preserving existing trees:
1. Calculate approximate area ofthe existing tree canopy:
22 sq. ft. x—23 sq. ft. = 500 sq. ft.
2. Measure distance from impervious surface to tree canopy: 35 ft.
A- 37
3. Calculate the volume reduction credit by preserving existing trees:
For Trees within 20 feet of impervious cover:
Volume Reduction cu. ft. = (Existing Tree Canopy sq. ft. x 1 inch) / 12
For Trees beyond 20 feet but not farther than 100 feet from impervious cover:
Volume Reduction cu. ft. = (Existing Tree Canopy sq. ft. x 0. 5 inch)/ 12
500 sq. ft. x 0. 5 inches)/ 12 = 21 cu. ft.
This volume credit can be utilized in reducing the size of any one of the structural BMPs planned on
the site. For example, the 21 cu. ft. could be subtracted from the required infiltration volume when
sizing the infiltration trench;
510 cu. ft. - 21 cu. ft. = 489 cu. ft.
489 cu. ft. / 3 ft. (Depth) = 163 / 6 ft. (Width) = 27. 1 ft. (Length)
Using the existing trees for a volume credit would decrease the length of the infiltration trench to 27. 1
ft. instead of 28. 3 ft.
2. Minimize Soil Compaction and Replant with Lawn or Meadow
When soil is overly compacted during construction it can cause a drastic reduction in the permeability of the
soil and rarely is the soil profile completely restored. Runoff from vegetative areas with highly compacted
soils similarly resembles runoff from an impervious surface. Minimizing soil compaction and re- planting
with a vegetative cover like meadow or lawn, not only increases the infiltration on the site, but also creates a
friendly habitat for a variety of wildlife species.
Design Considerations:
Area shall not be stripped of topsoil.
Vehicle movement, storage, or equipment/material lay down shall not be permitted in areas
preserved for minimum soil compaction.
The use of soil amendments and additional topsoil is permitted.
Meadow should be planted with native grasses. Refer to Meadows and Prairies: WildlifeFriendly Alternatives to Lawn at http:// pubs. causu. edu/ FreePubs/ pdfs/ UH128. pdf for
reference on how to properly plant the meadow and for a list of native species.
Determining the volume reduction by minimizing soil compaction and planting a meadow:
1. Calculate approximate area of preserved meadow:
22 sq. ft. x- 23 sq. ft. = 500 sq. ft.
A- 38
2. Calculate the volume reduction credit by minimizing the soil compaction and planting a
lawn/ meadow:
For Meadow Areas: Volume Reduction ( cu. ft.) _ (Area of Min. Soil Compaction ( sq. ft.) x
1/ 3 inch of runoff) / 12
500 sq. ft. x 1/ 3 inch of runoff) / 12 = 13. 8 cu. ft.
For Lawn Areas: Volume Reduction ( cu. ft.) = ( Area of Min. Soil Compaction ( sq. ft.) x 1/ 4
inch of runoff)/ 12
500 sq. ft. x 1/ 4 inch of runoff) / 12 = 10. 4 cu. ft.
This volume credit can be used to reduce the size of any one of the structural BMPs on the site. See
explanation under the volume credit for preserving existing trees for details.
Alternative BMP to Capture and Reuse Stormwater
Rain Barrels
Rain barrels are large containers that collect drainage from roof leaders and temporarily store water to be
released to lawns, gardens, and other landscaped areas after the rainfall has ended. Rain barrels are typically
between 50 and 200 gallons in size. It is not recommended for rain barrels to be used as a volume control
BMP because infiltration is not guaranteed after each storm event. For this reason, a rain barrel is not utilized
in the site plan example. However, the information is included to provide an alternative for a homeowner to
utilize when considering capture and reuse stormwater methods.
Design Considerations:
Rain barrels should be directly connected to the roof gutter/spout.
There must be a means to release the water stored between storm events to provide the necessary
storage volume for the next storm.
When calculating rain barrel size, rain barrels are typically assumed to be 25% full because they are
not always emptied before the next storm.
Use screens to filter debris and cover lids to prevent mosquitoes.
An overflow outlet should be placed a few inches below the top with an overflow pipe to divert flow
away from structures.
It is possible to use a number of rain barrels jointly for an area.
A- 39
Figure 6: Rain Barrel Diagram and Examples
R
BALED LID
i, - 111 7AO^s Lii'iDF,5
WAN PIPE
SC 411,
mantle
p;,., r{ d.`,•'
IX -,,,,
i4. iss
x
Sources:( top picture) http:// www. citywindsor. ca/ DisplayAttach. asp? AttachID= 12348
bottom picture on left) http:// repurposinglife. blogspot. com/ 2009/ 05/ rainwater- harvesting. html
bottom picture on right) http:// www. floridata. com/ tracks/ transplantedgardener/ Rainbarrels. cfm
Sizing Example for a Rain Barrel
1. Determine contributing impervious surface area:
Garage Roof( Right) 6 ft. x 24 ft. = 144 sq. ft.
2. Determine the amount of rainfall to be captured by the Rain Barrel. A smaller storm, no more than
2", is recommended to calculate the runoff to be captured. This example chose the 1" storm event.
3. Calculate the volume to be captured and reused:
144 sq. ft. x 1 inch of runoff) / 12 inches = 12 cu. ft.
4. Size the rain barrel:
1 cu. ft. = 7. 48 gallons
12 cu. ft. x 7. 48 = 90 gallons
90 gallons x ( 0.25*) = 22. 5 gallons (* assuming that the rain barrel is always at least 25% full)
90 gallons + 22. 5 gallons = 112 gallons
The rain barrel or barrels should be large enough to hold at least 112 gallons ofwater.
A- 40
REFERENCES:
Center for Watershed Protection and US Forest Service. ( 2008). Watershed Forestry
Resource Guide.
Retrieved on May 26, 2010 from http:// www. forestsforwatersheds. org/ reducestormwater/.
DeBarry, Paul A., Watersheds: Processes, Assessment and Management. John Wiley&
Sons. NY, NY, 2004 Department of Environmental Protection. ( 2006). Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual.
Wissahickon Watershed Partnership. Pennsylvania Rain Garden Guide. Retrieved on May
4, 2010 from http:// pa. audubon. org/ habitat/ PDFs/ RGBrochure complete. pdf.
Building a Backyard Rain Garden. North Carolina Cooperative Extension. Retrieved on
May 4, 2010 from http:// www. bae. ncsu. edu/ topic/ raingarden/ Building. htm
Delaware County Planning Commission. ( 2010). Draft Crum Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan. Ordinance Appendix B. Simplified Approach to
Stormwater Management for Small Projects.
Solebury Township. ( 2008). Solebury Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
Appendix J Simplified Stormwater Management Procedures for Existing Single
Family Dwelling Lots"
A-41
SMALL DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPLICATION
Small Project Stormwater Management Submission
Calculation of Impervious Area
In accordance with the Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance, small developments are
eligible for submission of a simplified stormwater management plan. Small developments propose
disturbance of less than 0. 25 acres and less than 5, 000 square feet of impervious area. The calculations
of proposed impervious area reported herein shall cumulatively include all new impervious area
constructed within the last five years. An impervious surface is a surface that prevents the
infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces ( or areas) shall include, but not be
limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds, porches, decks
and similar structures, and any new driveways or sidewalks.
Table 1: Calculation of Impervious Surfaces
Length ( ft) X Width ( ft) __
Proposed Impervious
Surface Type Area ( sq ft)
Building Home x
Addition x
Garage x
Porch/ deck x
x
Driveway x
x
x
Parking Areas x
x
x
Patios and Sidewalks x
x
X
x
X
Other x
x
x
Total Impervious Surface Area to Managed
A- 42
Ifthe Total Impervious Surface Area is less than 5,000 Square Feet, complete the remainder of
the Application.
Ifthe Total Impervious Surface Area EXCEEDS 5,000 Square Feet, a complete stormwater
management plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer must be submitted.
Small Project SWM Plan Worksheet
Based upon the information you have provided a Stormwater Plan IS Required for this development
activity and the project is eligible for review as a small development. The Municipal Stormwater
Management Ordinance allows for submission of a simplified stormwater management plan for small
developments.
Regulated activities shall be conducted only after the Municipality approves a stormwater management
plan. The Stormwater Management Ordinance will assist you in preparing the necessary information and
plans for the Township to review and approve. This document will constitute an approved plan if all of
the relevant details are to be installed in their entirety AND no part of the stormwater system
adversely affects any other property, nor adversely affects any septic systems or drinking water wells
on this, or any other, parcel. If an alternative system is to be used a plan will need to be submitted to the
Township for approval. A design by a qualified professional may be required for more complex sites.
PLEASE INITIAL BELOW TO INDICATE THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR THIS SITE
The relevant details from Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance will be
installed in their entirety AND the system will be located as not to adversely affect
other property, nor any septic systems or drinking water wells on this, or any other,
parcel. The BMP or BMPs proposed be implemented are as follows:
Table 2: Runoff Volume Calculation
Impervious Surface( sq ft)—
X
Runoff —
12 in/ ft
Total Runoff Volume to be
From Table 1 Depth ( in) Managed ( cu ft)
x 2 12
Table 3: Structural BMPs
Length Width Depth Void Volume
BMP Type (
ft)
X (
ft)
X (
ft)
X
Space Managed ( cu ft)
Infiltration
x x x 0. 40 =
Trench
Rain
x x 0. 5 x 1. 0 =
Garden
Dry Well x x x 0. 40 =
Total Volume Managed— Structural BMPs
A- 43
Table 4: Non-Structural BMP- New Tree Planting
Number
Volume
Volume Managed
Tree Type X Credit( cu =
of Trees
ft)
cu ft)
Deciduous Tree x 4
Evergreen Tree x 6
Total Volume Managed- Tree Planting
Table 5: Non-Structural BMP - Preservation of Trees
Rainfall
Distance from
Tree
Depth
Volume
Impervious Area Canopy X Managed ( Cu
Managed
Area ( sf)
in)
ft)
Within 20 Feet x 1
Within 20 Feet x 1
Within 20 Feet x 1
Within 20 Feet x 1
Within 20 Feet x 1
Within 100 Feet x 0. 5
Within 100 Feet x 0.5
Within 100 Feet x 0. 5
Within 100 Feet x 0. 5
Within 100 Feet x 0. 5
Total Volume Managed- Tree Preservation
Table 6: Non- Structural BMP - Minimize Soil Compaction and Planting
Rainfall
Volume
Planting Type
Surface
X
Depth
Managed ( cu
Area ( sf) Managed
ft)
in)
Lawn x 0.25
Meadow x 0. 33
Total Volume Managed- Minimize Compaction
A- 44
Table 7: Summation of Runoff Volume Managed
BMP Type Managed Volume
Structural BMPs (Table 3)
Tree Planting ( Table 4)
Tree Preservation ( Table 5)
Minimize Soil
Compaction/ Planting ( Table 6)
Total Volume Managed ( cu ft) -
Must be Greater than that
Calculated in Table 2
In lieu of providing the above, an alternative and/ or professional design is attached
for approval AND the system will be located as not to adversely affect other property,
any septic systems or drinking water wells on this, or any other, parcel.
Site Sketch Plan showing:
Property Lines with dimensions
Proposed buildings with dimensions
Proposed impervious surfaces with dimensions
Proposed sanitary sewer lateral or septic system, as applicable
Proposed water service or well site, as applicable
Proposed stormwater management system( s)
Erosion and Sedimentation Controls to be installed and maintained during
construction
A- 45
Operations and Maintenance Agreement
Execute and record a Stormwater Maintenance and Agreement
Application Review Fee
The application review fee has been made to the Township. The review fee
shall be as listed in the current Municipal Fee Schedule.
Condition of approval - The stormwater management plan must be fully implemented prior to a request
for final inspection of the building or zoning permit.
Acknowledgement— By executing below, the Owner acknowledges the following:
I declare I am the owner of the property.
The information provided is accurate.
I further acknowledge that municipal representatives are granted access to the above
described property for review and inspection as may be required.
Owner Date
A-46